
                               1 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 2, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Stewart Meacham, 74, Dies; Leader in Antiwar Movement

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 225 words


Stewart Meacham, a Methodist missionary who rose to prominence as a leader of
the movement against the Vietnam War, died March 24 after a long illness at the
Friends House retirement home in Santa Rosa, Calif. He was 74 years old.

In the mid-1960's, Mr. Meacham, a Philadelphia native, served as peace education
secretary of the American Friends Service Committee, a Quaker organization. In
1968 Mr. Meacham and two other antiwar leaders went to Hanoi and helped arrange
the release of three American airmen imprisoned in North Vietnam.

Later, as co-chairman of the New Mobilization Committee to End the War in
Vietnam, Mr. Meacham in 1969 helped plan a two-day protest in Washington, in
which 40,000 people marched from Arlington Cemetery to the Capitol. Each carried
the name of an American soldier killed or a Vietnamese village destroyed in the
war. Mr. Meacham made several visits to Vietnam after the fighting ended in
1975.

Mr. Meacham, a graduate of Davidson College and of the Union Theological
Seminary, served as a Methodist missionary in the early 1950's. He previously
worked for the National Labor Relations Board in Washington. Later he was
assistant to the president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers Union of America
in New York.

He is survived by his wife, Charlotte, one son, Stewart D. and several
grandchildren.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 434 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 3, 1985 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

'ALAMO BAY,' ETHNIC STRIFE IN TEXAS

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1162 words


AFTER the collapse of the United States-backed Government in Saigon in 1975,
more than half a million Vietnamese refugees made their way to this country,
approximately 100,000 settling in Texas and many of these along the coast of the
Gulf of Mexico. They fished and shrimped and, by being willing to work harder
and put in longer hours than the white Texan - or ''Anglo'' - boatmen, they
prospered.

Because of the language barrier, the Vietnamese, most of them Roman Catholics,
kept to themselves in their own makeshift communities. Initially times were
good, but as prices for fish and shrimp fell, competition between the Vietnamese
and the Anglos intensified until, in 1979, an undeclared war broke out. It was
an ideal situation for the Ku Klux Klan. The next couple of years were marked by
firebombings of Vietnamese boats and houses and the destruction of their
fish-traps, with the Vietnamese retaliating in kind. There was no denying the
urgency of the confrontations when, in 1980, a young Vietnamese shot and killed
an Anglo fisherman named Billy Joe Aplin.

To the economically beleaguered Anglos, of lot of whom had fought in Vietnam,
the refugees were ''gooks'' and Communists who, according to the Anglo way of
seeing things, had been saved by the United States Government - and by American
blood - only to be able to take the food out of the mouths of good, solid,
native-born patriots. To the Vietnamese, America had become a nightmare of
violence and bigotry.

These are the sad, complex, real- life events that serve as the source material
for ''Alamo Bay,'' directed by Louis Malle from an original screenplay by Alice
Arlen, who, with Nora Ephron, wrote the excellent screenplay for ''Silkwood.''
The film opens today at Loew's New York Twin Theater.

Like many other movies that have their origins in a general idea, which
characters and their story, ''Alamo Bay'' is almost shamefully clumsy and
superficial - it's manufactured ''art.'' Watching it is an unhappy experience
that never becomes illuminating.

Its mediocrity is especially surprising when one realizes that it comes from a
director who, in the past, has virtually made a personal style by evoking humane
comedy and drama from the most unlikely situations, including incest (''Murmur
of the Heart''), child prostitution (''Pretty Baby'') and a couple of white guys
sitting around talking (''My Dinner With Andre''). This movie discovers nothing
in the real-life events that wouldn't be immediately apparent in the newspaper
accounts of what actually happened. It's a rule of literature that second-rate
fiction diminishes fact.

That ''Alamo Bay'' is a well-intentioned melodrama can't be denied. It wouldn't
have been made otherwise. Mr. Malle and Mrs. Arlen can be certified as concerned
citizens. It's also apparent that they appreciate the terrible bind in which
both the native Texans and the Vietnamese find themselves. Where they fail is in
making something moving and comprehensible of the contradictory impulses within
their fictional characters. They try, from time to time, but the essential
nastiness of the situation overwhelms them.

At the heart of the film are three potentially interesting people. Glory (Amy
Madigan) is a pretty, tough, headstrong young woman who has returned to the
small fishing town of Port Alamo to help her ailing father in his
shrimp-shipping business.

Shang (Ed Harris), who used to ''spark'' Glory when they were in high school but
is now married to a shrew who lives in hair curlers, is a Vietnam vet having
trouble meeting the bank loan on his boat. Shang has the manners and mentality
of a redneck bigot, but he also has a lot of primitive charm. One is meant to
believe, I think, that under any other circumstances he'd be a fairly decent
guy, but even before the confrontation with the Vietnamese, he's such a
mean-spirited boor it's difficult to see how any woman not bent on
self-destruction could stick with him.

Dinh (Ho Nguyen) is a bright, shining-faced, optimistic young Vietnamese
refugee, newly arrived in Port Alamo, who goes to work for Glory and, in almost
no time, is in a position to purchase his own boat. Dinh is a very rare
creature, too good, you might say, to be true or, more important, to be
effectively dramatic. He accepts the racial slurs of the Anglo fishermen without
expression. His sunny nature eventually wins over the skeptical Glory, who
stands by him when the white fishermen declare their war on the ''gooks,'' as he
stood by her when the Anglos threatened to close down her business because she
dealt with the Vietnamese.

At the same time, Glory's private life has become a mess. She has resumed her
affair with Shang, only to have him leave her when she cannot produce the money
to save his boat from foreclosure.

Miss Madigan and Mr. Harris (who are married in real life) are good performers,
but their characters here are not as complex as they are. There's only one
moment in the entire film when it seems as if ''Alamo Bay'' is taking on a life
of its own, when we understand that behavior might be growing out of character
and not simply imposed on character. This is a sexy, mostly wordless love scene,
set in a Port Alamo barroom, when Glory and Shang are dancing together and, what
with the music and the body heat, realize simultaneously that each is ready to
chuck everything to be able to make love to the other.

That events overtake them is no particular surprise, nor are the events
themselves, including the film's bloody climax, which are regularly telegraphed
before their arrival. It's unfortunate for a film when its most lifelike
character is a smooth- talking Klan organizer. The movie's attempts to give
identity to its stereotypes sometimes are ludicrous, as in a scene when Glory
and Dinh, having a late-evening drink together in a bar far away from Port
Alamo, are trading the stories of their lives.

''What was the worst thing that ever happened to you?'' Glory asks Dinh. He
tells her that after the Vietcong attacked his village, murdering almost
everybody, he hid for a week in the jungle, where, to stay alive, he was forced
to eat grass. Glory is appalled: ''You had to eat GRASS!''

Much like a movie inspired by events and not character, Glory gets the
priorities wrong.

A War Continued
ALAMO BAY, directed by Louis Malle; written by Alice Arlen; director of
photography, Curtis Clark; edited by James Bruce; music by Ry Cooder; produced
by Mr. Malle and Vincent Malle; released by Tri Star Pictures. At Loews New York
Twin, Second Avenue between 66th and 67th Streets. Running time: 105 minutes.
This film is rated R.

Glory . . . . . Amy Madigan
Shang . . . . . Ed Harris
Dinh . . . . . Ho Nguyen
Wally . . . . . Donald Moffat
Ben . . . . . Truyen V. Tran
Skinner . . . . . Rudy Young
Honey . . . . . Cynthia Carle
Luis . . . . . Martino Lasalle
Mac . . . . . William Frankfather
Ab Crankshaw . . . . . Lucky Mosley
Sheriff . . . . . Bill Thurman
Wendell . . . . . Michael Ballard


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Photo of Ed Harris

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 3, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE LOST VOICES

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 747 words


WASHINGTON Any newspaper reporter worth a

dime pays attention to the clock

and the calendar, and keeps a future book about the passage of time.

Mine says that John Jay McCloy of New York was 90 last week, and that J. William
Fulbright of Arkansas will be 80 in a few days. But that can't possibly be true.

Mr. McCloy makes retirement look easy. He was down here today and made a little
talk in the caucus room of the Senate Russell Building that was so quiet and
modest that nobody could hear him. But privately he goes like sixty, as if he
were still at the War Department, or presiding as High Commissioner in Berlin,
or running the World Bank.

Mr. Fulbright is another quiet character, but speaks out, when asked, loud and
strong. He is a former President of the University of Arkansas. He was for many
years Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and is still presiding
over his adoring Fulbright scholars and working on his slice at the Burning Tree
golf course, outside Washington.

Assuming that the clock and the calendar are reasonably accurate, something
should be said for these old geezers, who in their day played an important part
in the passage of America from isolation to the defense of freedom in the last
half-century.

It is popular in the days of muscular diplomacy to mock these old
''establishment'' types out of Washington and the Council on Foreign Relations
in New York. But when the history of these troubled times comes to be written,
the McCloys and the Fulbrights are not likely to be forgotten.

Mr. McCloy came out of Berlin with the conviction that nothing would restrain
the expansion of the Soviet Union but military force. But at the same time, he
was almost the only voice to oppose dropping the atomic bomb on the Japanese
until we had sent a solemn warning to Tokyo that we had such a weapon and would
use it unless they surrendered.  Mr. McCloy had and still has some other
anxieties about the conduct of our national affairs. For years, I have had long
letters from him protesting that the executive and legislative branches of the
Government are being run by unelected officials who are writing the speeches and
stating the questions for decision by the President and Congress.  Mr. Fulbright
has been insisting on the same questions. As a former university president and
student of foreign affairs, he lives down the street from this house wondering
why so much money is going into the Pentagon, and why the budget for education,
the farmers and the old folks are being cut back.  And Mr. McCloy and Mr.
Fulbright, right or wrong, are not alone in their anxieties. There are others
who helped along the way and now in advancing years worry in the night about our
present foreign, domestic and financial priorities.  This city is full of ghosts
who one day exercised great power but are now out of office in the last years of
their lives and can't go home and don't even know where home is.

There is, for example, Clark Clifford, who had the bad luck to be born on
Christmas Day (having to share his Christmas with his birthday presents), and
now has the consolation as an old man of having helped his buddy Lyndon Johnson
try to get out of Vietnam.

There is also George Kennan, former Ambassador to Moscow, author of the nation's
policy of ''containment'' of Soviet power, now living in Princeton in his 81st
year and writing like de Toqueville about the inevitable destiny and confict
between the two great continental powers of America and the Soviet Union.

This is not to forget Averell Harriman, also a former U.S Ambassador to the
Soviet Union and to Britain and a former Secretary of Commerce, among many other
things. Now in his 94th year, he is drifting into the shadows, but still, with
the help of his wife Pamela, with her Churchill connections, doing the best he
can with his money for the study of U.S.-Soviet relations at Columbia
University.

These are the ''lost voices'' of the past, but echoes of them are still heard
from both political parties, however vaguely.

The tragedy of it on the side is that family life can't always bear the pressure
of time and events. Mr. McCloy and Mr. Fulbright, for example, are no longer
concerned primarily about the conduct of the nation's foreign policy. They are
concerned above all else about the frailty of the lives of their wives. They
have said all they can about public affairs, and now in old age think mainly
about the security of their families.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 3, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LET'S HEAR THEM SAY 'AMIGO,' NOT 'UNCLE'

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 147 words


To the Editor:


The President's denunciation of Nicaragua for moving civilians out of certain
territory to create ''free-fire zones'' is a one-sided use of history (news
article, March 26).

In the Civil War, in 1864, General Grant ordered the Shenandoah Valley emptied
of inhabitants and the earth laid waste to deprive General Lee's forces of
material support. In the Indian Wars the native peoples were squeezed onto
reservations as the railroads conquered the rest of the land.

In Vietnam, the Army created ''strategic villages.'' Anyone living outside these
compounds was considered a hostile force and dealt with.

Perhaps free-fire zones and forced relocation are necessary evils in war;
perhaps they lack moral justification. But to pretend the U.S. is blameless on
this, contradicts facts and violates truth.

CHUCK MCGROARTY Jersey City, March 28, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 3, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS HOSTILE TO ETHNIC VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1168 words

DATELINE: UDON THANI, Thailand, March 27


Tens of thousands of ethnic Vietnamese living in Thailand are finding themselves
in a precarious position as public anger mounts over daily reports of incursions
into Thai territory by Vietnamese troops pursuing Cambodian guerrillas.

In the last few weeks, large and well- orchestrated rallies to denounce Hanoi
have been held in Thailand's Northeast,

 where most ethnic Vietnamese live. Most of these Vietnamese do not hold either
Thai or Vietnamese citizenship, and they are vulnerable to pressures both from
Thais and from pro- Hanoi Vietnamese within their ranks.

While the organizers - Thai nationalist groups and Government officials - have
said repeatedly that the anti-Hanoi demonstrations are not aimed at local
residents, at least one rally, in the Mekong River town of Nakhon Phanom, was
reported to have turned into an attack on local Vietnamese. No injuries or
property damage resulted, Thai authorities said. But in Hanoi, the Thai
Ambassador was summoned to receive a protest.

Here in Udon Thani, the capital of a province with about 7,000 ethnic
Vietnamese, residents say Thai hostility and Vietnamese fears have never been
far below the surface. In 1979, the year Vietnam ousted the Khmer Rouge
Government in Cambodia, rumors that Vietnamese were poisoning local food led to
riots. Visitors are still told stories of secret Vietnamese contacts with
Hanoi's agents across the Mekong in Laos. Thai officials who monitor the
Vietnamese discount such fears, but they persist.

Some in Thailand for Decades

There are thought to be about 80,000 ethnic Vietnamese in the Northeast, where
they entered the country from Laos or Cambodia. Some have lived in Thailand for
generations and have become Thai citizens. But the overwhelming majority, denied
Thai nationality, continue to exist, after more than 30 or 40 years, in a
circumscribed condition of statelessness.

They are barred from many jobs and most professional training and higher
education. They cannot own property, though they are allowed to operate
businesses. Their rights to travel, even inside Thailand, are severely
restricted. Every Vietnamese over the age of 12 must carry a special identity
card, the cover of which shows silhouettes of people in conical Vietnamese hats.

This year, Udon Thani's provincial government banned the wearing of
Vietnamese-style hats. A billboard has been erected here, complete with samples
of Thai and Vietnamese headgear and the admonition to avoid ''alien hats.''
Another sign beside it exhorts the reader to ''be a real Thai'' by wearing the
right hat. ''Be a free Thai, not the slave of other countries,'' it says.

The other day, when anti-Hanoi protests were held in 17 provincial towns in the
Northeast, including this one, a visitor asked a hotel clerk for the addresses
of Vietnamese restaurants. The clerk replied: ''They will all be closed today
because of the demonstrations. We don't like the Vietnamese, and they know
that.''

Vietnamese Unwilling to Talk

Vietnamese shops and restaurants were not closed, here or in Nong Khai province
to the north, where the ethnic Vietnamese population is believed to be about
9,000. But proprietors did not want to talk about the day's events. In the river
town of Si Chiang Mai, a center of Vietnamese settlement, a group of people
making Vietnamese rice wafers in a family shop told a visitor, in Thai, that
they were all Thais.

Among the stateless Vietnamese in Thailand are people who fled into Thailand
during World War II, when Indochinese nationalists were plotting against the
French. Others, known as ''Dien Bien Phu Vietnamese,'' sought refuge during and
after the final battles for independence from France.

They came for many reasons. Some were politically or religiously motivated, as
were the hundreds of thousands of North Vietnamese Roman Catholics who fled to
South Vietnam. Many others were simply avoiding the disruption of war. A large
number were driven away from Cambodia and Laos by anti-Vietnamese sentiment
after the departure of the French, who had encouraged Vietnamese to settle
there.

Some Vietnamese were returned in the late 1960's, officials here say. Since
1975, when South Vietnam fell, Thailand has not allowed Vietnamese to settle.
Instead they are confined to refugee camps to await emigration to other
countries.

Competition Between Empires

The traditional antipathy to Vietnamese, going back over centuries of
competition between Siamese and Vietnamese empires, is at least partly to blame,
refugee officials say, for the brutality that Vietnamese boat people have faced
from Thai pirates.

Questions about Vietnamese security risks arise because many of them who have
lived in Thailand for three or four decades cling to the memories and romantic
hopes of early Vietnamese nationalists.

''In many of their houses the picture of Ho Chi Minh hangs higher than that of
the Pope,'' a priest said.

Thai officials responsible for the ethnic Vietnamese say that traditional
loyalties like these have been exploited by pro-Hanoi factions. In an interview
here, Capt. Charoen Phimsuksa, a Thai Army intelligence officer, said about 20
percent of the ethnic Vietnamese in this province may be donating money to Hanoi
or gathering information to be passed on to the Vietnamese Embassy in Bangkok.
But except for some direct support given a decade ago to a Communist
insurrection in the Northeast, he said, ethnic Vietnamese have not been a danger
to Thailand.

A Potential for Trouble

Thai authorities are aware of the potential for trouble that could come as new
generations of ethnic Vietnamese, who were born here and consider themselves
Thai, continue to be denied the rights of Thai people. Officials working most
closely with the Vietnamese say that a disaffected group is being created and
that Thailand should move toward granting citizenship. Political considerations
and popular sentiment may make this a long process, however.

''In Udon, most Vietnamese people want to have Thai citizenship,'' said Lieut.
Col. Sermsak Keokanta, the provincial deputy police chief in charge of
Vietnamese affairs. ''The first step will be to make them resident aliens. Then,
after they prove they are good people, they could get Thai citizenship on a
case-by-case basis.''

At the same time, he said, ''officials in Udon try to explain to the Thais how
to understand the Vietnamese better.''

Meanwhile, the ethnic Vietnamese try to stay out of the limelight and to
demonstrate their loyalty to Thailand. A group of them, prosperous merchants,
recently donated nearly $40,000 to the Thai Army to help defray costs of its
operations against Vietnamese troops on the Thai-Cambodian border. It is hard to
measure their anxiety, church workers say, because if they suffer, they do so in
silence.

A priest who has known many Vietnamese over the years said, ''Even I don't feel
that I could go to anybody and say: Tell me how it really is.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Thailand highlighting Udon Thani; photo of signs in Udon Thani
describing proper headgear (NYT/Jim Wilson)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 3, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 877 words


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 3, 1985 International

Soviet weapons technology is rapidly progressing, especially in submarines,
nuclear missiles and space weaponry, according to a Pentagon assessment of
Soviet military power. The report focused on an expanding program in laser
weapon research, which the Pentagon described as part of drive for space weapons
superiority that proves the need for President Reagan's ''Star Wars'' space
defense program. The Russians were reported to have built prototype ground-based
laser weapons capable of interfering with American satellites. (Page A1, Column
4.)

Moscow ordered computer courses to be given in Soviet high schools by next fall.
The directive was issued by the Soviet leadership under Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Computer training had been a goal of the school reform adopted in April 1984.
The speed with which the computer instruction program is being put into place
seemed to reflect the new Soviet leader's emphasis on stepping up modernization
of the economy. (A5:1.)

Ethnic Vietnamese in Thailand feel threatened as anger increases among Thais
over daily reports of incursions into Thai territory by Vietnamese troops
pursuing Cambodian guerrillas. Large demonstrations denouncing Hanoi have been
held in Thailand's Northeast, where most of the tens of thousands of ethnic
Vietnamese live. Many have been there for decades. (A8:4.) National

A tough trade reprisal bill aimed at Japan was approved by the Senate Finance
Committee. The Administration opposes it, but may use it to demand further
access to the Japanese market for American products. The bill would give the
President 90 days to obtain more liberal Japanese trade rules or take action
under this country's ''unfair trade'' law to ban imports from Japan. (A1:6.)

100,000 Villanova fans rallied near City Hall in Philadelphia to greet and
idolize the team that scored one of the biggest upsets in collegiate basketball
history in its defeat Monday of overwhelmingly favored Georgetown for the
national championship. Philadelphia fans paid slightly greater homage only to
the Phillies when they won the World Series in 1980, according to police
estimates. (A1:1.)

Claims for Dalkon Shield injuries will be paid from a $615 million fund set
aside for the purpose by the A.H. Robins Company, manufacturer of the female
birth control device, the company announced. The reserve fund is by far the
biggest provision of its kind in a product liability case, lawyers said. (A1:5.)


The theory that life began in clay

 rather than the sea is supported by a major discovery announced at a meeting in
California, scientists said. An analysis of common ceramic clay, found that it
contains two basic properties essential to life: the ability to store and
transfer energy. (A1:2.)

A new line of destroyers will be built at the Bath Iron Works in Maine. The Navy
chose the shipyard after years of intense competition among shipbuilders for one
of the Navy's biggest shipbuilding programs. Bath was awarded a $321.9 million
contract for the first Arleigh Burke class destroyer, designated DDG-51, which
will be armed with the latest weaponry against planes, missiles, submarines and
surface ships. (A1:6.)

Arthur J. Goldberg will investigate

 the ties of the chief justice of Rhode Island's Supreme Court to reputed
organized crime figures. Mr. Goldberg, a retired Supreme Court Justice and
former chief United States representative to the United Nations, was appointed
to head the investigation by the Rhode Island state judicial ethics commission.
(A16:3.)

The phase-out of Federal jobless aid

 to people out of work more than six months was approved by the House, which
bowed to White House pressure. The Senate is expected to approve the measure
today, which would continue payments to people enlisted in the program but would
permit no new applicants. (A19:5.) Metropolitan

A drought warning is planned by New York City, which is cutting back on water
use by the Sanitation Department and the Transit Authority. More hydrants will
be locked to prevent nonessential use of that water source. The reservoirs from
which the city gets its water are at 59 percent of capacity. At this time of
year, they are usually at 96 percent of capacity. The drought warning would
follow the drought watch of Feb. 25, calling for water conservation. (A1:3.)

Some tougher prison sentences than were originally suggested are proposed in the
final report on recommendations for uniform sentences in New York State.
Sentencing procedures would be changed to provide similar sentences for people
convicted of similar crimes. The revised version of the guidelines would provide
the longest sentences to people who have been convicted of felonies more than
once. (B3:5.)

More state aid for New York City was agreed to in Albany, clearing up one of the
last obstacles on state budget agreement. Stanley Fink, Speaker of the Assembly,
and a Democrat from Brookly, persuaded Republicans to increase the city's share
of $68.5 million in state aid to 40 percent from 32 percent. (B4:1.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 4, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE PANEL BACKS CAMBODIAN-GUERRILLA AID

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 330 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 3


The House Foreign Affairs Committee tonight approved a $14.5 billion foreign aid
bill for 1986, including $5 million in military aid to be funneled through
Thailand to non-Communist Cambodian forces battling the Vietnamese occupation
army.

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, author of the aid bill,
compared the situations in Cambodia and Afghanistan, where guerrillas battling
Soviet troops are receiving extensive United States aid.

Mr. Solarz, who recently visited Southeast Asia, said the Vietnamese have
''absolutely no intention'' of withdrawing from Cambodia ''under the present
circumstances,'' and would only leave when the price of occupation becomes too
high.

Under his plan, the aid would go only to non-Communist Cambodian guerrillas who
have been fighting Vietnamese troops since they invaded in 1978 and installed
the pro-Hanoi Heng Samrin regime.

The guerrilla are split into three groups - the non-Communist Khmer Peoples
National Liberation Front, a faction loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and the
Communist Khmer Rouge.

Representative Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa, sought to block the aid by
offering an amendment to the foreign aid bill authorizing the President to
provide humanitarian aid to the non-Communist Cambodian forces, but the
committee rejected his amendment, 24 to 9.

By voice vote the committee also approved $1.5 million in additional economic
aid for Israel, even though the administration had urged the committee to defer
action on the aid until the Israeli Government made changes to improve that
country's economy.

The panel approved, on a 19-7 vote, an amendment by William Broomfield,
Republican of Michigan, to provide aid to Greece on the same low-cost credit
terms allowed Turkey.

Over Administration protests, the panel cut military aid to the Philippines from
$100 million to $25 million and increased economic aid from $95 million to $155
million.

The bill now goes to the full House.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 4, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW DIRECTORS/NEW FILMS;
'WITNESS TO WAR' AND 'THE TIES THAT BIND'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 782 words


OF the two short documentaries being shown on a single program today at the New
Directors/New Films Festival at the Museum of Modern Art, the more interesting
and compelling is Deborah Shaffer's 29-minute ''Witness to War: Dr. Charlie
Clements,'' about a United States Air Force Academy graduate, a Vietnam veteran
who, some years - and a medical degree - later, wound up tending civilians in
rebel-held territories of El Salvador.

The second, somewhat more ambitious film is Su Friedrich's 55-minute ''The Ties
That Bind,'' in which the film maker's mother talks about her experiences
growing up in Nazi Germany, the daughter of acceptably Aryan but staunchly
anti-Nazi, middle-class parents. The program will be screened today at 8:30 P.M.
and on Saturday at 6 P.M.


Dr. Clements's story is that of one man's more or less gradual discovery of his
own identity, including his own politics. Born and brought up in a military
family, he was, by his own admission, an enthusiastic supporter of the Vietnam
War when he went overseas as a pilot. In the course of his service, though, he
became so troubled by his participation that he finally refused to fly further
missions. The Air Force packed him off to a psychiatric hospital, after which,
having won an honorable discharge, he went to medical school and subsequently
volunteered to serve in El Salvador, prompted, he says, by the fear it could
become another Vietnam.

Tall, lean and very intense, Dr. Clements, who became a Quaker, is a persuasive
personality whose integrity is certified in interviews with several of his Air
Force associates and in one brief interview with Col. Mal Wakin, the dean of the
Air Force Academy. Miss Shaffer's film includes footage of Dr. Clements at work
in El Salvador, where he lived for one year, as well as clips from one of the
lectures he gave after returning home.

Asked by a member of the lecture audience how he could reconcile his Quaker
beliefs with the violent policies of the rebels with whom he worked, Dr.
Clements admits that the question always troubled him though, he emphasizes, he
volunteered only to treat civilians and never himself carried arms. ''Witness to
War'' is effective for being as straightforward and direct as the doctor himself
appears to be.

Rather more complicated - fancier, really - is ''The Ties That Bind,'' both
because of the subject matter and the way Miss Friedrich chooses to present it.
The movie, which is as uncritical as a family album, doesn't pretend to be a
history of Germany, but only one woman's recollections of a private life decades
later. However, because movie audiences do not share Miss Friedrich's
relationship with her mother, the testimony is heard in the context of
everything else we know about what was going on in Germany before, during and
after the war.

A problem is thus built into the film: The mother's stories about being rude to
a music teacher she knew to be a Nazi, about suffering through air raids, about
the mess that United States occupation troops made of her family's requisitioned
house (they broke the furniture and sprayed catsup on the walls), about old
people being beaten up by occupying troops (whose troops she doesn't
specifically say) are inevitably compared to our own awareness of far greater
horrors, which, of course, the mother now shares. In a family gathering these
memories might be very moving. In a film they take on an air of self-importance
that doesn't complement history as often as it seems to trivialize it.

The images that accompany the aural testimony are not especially helpful - shots
of her mother swimming in a lake, shots of Ulm, where her mother grew up, and
occasional shots of her mother's hand or arm resting on the back of a sofa as, I
assume, her daughter is tape-recording the words. The film maker's voice is not
heard on the soundtrack. Instead, the questions she has put to her mother are
shown as printed titles - in a childish scribble - that repeatedly emphasize
Miss Friedrich's filial affection and love.

''The Ties That Bind'' is a very private movie.


Old and New Wars

WITNESS TO WAR: DR. CHARLIE CLEMENTS, directed by Deborah Shaffer; camera, Tom
Sigel and Sandi Sissel; edited by Miss Shaffer; produced by David Goodman; a
Skylight Production in cooperation with the American Friends Service
Committee/NARMIC.  Running time: 29 minutes.  Interviewees: Dr. Charlie
Clements, Terry Savery, Col. Mal Wakin

THE TIES THAT BIND, a film by Su Friedrich.  Both films at Roy and Niuta Titus
Theater 1, Museum of Modern Art, as part of the New Directors/New Films Series.
Running time: 55 minutes. These films are not rated.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dr. Charlie Clements

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 4, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HERS

BYLINE: By Francine Prose

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1074 words


WHEN I went to register my son Bruno for first grade at the local public school,
I was told that unless he had documented proof of having attended kindergarten
in Arizona - where we had spent the last two years - he would have to repeat it.
Knowing that obtaining such proof would involve negotiations on the scale of
Yalta with Bruno's disorganized and unashamedly meretricious preschool, I asked
to see the principal, who explained the value of this regulation: If they let
one child skip kindergarten, they would have to let them all. ''But Bruno's 6
years old,'' I said. ''He can read and write and use my computer.'' In reply,
the principal fixed me with the blankest stare I've ever seen and said: ''Of
course.

Every mother thinks her child is very bright.''

Until that moment I was a true believer in public education. Friends teased me
that this was because I didn't go to public school; perhaps they were right.
Having attended a small Quaker school, I wanted my sons to grow up around
children from diverse backgrounds: the world in microcosm. To this end, I've
been paying school taxes more or less uncomplainingly in the belief that what I
was paying for was no less than my children's constitutional right.



We've been dining out lately on the story of P.T.A. Family Night, of how we
arrived to find the gym teacher exhorting the parents to join in various
get-acquainted games. I can't recall when I've felt as out of place as I did
among these good country people, the men in their mesh baseball caps, the women
in their polyester pantsuits. Yet this was why I'd come, why I was sending my
child to public school, which I kept telling myself even as these parents lay
down on their stomachs in a circle on the gym floor and played at blowing a
Ping- Pong ball around without touching it. This, most of all, is what I want
Bruno to learn: The world is wider than his parents, his parents' friends. These
people exist in it; their children are first graders, too.

Rumors have been filtering down from the high school and junior high: drugs and
violence in the halls of our own bucolic blackboard jungle. Eventually we'll
have to face this, but now it concerns me less than what I've already observed:
the powerful, almost preternatural ability of public institutions to dehumanize,
depersonalize, erode spirit, talent and will.

I've been trying - unsuccessfully - not to think of Frederick Wiseman's
astonishing documentary ''High School.'' Filmed during the Vietnam War, its
subtext is the way a large public high school - in this case, one with a middle
and upper middle class student body and pretensions of being progressive -
graduates the sort of student who can go on to fight an unjust war without
asking too many questions.

In one chilling scene, a guidance counselor urges a student to admit the
misdemeanor he's been reported for, though both the counselor and student know
the boy is innocent. This summer, in the principal's office, I felt as if I were
living that scene, that a similar complicity was being asked: assent to the
wisdom of my son's repeating kindergarten. With one blank stare, I was reduced
to Everymother, deluded by unruly maternal chemicals into thinking her child was
bright.

It's easy to spot dehumanization at work, harder to understand its method.
Repetition, frustration - even the slowest rat will eventually stop trying the
same blind alley - the pressure of propriety, some watered-down version of fear.
Leaving the principal's office, I was trembling, not from anger so much as from
the effort of containing it. I didn't want Bruno to start school known as the
kid whose mother's hands had to be pried from around the principal's neck.

Still I can't help thinking something else is involved, something subtler and
more mysterious than frustration and social pressure. Years ago, Bruno and I
worked as extras in a movie. Among the other extras were recent Russian emigres,
and though we all wore period costumes the new immigrants stood out of the
crowd: their faces looked different, unassimilated. I found myself thinking that
perhaps assimilation - or at least its appearance - comes with eating and
sleeping and breathing the American air. And perhaps it's that way with the kind
of conformity public school seems to breed. Perhaps it is in the air, as
omnipresent and contagious as viruses in cold season.



Eventually the necessary letters came. Bruno enrolled in first grade. And early
in the fall, the parents of Bruno's classmates gathered in the cheery classroom
while his teacher - a bright, responsive and by all indications dedicated young
woman - explained the curriculum. She saved the handwriting program till last,
sensing that this was a sore point. Though nearly all the children could write
their names before school began, they are being forced to unlearn the alphabet
and - with an emphasis on rote penmanship that seems positively Dickensian -
relearn a new kind of printing. Slanted, adorned with curlicues, baroque and
deformed, these ''new'' letters will in theory ease the transition to script.

Bruno's teacher smiled - a little apologetically, it seemed - as she explained
that she herself had originally opposed this decision of the spelling and
handwriting committee, but had come to see its uses. In that smile I saw myself
in the principal's office, saw that wrongly accused student in ''High School,''
saw new significance in those normally dignified mothers belly down on the gym
floor, saw all of us smiling, agreeing, just trying to get through the day.

Perhaps ''get through'' is the operative phrase. Bruno will, I hope, get
through, will learn. He has adjusted to his new school, is enjoying himself, for
which I'm enormously grateful. His teacher is as good as any we could have
wished for. The same friends who teased me for my na"ivete assure me he'll be
better for surviving the experience. It's the popular notion that scrappers fare
better than the sheltered and privileged - a theory that the facts of who
succeeds in America do little to bear out.

Meanwhile we read with Bruno at home, do math games in the car, tell him all
manner of seditious things - that the world won't care if he can write so long
as he learns to type, encourage him constantly, as if encouragement and sedition
were a charm against depersonalization, a vaccine to ward off that numbing virus
and keep his individuality alive.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Is 'Nicaragua' Spanish for 'Vietnam'?

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 239 words


To the Editor:


The March 24 Op-Ed article ''10 Years Later, Lessons of the Vietnam War,'' by
Allan E. Goodman and Seth P. Tillman concludes correctly that no ''foreign
venture can succeed without solid domestic foundations.'' Yet, the authors do
not explore the greatest of the Vietnam lessons, namely, that there cannot and
should not be support for foreign ventures that go against history.

While they state, ''As applied to El Salvador or Nicaragua, the lesson of
Vietnam is to . . . study the local conflict and its roots, domestic as well as
external,'' that does not mean, as they advise, ''to forget about Vietnam.''
Rather, all should learn from the Indochinese tragedy that it is futile to
oppose revolutionaries who have gained as much legitimacy as the Vietnamese had
by the time of their ''August Revolution'' of 1945.

Based on that legitimacy, they could then organize the inexhaustible supply of
activists (not necessarily a majority) that enabled them to defeat the powerful
military machines led by the French and then the Americans.

Even if Washington does not like the ideology of those who have won their
legitimacy, Vietnam shows that it would be better to try to encourage their
evolution than to fight them.

JAMES P. HARRISON Professor of History, Hunter College New York, March 25, 1985

The writer is author of ''The Endless War: Vietnam's Struggle for Independence''
(1982).


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD ;
U.S. Yachtsman Is Freed by Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 134 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 4


A 41-year-old American yachtsman was released today by Vietnam, where he had
spent eight and a half months in solitary confinement on charges of espionage
and violating territorial waters.

The yachtsman, Bill Mathers, was in Bangkok today on his way home to Singapore.
He denied he was spying when he was captured July 22, or that his schooner was
in Vietnamese waters.

Mr. Mathers, who worked for a marine construction company, grew up in Oyster
Bay, L.I., but has lived in Singapore since 1970. Four French citizens and one
Australian in his crew were set free earlier, after fines were paid.



 By The Associated Press

Mr. Mathers's father, William Mathers, a lawyer, said yesterday in Cove Neck,
L.I., that he had paid $10,000 to Vietnam for his son's release.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION ;
Ex-Vietnam Waif Named U.S. Teacher of the Year

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 108 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 4


A woman abandoned as a waif in Vietnam and adopted by an American soldier has
won the teaching profession's highest honor: the 1985 National Teacher of the
Year award.

Therese Knecht Dozier, a 32-year-old history teacher at Irmo High School in
Columbia, S.C., will be honored in Washington on April 17.

Mrs. Dozier was born in Saigon to a Vietnamese woman and a former colonel in the
German Army who joined the French Foreign Legion and was sent to Indochina after
World War II.

Her mother died after bearing her and a younger brother. They were brought to
America in 1954 after being adopted by an American Army adviser and his wife.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Therese Knecht Dozier (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM MEMORIAL IS TAKING SHAPE

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Herman Rubenacker, left, and David Scott setting glass blocks in place
yesterday for the New York Vietnam Veterans Memorial on plaza at 55 Water Street
in lower Manhat- tan. The monument, 14 feet high and 66 feet long, will be made
up of blocks etched with excerpts from letters and poems sent to and from
Vietnam, as well as speeches and news dispatches from the war era.  The New York
Times/Marilynn K. Yee

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: DILEMMA OF 'ABEL'S SISTER,' AT THE ECHO

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 405 words


IN ''Abel's Sister'' (at the Echo

Stage), a spastic woman visits

her twin brother at his country

house on the moors and overstays her welcome. For her, even this increasingly
divisive household offers a hospitable sense of family - in direct contrast to
the institution that is her usual home. For her brother, a painter of peace
posters, she is one of several intrusions on his routine. In his case, charity
does not begin at home.

When the playwright, Timberlake Wertenbaker, focuses on the sister, on her
problems and the problems others have adjusting to her incapacitation, the play
has an immediacy. When Miss Wertenbaker attempts to expand her perspective to
discuss the Vietnam War and the pacifist movement, among other subjects, the
play diverges from its dramatic core.


The other, far less appealing characters are the self-righteous brother, his
housemate and their neighbor, an American veteran turned war protester. The
three fall into a predictable romantic triangle, leaving the sister pathetically
on the fringe. It is the sister's dilemma that instills the brief play with
whatever interest it possesses. This undoubtedly derives from the fact that the
playwright has based the character on first-hand material supplied by Yolande
Bourcier, who is herself handicapped.

The sister is filled with mystical reflections about the root of her disorder
and with comments about her feeling of being an outcast. Others assume that her
physical impairment is a sign of mental deficiency. Actually, she has intuitive
powers of observation.

The play, first presented last year at London's Royal Court Theater, has been
given a compact production by Martin Nordal. The American actors are effective
within the limits of their characters, with the most telling contributions
coming from Cynthia Hayden as the desirable center of the triangle and Mim
Solberg as the sister. Miss Solberg conveys the double- edged quality of her
victimized character. An outward display of assertiveness barely conceals
emotional wounds.


An Outcast at Home

ABEL'S SISTER, by Timberlake Wertenbaker, based on material by Yolande Bourcier;
di rected by Martin Nordal; assistant director, Jane Cook; production stage
manager, Ken Simmons. Presented by Echo Stage Repertory, at Actor's Outlet, 120
West 28th Street.  HowardRichard Abernethy LauraCynthia Hayden ChrisDonald Most
SandraMim Solberg




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Donald Most in role (Gerry Goodstein)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 6, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

JIM CROW IS GONE, BUT WHITE RESISTANCE REMAINS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2689 words

DATELINE: GREENSBORO, N.C.


Like Birmingham and Montgomery and Selma, those other shrines of the civil
rights movement, Greensboro marked an important turning point for blacks in the
South. Here, 25 years ago, four young black men sat down at a white-only lunch
counter and refused to leave.

The sit-in was the first in the South, and it inspired similar challenges across
the region, actions that, over time, helped break the back of the Jim Crow
segregation laws that were then the first line of white resistance to progress
by blacks in the South.

Gone with those laws is most overt discrimination. Today, blacks cannot legally
be denied a drink at a water fountain, a table in a restaurant or a room at a
hotel. But civil rights leaders in this graceful city in the rolling Piedmont of
North Carolina, like other places throughout the South, say that resistance
among whites, while no longer having the force of law, is being expressed in
other, mostly more subtle ways.

On occasion, that expression can be violent, as it was in November 1979, when
five Communist protesters here were shot to death in an exchange of gunfire with
a group of heavily armed Ku Klux Klansmen and members of the American Nazi
Party. They were twice acquitted of criminal charges, but a civil trial is now
in progress on a suit filed by survivors.

But, more typically, the resistance is more subtle and institutionalized,
reflecting what many blacks and whites say is the reluctance or indifference of
whites to effect the sorts of changes, in voting systems, housing opportunities
or hiring practices, that many view as necessary to achieve real progress for
blacks, who continue to lag far behind whites in all economic indicators, such
as income levels and employment rates.

''White resistance in the South today seems to take two worrisome forms,'' said
Steve Suitts, executive director of the Southern Regional Council, a private,
nonprofit organization in Atlanta that, among other things, studies race
relations in the South. ''There is the resistance of random violence, which
occurs at levels comparable to that of 20 years ago.

''And there is the resistance of indifference. Many whites in the South today
tend to believe that blacks now have opportunities equal to those of whites.
They do not feel any responsibility for the sins of the past. And so they refuse
to take an active or sympathetic role in seeking further change in the region.''

Even political changes often come only after long battle. Recently, for example,
a group of blacks in Greensboro used the threat of Federal lawsuits to help push
both the city and the surrounding county of Guilford into dividing each
juridiction into election districts rather than having officials chosen by the
electorate at large. They argued that at-large systems are racially
discriminatory because they dilute black voting strength and favor the white
majority.

'It's Just Harder to See'

''A lot has changed in this city in 20 years, and blacks are a lot better off
for it,'' said Earl Jones, one of two black City Councilman elected in 1983 as a
result of the new district system in the Greensboro, whose population of 180,000
is one-third black. ''But that doesn't mean that white resistance has gone away.
In many ways, it has just become more subtle, more institutionalized. It's just
harder to see, but it's there.''

Many white residents in the South disagree with the notion that whites overtly
resist black progress. In Guilford County, for example, officials say they
abandoned at-large voting specifically because they came to agree with
complaints by blacks who filed a lawsuit arguing that the old system was
discriminatory.

''In the past, I think people would argue that the system was not biased, that
blacks did not win because they did not run,'' said William B. Trevorrow, the
County Attorney. ''But once it became an issue, we stepped back and took another
look at it. And we were willing to change.''

Reverse Discrimination Charged

In that sense, some analysts say attitudes in the South have come to reflect
those in the nation as a whole.

''I think one problem in the South, like the rest of the country, is that whites
have bought the argument of reverse discrimination, that blacks have gotten more
than they deserve,'' said William H. Chafe, a professor of history at Duke
University in Durham and a longtime student of race relations in Greensboro.

''This reflects a larger political environment that sanctions implicit racism
and sometimes explicit racism,'' Mr. Chafe said.

That environment, he said, was defined in part by the Reagan Administration's
emphasis on the individual and its arguments against programs designed to place
more members of minority groups in jobs. The Administration argues that such
affirmative action is wrong because it tends to favor one group at the expense
of another.

White Support for Reagan

If anything, these arguments may have even more weight in the South, where
President Reagan found his highest percentage of support among white voters last
November. About 71 percent of Southern whites voted for him.

In another sense, the very fact that Southern attitudes now more closely
parallel those outside the region serves to underscore how much the South has
changed over the last two decades, from the days when the force of terror and
intimidation helped define the cutting edge of what was then called white
resistance in the South.

The Citizens Councils, those stolid assemblies of white merchants and community
leaders who formed a common front against integration in their communities, have
disappeared. The Jim Crow segregation laws, which took their name from an early
minstrel song and were enforced with a ruthless determination by the local
police and sheriffs, long ago dissolved under the force of Federal legislation.

And while incidents of racial violence and intimidation - random cross burnings,
firebombings, beatings - still occur, the Klan itself no longer commands the
following or generates the fear it did in the past.

Pressure on the Klan

In many communities local merchants cringe at Klan marches, fearing they will
drive away black business on which they rely. Meanwhile, the Klan has found
itself under increasing pressure as a result of both criminal charges by the
Federal Government and civil lawsuits pressed by private organizations like the
Southern Poverty Law Center in Montgomery, which has won court injunctions to
stop the Klan from harrassing blacks in North Carolina.

And the Klansmen and Nazis involved in the Greensboro shootout in 1979 are now
in court again. After twice being acquitted of criminal charges, they are
defendants in a civil suit brought by relatives of the five victims, who
attribute the incident not only to raw racist violence but also to complicity on
the part of Government officials who, the plaintiffs argue, knew of the
potential for trouble but failed to stop it before it began.

But Mr. Suitts and others note that, economically, there are still great
inequities between blacks and whites, differences that are more sharply drawn in
the South than in the rest of the nation.

Black Work Force Studied

According to an examination of data from the Federal Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, nealy 66 percent of the black work force in 11 Southern
states hold jobs in the three lowest categories: service workers, such as maids,
cooks and waiters; unskilled general laborers, and semiskilled operators, such
as chauffeurs, delivery people and dressmakers. This contrasts with 32 percent
of the white work force in such jobs in those states.

Outside the South, 51 percent of blacks are in these job categories.

And 59 percent of black families in the South have annual incomes below $15,000
as against 31 percent of white families.

Despite the force of law and moral authority, examples of overt discrimination
can still be found in the region, more often in smaller communities that escaped
the turmoil of the 1960's, when communities like Greensboro and Birmingham and
Selma were on the front lines of the battle.

In Elizabeth City, N.C., for example, the local country club recently withdrew
an offer to allow the high school golf team to practice on its course after
discovering that the squad included a black player. Officials of the club said
that race had nothing to do with their decision, asserting that the course had
become too crowded.

Battle Over Voting

In Butts County, Ga., local officials only recently tore down a chain-link fence
that separated the black portion of the county cemetery from the white portion.
Until the fence was taken down, black funeral processions entered the cemetery
through a back gate.

For civil rights organizations in the region, however, the single most dramatic
measure of Southern political resistance has been the continuing battle to force
white local governments in the region to abandon at-large voting systems in
favor of district balloting.

For years blacks have argued that such systems are unfair because they tend to
minimize the voting strength of minority groups by permitting the political
majority to elect all the representatives of the district.

Opponents of at-large voting gained important ammunition for their cause in
1982, when Congress passed an extension to the 1965 Voting Rights Act, which
allowed Federal judges to invalidate a voting system if it was found to have a
racially discriminatory effect.

Electoral Victories for Blacks

Since then scores of local jurisdictions across the region have either been
ordered by the courts to replace at- large voting systems with district voting
or have agreed to do so under the threat of lawsuit. In Georgia alone, 78 of 600
blacks who ran last fall for county commissions or school boards were elected,
winning seats never held before by blacks. Most of those victories were directly
tied to decisions by local governments to switch to district systems.

''But very few of them do it willingly,'' said Charles McCant, a researcher with
the Voter Education Project in Atlanta, the nonprofit organization that has done
much of the work on changing at-large systems. ''And the only reason a lot of
these counties give in is because they can't afford to pay a lawyer $150 an hour
to defend the system in court.''

Currently, the voter education group has 15 lawsuits pending in Federal courts
against local governments in Georgia.

At-large voting systems have been most prevalent in Alabama, Georgia, North
Carolina and South Carolina. According to a survey published in January by the
Southern Regional Council, the majority of the county governing boards in
Alabama and North Carolina are still elected on an at-large basis, with the
highest proportion being in North Carolina.

Pattern of Discrimination

In addition, according to a study by the North Carolina League of
Municipalities, 88 percent of the towns and cities in the state use at-large
voting. And largely as a result, blacks make up only 5.3 percent of the
membership of county governing boards, even though they constitute nearly 23
percent of the total population.

In several court decisions, Federal judges have described a larger pattern of
discrimination that is consistent with maintenance of an at-large system. In a
1982 decision ordering Burke County, Ga., to abandon an at-large voting system,
the Federal District Court uncovered what the United States Supreme Court later
called ''extensive evidence that elected officials of Burke County have been
unresponsive and insensitive to the needs of the black community, which
increases the likelihood that the political process was not equally open to
blacks.''

Among the evidence cited by the court was the fact that fewer roads in the black
neighborhoods were paved and that the county had donated public funds for the
purchase of band uniforms to an all-white private school that the County
Commissioners had helped incorporate.

In Greensboro, blacks began to push for a district voting system after the city
proposed annexing property that would have brought into the city 12,000 new
voters, 95 percent of them white, a move that would have further diminished the
voting strength of blacks.

Annexation Blocked

In 1981 they petitioned the Department of Justice under terms of the Voting
Rights Act, and the Government blocked the annexation. Later, as a result of
continuing pressure and the threat of a Federal lawsuit, the all- white City
Council agreed by ordinance in 1982 to adopt a district system.

Similarly, Guilford County put the issue of at-large balloting to voters last
fall, after the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People filed
a lawsuit alleging the existing system was discriminatory. The change was
adopted by voters, and the first district elections will be held next year.

Although blacks have historically made up about a quarter of the population of
Guilford County, only two blacks have ever served on the county governing board
since Reconstruction. According to Mr. Jones, the new system ought to provide
for the election of at least one black Commissioner, from a predominantly black
district.

Through the mid-1960's, the Ku Klux Klan remained the most powerful symbol of
white resistance in the South, and a powerful reservoir of political strength
for candidates who ran on openly segregationist platforms. John M. Patterson,
successfully running for Governor of Alabama in 1958, refused to repudiate an
endorsement from the Klan, later telling an interviewer that at the time he
would rather have the Klan with him than against him.

''They can do you great harm - they can do you great good,'' he said. ''And, of
course, I wasn't about to run them off.''

Klan Membership Down

Today, according to various estimates, Klan membership in the region numbers
6,000 to 9,000, down by several thousand from a few years ago.

For one thing, the Klan has come under increasing scrutiny, both as a result of
civil litigation and criminal indictments. In Georgia last year, for example,
five Klansmen were sentenced to prison terms of 15 to 40 years for their role in
two racially motivated attacks on families in the western part of the state in
1982 and 1983.

And last May nine Klansmen were indicted on Federal charges growing out of an
attack on a civil rights march in Decatur, Ala. in 1979.

However, one worrisome trend involves the growing affection among some Klan
groups for paramilitary training. In North Carolina, a group called Confederate
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, which has recently renamed itself the White Patriot
Party, draws strongly from Vietnam veterans. Both the Atlanta-based Anti- Klan
Network and Klanwatch of Montgomery, two privately financed monitoring groups,
say the North Carolina group numbers about 1,600 members and is the
fastest-growing Klan organization in the region.

Potential for Future Problems

Unlike the old Klan, these new groups are ideologically allied with the Nazis
and other white supremacists, including the Aryan Nations, a fanatical cult in
the Northwest tied to bank robberies and the murder of a Jewish radio
personality in Denver last year.

Though few in number, Federal agents and others say, these groups are viewed as
extremely dangerous.

But even beyond the threat posed by a small handful of Klan fanatics, others in
the South do worry about the potential for further problems in the future.

Joel Williamson, a history professor at the University of North Carolina who is
a student of race relations in the region, says that one troubling factor is
that white guilt is on the way down. ''Whites are saying, 'The race problem has
nothing to do with me. I'm not a racist anymore.' ''

''But at the same time,'' he adds, ''white prejudice against black people is
still alive and virulent and ongoing and evolving.'' When and if black people
ever rebel again over discrimination and poverty, Mr. Williamson said, ''there's
not going to be as much white guilt to play on as there was in the 60's and
70's.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Race Relations: The Changing South; Fourth article of a series appearing
periodically

GRAPHIC: Photo of Greensboro Councilman Earl Jones (NYT); Photos of 1960's lunch
counter sit-in and Ku Klux Klan rally (UPI); Map of North Carolina (NYT/April 6,
1985)

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 6, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
CAMBODIA FORGOTTEN

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 748 words


It is 10 years this month since Indochina fell to the Communists, and

the anniversary is being marked by an outpouring of television reports,
documentaries, magazine articles and books. For the most part this is fitting -
when it is not being trivial or a media copycat orgy - because that war remains
an unhealed sore on this country's psyche, and Americans have a legitimate need
to try to resolve this unfinished thing that nags at their self-image.

One disappointment for me in this wave of reexamination is that nearly all of it
focuses on Vietnam, while Cambodia - the country that everyone used and tossed
away - is still everyone's afterthought.

The ''great'' powers are still talking about the Cambodians as abstractions, not
as human beings. This apparently gives Washington, Moscow and Peking the peace
of mind to continue to play superpower games with these tormented people.

Consider this thumbnail sketch of the present situation for the Cambodians. The
Russians support the Vietnamese, who have installed a client Government in Phnom
Penh, a rigid regime that is disliked but tolerated by the Cambodians because
they can do nothing about it and because it is less insane and murderous than
the Khmer Rouge - who were driven out by the Vietnamese invasion of 1979. The
Chinese still support and provide arms to the Khmer Rouge, whose barbaric acts
and policies resulted in the deaths of two million or more of Cambodia's seven
million people and who now exist as a guerrilla force of perhaps 40,000 troops
in the jungle in Cambodia's northwest, along the border with Thailand. And the
United States supports two non-Communist factions that have ''joined'' in a so-
called alliance with the Khmer Rouge to push the Vietnamese out - a goal they
have no chance of achieving.

Meanwhile, 250,000 Cambodians live in limbo in camps up and down the Thai
border; very few have any hope of being resettled in other countries.

In short, the superpowers still care as little about the Cambodian people as
they did in 1970 when they dragged them into the Indochina war and led them to
the tragedy that is their lot now. If the powers cared enough, they would make
Cambodia a priority - and that's the one thing Cambodia has never been.

Many things must be remembered if we are to resist the blandishments of the
rewriters of history - who are usually ideologues of the right or left
(ideologues don't care about people either, only about preserving their dogmas).

Remember that the Khmer Rouge were a meaningless force when the war was brought
to Cambodia in 1970 - a loose collection of guerrilla units numbering at most
5,000 men. They presented no threat to the Government in Phnom Penh. In order to
flourish and grow, they needed a war to feed on. And the superpowers - including
this country, with the Nixon incursion of 1970 and the massive bombing that
followed - provided that war and that nurturing material.

Remember that those geopolitical wizards, Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger (who
now lead the pack in publishing revisionist history), cared so much about the
Cambodian people that while they were providing $1 billion or more a year in
bombing and other military aid, they could find only a few million in their
budget for refugee and relief aid.  And remember that during that war and right
up to today, Washington has played footsie with the Chinese in an effort to
thwart Soviet designs in Indochina. And remember that the Chinese have been the
main support of the Khmer Rouge, whose barbarism Messrs. Nixon and Kissinger
bemoan today, while blaming Congress and the press and antiwar activists for the
fate of Cambodia and conveniently forgetting their own support of the Chinese.
Remember, too, that the Reagan Administration continues this folly by playing
even more intimate footsie with the Chinese, without whose backing the Khmer
Rouge would wither and die. This Administration also provides aid for the
refugees at the border, some of which goes to the Khmer Rouge.  And, finally,
remember that, through the machinations of superpower politics, the flag that
flies outside the United Nations for Cambodia is the flag of the Khmer Rouge.
And the delegate who occupies the Cambodian seat is the Khmer Rouge delegate.
And the name for Cambodia at the U.N. is the Khmer Rouge name - Democratic
Kampuchea.  Yes, we should remember all these things the next time some
geopolitician makes a crocodile-tear speech about the Cambodian people.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 6, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Thais Kill Vietnam Soldier

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 58 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, April 5


Border policemen killed a Vietnamese soldier in Thailand during a 10-minute
fight near the border with Cambodia, Thai authorities said today. The clash was
said to have occurred Thursday at Laem Nong Ian, a restricted area 15 miles
southeast of this Thai border town, after five Vietnamese intruded about 875
yards into Thailand.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 6, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BAGHDAD SECURITY GETS EVEN TIGHTER

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, April 5


Every day, the state-owned publication known as The Baghdad Observer prints a
list of international direct-dialing codes for Iraq's telephone system, one of
the Middle East's most modern, efficient networks.

But these days, the codes are irrelevant. For more than two weeks, Baghdad's
international telephone lines have been cut by the Government. All international
calls must be handled by a central operator, which insures that virtually no
international calls can be made or received by Baghdad residents.

The loss of telephone contact with the outside world is just one of the many
security measures adopted in Baghdad since a series of mysterious explosions
began rocking the Iraqi capital on March 14. Witnesses said another explosion
went off in the downtown area today, minutes after Iran announced that it had
fired a surface-to-surface missile at the city.

Iraqi officials have said the security measures are intended to insure the
safety of Iraqis and foreign residents. But many of the actions, such as cutting
automatic phone lines, have heightened a sense of isolation and vulnerability,
particularly among Westerners, according to interviews with diplomats, foreign
residents and a few Iraqi citizens.

A Tradition of Secrecy

Even in the best of times, Iraq is a highly secretive society. Secrecy played a
vital role in the development of the ruling Baath Party, whose members were
hunted and persecuted before they came to power briefly in 1963 and then again
in 1968. In the party's early days, no member was to know more than two others,
to protect the group from infiltration. Even today, little is known about the
party's membership and structure.

Iraqis, either by character or political caution under an authoritarian
Government, shun foreign visitors or are uncommunicative in meetings with them.
Telephone numbers are secret.

Telephone directories are not distributed. Even maps of the country that are
viewed as too accurate are banned. About 100,000 copies of an up-to-date map
published here were being stored in a warehouse near the airport because the
Government has refused to permit their sale, diplomats said.

Hotel lobbies are usually filled day and night with idle men who fiddle with
worry beads and drink Arabic coffee while keeping an eye on guests, particularly
guests who meet with Iraqis.

Diplomats said that even before the explosions began, meetings with Iraqis were
confined to calls for official purposes.

'A Missing Element'

''There's a missing element in all of this embassy's reporting,'' a Western
diplomat here said. ''We know nothing about what Iraqis think.''

Diplomats, unlike foreigners who work for private companies or even journalists,
need permits to travel outside Baghdad. Most diplomatic residences, those of
military attaches in particular, are closely watched.

''We're viewed as spies in uniform,'' a military attache here said.

When the series of explosions began March 14, security got even tighter. The
Government has publicly acknowledged only two of the blasts, one at the 13-story
downtown headquarters of the state's Rafidain Bank, and another two days later
on the west bank of the Tigris River near the presidential palace.

Iraqi officials attributed the explosions to sabotage by Iran and its ''agents''
here.

An Easing in Security

Diplomats said security eased somewhat after Baghdad concluded that the prime
threat to the capital came from missiles, rather than from internal sabotage.

Some roads that had been closed were reopened. Sandbags that had surrounded
particularly sensitive buildings were removed. Visitors to Baghdad are no longer
bodily searched after arriving at the airport.

But security remains tighter than that in any other Middle Eastern capital.
Taxis cannot stop in front of embassies, hotels or Government office buildings.
Passengers are dropped off a long distance from the entrances to such buildings
and are required to walk by several machine gun-toting, often nervous-looking
soldiers.

Handbags and briefcases are searched at the entrances of hotels and other public
buildings. The discoth eque at the Meridien Hotel, where Iraqi soldiers and
foreign visitors once drank and danced till dawn, now closes at 2 A.M., ''for
reasons of security,'' according to a sign at the hotel.

The Government has greatly loosened its usually restrictive visa policy to admit
journalists. Foreign correspondents are permitted to file dispatches about the
war and other subjects without submitting them to censors or obvious Government
interference. But reporters' activities are strictly monitored and indirectly
controlled.

Information Ministry's Role

All appointments with Iraqis must be made through the Ministry of Information.
Permits for filming are required and videotape leaving the country is rigorously
screened and censored, television journalists say.

Reuters and The Associated Press have both been repeatedly warned that their
bureaus risk being shut down if they publish information the Government wishes
to keep secret, according to visiting representatives of the agencies.

''You must understand,'' an official from the Ministry of Information said.
''This country is at war. And our war is not far away from our land, as yours
was in Vietnam. This war is here in our capital.''

Many diplomats and journalists seem to have accepted the argument, as well as
Iraq's special security meaures. No embassy, for example, has formally protested
the severing of automatic international telephone lines.

But others expressed skepticism about the Government's rationale. ''President
Saddam Hussein is firmly in power,'' a diplomat said. ''There are no known
contenders for power in sight. The Government's control seems almost absolute
and ubiquitous.

''The only threat is an occasional missile that doesn't seem to do very much
damage here,'' he said. ''But still there is this incredible security. It makes
us wonder, What they are afraid of?''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE EVOLVING INDEPENDENT EXECUTIVE;
BRIDGING THE CORPORATE GENERATION GAP

BYLINE: By D. QUINN MILLS; D. Quinn Mills teaches at the Harvard Business
School. He is the author of ''The New Competitors,'' to be published in May.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1210 words


IT is a scenario oft-repeated in the halls of corporate America. The 57-year-old
chief operating officer of a huge industrial and military products company,
recognizing that costs were too high and technology was lagging, brought some
300 managers from all over the country in for a conference. ''The only purpose
of this company,'' he told them, ''is to make a top return on the capital
invested in it. We're not around to build the best products, that's just what we
do to get return on equity. That's what you should be thinking about.''

Looking around the room, he saw the lights go out in many eyes. The same
managers in whom he had once sensed a seemingly genuine desire to have a bigger,
better company suddenly appeared disaffected and sullen. Even when he announced
the chance of hefty bonuses tied to return on investments, enthusiasm among the
assembled managers was conspicuous by its absence.

Sure enough, within a year several of the company's best managers had quit.
Competitors were still gaining on the company, yet morale was so low that no one
was pushing to turn the situation around.

What had the executive done wrong?

He had blinded himself to the perceptions and values of a younger group of
managers - fallen victim to a corporate generation gap.

When he had been on the fast track to the top, all young managers expected to be
given their marching orders by their superiors, and to have those orders revolve
around the sole goal of profitability.

But today's rising stars have a different set of criteria. They expect to be
part of the decision-making process, not just on the receiving end of faits
accomplis. And they expect their companies to be long-run successes as well as
to add to the shareholders' coffers today. The intimation that putting out a
quality product and thus building long-term customer loyalty was secondary to
getting a good return on equity today was guaranteed to upset them.

The manifestations of the evolution in value systems can be found in even brief
discussions with young managers. In recent years I've asked several hundred of
them to describe the characteristics of the most effective group they were ever
part of. Most mentioned such things as a clear mission, creative and cooperative
coworkers, open communication, and fair division of duties.

The list has some very telling omissions. Few executives below the age of 45
thought to mention strong leadership, clear lines of authority, or exact
directions. Yet those factors top the list of priorities for most of today's
chief executives.

Why the discrepancy?

It is rooted in different life experiences and different expectations for the
future.

Many of today's top executives had their introduction to large organizations
when they served in the Armed Forces during World War II. They quickly learned
that survival, let alone effectiveness, depended on strong leadership, a clear
chain of command, decisiveness, clear direction for the rank and file - in other
words, a top down, hierarchical organization in which top-level strategy was
developed in secret.

Few G.I.'s or officers looked at the military as a paragon of organizational
structure. Most recognized that it was too inefficient, too bureaucratic and too
frustrating. But nonetheless, it had won the war. And a whole generation of
managers walked away with a deeply ingrained (albeit often subconscious) belief
that the military way of doing things was a good model to apply to peacetime
industries.

THAT is certainly not the impression that younger managers took

away from their experiences in Korea and Vietnam. Both those wars tarnished the
military's image.

Thus, young managers reach more widely when they try to pinpoint the epitome of
a successful organizational structure. They look to churches, political groups,
clubs and associations, as well as to business. And, as often as not, the groups
they find the most effective do not depend primarily on clear lines of authority
or unambiguous direction.

Today's young managers do not see much that is laudable about carrying through a
task given them by others. They recall as most effective those situations in
which they felt themselves to be participants, even partners. And they wish to
be dealt with as non-conforming individuals, rather than as members of a group.

Every generation lives in a different world from its predecessors, and wars are
certainly not the only determining factors. Technological developments also
serve as benchmarks of change, as do social movements and political events.

In these areas, too, younger executives differ markedly from their bosses. They
all are comfortable with computers and other forms of technology. Young male
executives are comfortable with women and minorities as peers.

Young managers are also difficult to categorize politically. Many of today's
chief executives are political conservatives who believe in a free market for
goods and services, but would be prepared to support restrictions on life styles
and the expression of ideas. Most of today's young managers also believe in the
free market part of the conservative philosophy, yet side with the liberals in
terms of personal freedoms. They are not counterculture, in that they are
committed to work, and are ambitious for status and financial gain. But they
will not give up their other interests for work.

Part of the reason for that unwillingness is that the younger managers do not
share their seniors' firm belief that hard work insures a wealthy, secure
future. They have heard the health of the Social Security system called into
question; they face a slow growth economy, and they are competing with a large
number of ''baby boom'' peers who are also striving for top positions.

The unwillingness of today's young managers to subordinate all other aspects of
life to the needs of the corporation may be misread by some chief executives as
a lack of ambition. But the younger manager may be defining a different type of
ambition - to advance in the company but also to balance other responsibilities.

If these life style concerns are treated as legitimate, they can serve as a
powerful means of winning loyalty to the company. Top managers, if they are
''working smart,'' will turn this ambition to motivation without thwarting it.
They will do so by displaying loyalty to the employee as a person, not just as a
performer. And that means accepting different life styles, the desire to speak
out even on unpopular causes, and the desire to be taken seriously as an
individual.

Too often, older executives promote those subordinates who behave according to
the old-guard values - those who are aggressive, singlemindedly devoted to the
business, living in a traditional one-income family environment. But in some
instances the conformity of younger executives is only feigned.

Where older executives locate and promote those in the younger generation who
are most like themselves, they take a large risk. People who are too much like
the older generation may be ill-suited to success in tomorrow's business world.
They, too, may misunderstand the needs and objectives of their own peers, and
will just perpetuate the cycle of authoritarianism and disaffection.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 159 words


VIETNAM LETS HIM GO Treasure hunters usually collect bounties, not pay them. But
in Thailand last week,

Bill Mathers , an American deepsea diver, said he was only too grateful that his
parents spent $10,000 to get him out of Vietnam, where he had been held in
solitary confinement for nearly nine months. The Vietnamese, who suspected him
of spying, said the money was a fine. The 41-year-old Vietnam veteran was
captured 36 miles offshore in his schooner, which was outfitted with electronic
equipment to detect shipwrecks on the ocean floor. Four French citizens and an
Australian in his crew were released earlier after paying fines. Mr. Mathers,
whose parents live in Cove Neck, L.I., said he was treated ''all right'' but was
not allowed any contact with the outside world. ''We still feel there was no
reason for him to held,'' an American official said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bill Mathers

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS HAS ITS WAYS OF INFLUENCING FOREIGN AID;
A $14.5 BILLION PACKAGE WAS ADOPTED BY COMMITTEE LAST WEEK

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The House Foreign Affairs Committee decided last week that an aid program for
the Upper Huallaga Valley in Peru could go forward only after the Agency for
International Development determined that the valley had reduced the cultivation
of coca leaf, the raw material for cocaine.

Aid to Paraguay, said the panel, would be halted until a ''good faith effort''
had been made to determine the whereabouts of Josef Mengele, a Nazi doctor
reported to be hiding out in that country.

Jordan could not purchase sophisticated American weaponry under the bill until
the President certified that Amman was ''publicly committed to the recognition
of Israel'' and ready to enter peace negotiations.

These are only three of the dozens of clauses, conditions, and constraints
contained in the 121-page, $14.5 billion foreign aid bill adopted by the
committee. They are another demonstration of Congress's determination to
influence foreign policy.

For many members, debate over the annual aid bill provides the only opportunity
to voice their feelings about foreign policy.

''We feel this is our one chance to express our views on a number of issues,''
said Representative Howard L. Berman, a California Democrat who sits on the
Foreign Affairs panel. ''Some people would accuse us of micromanagement, but
that stems from our frustration. This is the only vehicle on which we can do
anything. Otherwise it's all talk.''

The growing tendency of Congress to encumber foreign aid bills with all sorts of
restrictions and provisos has caused the legislation to stall in recent years.
No authorization bill has become law since 1981, leaving the foreign aid program
to be financed through catchall spending bills known as continuing resolutions.

Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, the chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee, said he was encouraged by the ''spirit of comity'' that marked his
committee's drafting sessions on the foreign aid bill last week.

He expressed ''some optimism'' that this year, the bill would go through. But it
still has problems.

''There is a danger that we get too detailed,'' warned Senator Daniel J. Evans,
a Washington Republican. ''As a fundamental policy we ought to be working on the
major thrusts of foreign policy. Sometimes we spend too much time and effort on
micromanaging the aid program.''

The State Department generally shares this criticism of Congressional interest
in the details of policymaking. But the Administration itself demonstrated last
week how foreign aid remains one of the most useful tools of international
diplomacy.

When President Gaafar al-Nimeiry of the Sudan visited the White House early in
the week, the best present President Reagan could give him was the announcement
that the Administration was freeing up $67 million in aid earmarked for his
country. The money had been blocked pending reforms in the Sudan's financial
structure.

Later in the week, Mr. Reagan cheered Prime Minister Turgut Ozal of Turkey by
promising to fight for high levels of aid to his country.

Congressional activism on foreign aid reflects the fact that more and more
Senators and Representatives want to have a say; increasingly, younger members
are unwilling to bide their time and defer to their elders. ''One hundred
senators all have foreign policy interests now,'' noted Senator Lugar, ''and
they feel they ought to play a role.''

The foreign policy committees have also attracted lawmakers with strongly held
views on particular issues. For example, a number of Jewish members sought
places on the House panel in part because of a deep interest in Israel.

Since joining the committee this year Representative Christopher H. Smith, a New
Jersey Republican, has concentrated on pressing his anti-abortion views.

Moreover, the political balance that has prevailed in Washington since 1981,
with the Democrats controlling the House and the Republicans in charge of the
Senate and the White House, has increased the determination of Democrats to use
the foreign aid bill to influence Government actions.

''Democrats here don't feel that we have enough ability to quietly convince the
Administration of our concerns,'' said Representative Berman. ''So this becomes
our vehicle.''

In the view of Representative Howard Wolpe, a Michigan Democrat, many lawmakers
have been moved to activism by what they regard as the misjudgments of Reagan
Administration foreign policy. ''What you're seeing,'' he said, ''is a breakdown
of consensus and a low degree of trust between the Administration and
Congressional foreign policy makers.''

This assessment seemed to be borne out in a number of provisions adopted by the
House committee, including the following:


* An additional $1.5 billion in economic aid for Israel in the current fiscal
year. In the process, the panel brushed aside an Administration request for a
delay.


* A requirement that aid to El Salvador be contingent on a report by the
President detailing that country's progress toward ending violations of human
rights. The Administration wanted no reporting requirement, and the Senate
committee did not include one.


* A clause making military aid to Guatemala contingent on the installation of a
democratic government.


* An allocation of $5 million in military aid to noncommunist rebels in Cambodia
fighting the occupying forces of Vietnam.

The Administration opposed the provision, but Representative Stephen J. Solarz,
a Brooklyn Democrat, said the fight illuminated the lack of Congressional
confidence in the White House.

''If the Administration reflected the majority of the views on the committee,''
said Mr. Solarz, the author of the Cambodian aid clause, ''there would be no
need to put these things in the bill.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

PAPANDREOU:THE POLITICS OF ANTI-AMERICANISM

BYLINE: By Henry Kamm;Henry Kamm is The New York Times's bureau chief in Athens.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 17, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5305 words


IN MARCH 8, Greek President Constantine Caramanlis went to bed believing that
the following morning he would be endorsed by the ruling Socialist Party as its
candidate for re-election. Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou had just sent an
emissary to tell the 78-year-old Mr. Caramanlis, the country's grand old man,
that when the central committee of the Socialist Party met the next day, it
would unanimously endorse the Prime Minister's nomination of the conservative
President.

But on the morning, Mr. Papandreou asked for and obtained his party's unanimous
support for Supreme Court Judge Christos Sartzetakis, the original of the
investigator in the movie ''Z.'' Judge Sartzetakis was as unaware of his
impending elevation as Mr. Caramanlis was of the humiliation in store for him.

The apparent swiftness of the change of mind was typical of Andreas Papandreou.
So was its unexplained motivation.

The adjective heard most often when observers of Greek politics are asked to
describe its 66-year-old leader is ''mercurial.'' For many, this is a polite way
of saying what they mean; other adjectives that come up are ''unpredictable,''
''unreliable'' or worse.

''Fifty percent of what he does cannot be analyzed at all, and the other 50
percent is 'tightrope walking,' '' says a Greek nonadmirer who has had a close
official relationship with the Prime Minister. ''He calls it 'tightrope walking'
himself and is proud of it as a way of conducting government. For Papandreou,
the quintessence of diplomacy is unpredictability. He believes that is the only
way for a small country.''

Mr. Papandreou's tightrope diplomacy has infuriated his allies in Europe as well
as America, but the United States (his home in the 1940's and 50's) has been the
principal arena of his balancing act. He tells a large sector of the Greek
public what they want to hear: Their country's problems are none of their doing;
they have been created by outside forces led by the biggest force of them all,
the United States.

Mr. Papandreou's odd-man-out posture - his readiness to attack the United States
while sparing the Soviet Union, his ostentatious dissent from agreed Western
positions, his frequent assertions that Greece has much in common with the
non-Western world while it is living at a decidedly Western level of material
well-being - has given him the greatest international audience a Greek leader
has ever had. Unfortunately for Greece's image in the West, this audience has
often been shocked by what it has heard.

A far from smooth run in Greek- American relations between now and the Greek
general elections in October is expected both by Western diplomats and Greeks
critical of the Government. They believe that the Prime Minister has made a
defiant stance toward the United States too much of his stock in trade to
soft-pedal it. Furthermore, following the change of strategy heralded by the
dropping of Mr. Caramanlis and the election late last month of Judge
Sartzetakis, most analysts believe that Mr. Papandreou's party will be striking
its most leftist posture between now and October.

There are, however, hard limits on how far Mr. Papandreou can go in fanning
anti- American fires. He can denounce the United States for favoring Turkey -
and it is axiomatic in Greece that Turkey is an implacable foe - but American
military supplies are essential for just that reason. And no matter how sweet
this NATO Prime Minister's rhetoric may sound to Soviet ears, Moscow has shown
no less care than Washington in keeping a delicate balance in its attitudes
toward Greece and Turkey.

Are the Communists right in accusing the Prime Minister of barking at the West
without biting? Yes, say those intent on noting that, despite his threats,
Greece's commitments to the West remain intact. They are in a minority. Mr.
Papandreou's critics, Greek and foreign, believe that the Prime Minister's
provocatory words, even if they are not followed by commensurate action, are not
only subverting Greek minds, particularly those growing up under his Government,
but also creating a mood toward Greece that is of itself a new political
reality. Greece's allies, in America as well as Europe, now consider the country
an unreliable ally in both the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and in the
European Community.



 CONVERSAtion with the Prime Minister of Greece can be disconcerting for an
American.  It does not come as a surprise to hear a man who is proud of having
headed the Minnesota state committee for the election of Adlai E. Stevenson, as
well as the economics department at the University of California at Berkeley,
speak damningly of American global policies. After all, many American liberals
with similar backgrounds do.

What jars the listener out of a sense of conversing with one more campus liberal
is to hear Mr. Papandreou decline to state a preference between the United
States and the Soviet Union. ''As a scientist I could do it,'' he says, ''as a
human being I could do it, but as a political man in Greece, as Prime Minister,
I should not permit myself the luxury of talking about the internal aspects of
two superpowers.''

At a seaside, Government-owned luxury hotel outside Athens, to which he likes to
repair for working weekends, the Prime Minister speaks in the calm and
cultivated tones of a faculty-club member, toying professorially with his pipe
and scraper. To this reporter, who knew him 20 years ago, Mr. Papandreou seems
to have matured and grown in stature without acquiring and communicating a sense
of ease. He tenses into a chair rather than relaxing into it; his gestures are
few and sharp, almost brusque. He is wary, even when reminiscing with some show
of pleasure, almost American to American, about his own 20 years of living in
the United States. Only a slightly alien intonation marks his American English.

Twenty years ago, when his American-campus past was still the more active part
of his complex personality, Andreas Papandreou, then a freshman member of the
Greek Parliament, seemed more at ease over a drink with an American reporter
than in the somewhat levantine ambience of Greek political antechambers. He was
the only man without the ubiquitous worry beads. Now, the Prime Minister
twiddles with them as though to the manner born, and he is less on his guard
before a political crowd than over a drink with an American reporter. His
attire, too, has changed. His campus-store, ready- to-wear clothes have been
replaced by elegant, custom-tailored suits of discreet grays and browns. And
over the years he has refurbished his Greek self. At a reception during his
February visit to Moscow, he rose spontaneously to dance a Greek syrtaki to the
rhythm of a Russian gypsy song.

What has been a constant in Mr. Papandreou's career remains clearly evident. The
man whom former colleagues describe as suavely successful in faculty politics,
saying to friends and rivals what will ring pleasantly in their ears, has
retained that facility in the face of larger political audiences or
interviewers. To an American reporter, he makes a noticeable effort to put his
views for an American public in terms designed for minimal affront.

When asked to single out what they consider Mr. Papandreou's most offensive
performance, Western diplomats cite his major address on ideology and policy to
his party's congress last year. The Greek leader asserted that the Soviet Union
was not an ''imperialistic power,'' although ''it often makes moves that are
difficult in many cases to differentiate from those of the United States.''

On the other hand, the United States, he said, was ''the metropolis of
imperialism.'' ''The Soviet Union's struggle for detente is genuine,'' he added,
even if Moscow sometimes had ''an active presence beyond its borders.'' When it
did - presumably in such places as Afghanistan, Hungary or Czechoslovakia - it
was ''a result of its efforts to guard itself against United States
expansionism.'' Mr. Papandreou seemed to find no difficulty in condemning
American foreign conduct while accepting about $500 million a year in American
military assistance. The aid is a result of a tough bargain driven by his
Government in return for allowing the continued presence of four major American
military bases in Greece.

The speech so enraged Washington, still not accustomed to such acerbity from a
country once so closely allied, and from the mouth of a former American and
World War II Navy veteran to boot, that it put on ice a plan to invite him for
an official visit. Mr. Papandreou says he would consider such a visit ''very,
very'' useful to ''put things on the table.''

He denies being anti-American. But he and the United States differ on many
important points.

He has demanded - publicly, although never formally - that the United States
remove its stockpile of nuclear warheads from Greece, and he is opposed to the
installation in Europe of American cruise and Pershing 2 missiles. He is
supporting a series of nuclear-disarmament initiatives that the United States
contends weaken the joint Western stand in negotiations with the Soviet Union.

Following the imposition of martial law in Poland in 1981, Mr. Papandreou
opposed economic sanctions against that country, and last year he became the
first and so far the only Western head of government to visit Warsaw and praise
Polish leader, Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski. Mr. Papandreou also broke Western unity
by granting full diplomatic recognition to the Palestine Liberation Organization
and meeting with its leader Yasir Arafat. The United States, unhappy with
Greece's degree of cooperation in the fight against international terrorism, has
deplored Mr. Papandreou's shows of friendship for Libya's Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi.

As Mr. Papandreou sees it, the differences with the United States and with other
Western powers are ''within the family, and Greece remains a member of that
family.''

The Prime Minister grows testy when he denies laxness against terrorism. Raising
the subject of his own accord, he says: ''This irritates the hell out of us
because, for heaven's sake, a serious government would favor or protect
terrorism? This is not something acceptable.''

The Prime Minister is firm also in denying sympathy for Communism. From the
earliest days of his political education when, as a teen-ager, he read Marx
under his liberal, anti-Marxist father's guidance, he has rejected ''the Soviet
model,'' he says.

He does accuse the United States of dealing with Greece in ways long outdated.
''There was a day when the armed forces, for instance, just like this'' - he
snaps his fingers - ''would make a move if asked. No longer. Nor will they in
the future. . . . I think that America still operates - this is inertia - on the
concepts of the 1950's or 1960's. If . . . you could attempt to deal with Greece
the way you deal with Belgium or Holland or Denmark, then you'll find how
smoothly things will run.''

Notwithstanding Mr. Papandreou's anti-American pronouncements, the United States
has obtained from Greece's first left-wing Prime Minister what it had failed to
get from his two conservative predecessors: a renewable agreement to maintain
the military bases. (The present agreement runs until 1988.) The achievement was
the more surprising since Mr. Papandreou - and the Panhellenic Socialist
Movement, which he founded - won election in 1981 on what most Greeks believed
to have been pledges to remove the bases and take Greece out of two groupings he
depicted as inimical to Greece's sovereign national interests: NATO and the
European Community.

Mr. Papandreou rejects a suggestion that his campaign pledges went unfulfilled.
''I cannot say there is nothing in it,'' he allows. ''I think this is true of
all governments.'' But, he adds, he had promised no more than to establish a
timetable for the closing of the bases.

Defining his present stance in regard to NATO and the European Community, Mr.
Papandreou asserts: ''Our ideological position is no, we do not want to be in
any blocs; we want a federated Europe, East and West. But this is a vision. In
reality, we are not taking Greece out of NATO. We don't bring to a stop the
machine by vetoing.''

Neither is he proposing to get out of the Common Market. ''I said we should
fight within the Community.'' His more positive view may be brought about by a
considerable flow of Community funds into Greece, largely in agricultural
subsidies, which has raised rural prosperity. As a result, the countryside is
considered to be one of Mr. Papandreou's election assets, and the Community may
paradoxically help its least willing member government to remain in power. SO
PERSONAL IS Andreas Papandreou's style of government, so marked are his apparent
contradictions, that the national predilection for endless political debates is
turning more and more into a character analysis of a man Greeks refer to by his
first name. This is less a sign of the Prime Minister's popularity - great as it
is (he won 48 percent of the national vote in 1981) - than a carryover from the
days when ''Papandreou'' meant his late father, George, also a Prime Minister.

What Andreas's opponents half-jokingly say they fear is that someday ''George''
may also become synonymous with ''Prime Minister.'' They mean Andreas's
American- born son, who at the age of 32 represents the third generation of
Papandreous in politics. A member of his father's party, he holds a
parliamentary seat.

At many dinner tables in Kolonaki and the suburbs of Psychiko and Filothei,
where the Athenian elite lives, Andreas is the inescapable topic No. 1. To an
American, the nearly uniform condemnation of the man and his policies has the
acid edge that social history tells us sharpened conversations at comparable
tables throughout the United States in the days of President Franklin D.
Roosevelt.

In the usually overheated political atmosphere of Greece, all actions of the
country's first leftist Government are suspected by its opponents of ulterior
motives. When they touch on the military or police, they are interpreted - even
before any evidence on their meaning or effect can be gathered - as parts of a
design by Mr. Papandreou to establish a one-party dictatorship. So far, these
suspicions remain unsubstantiated.

The Prime Minister is depicted almost as a traitor to his class, subverting
institutions that serve the elite well and threatening to put in their place
dangerously leftist models. However, in his fourth year in office, Roosevelt had
reshaped the United States profoundly, while in more than three years as Prime
Minister, Mr. Papandreou has changed little in Greece except the political
balance and rhetoric.

The Greek economy remains capitalist; political freedom, untrammeled; the spoils
system, more rampant than ever. A free and overheated press still competes,
however feebly, with state- controlled television and radio in shaping the
idiosyncratic world view of Greeks. The social content of education, formerly
deeply conservative, is now suffering from the influence of the opposite bias.

The United States figures prominently in the national debate, not only because
it has been a determining force in Greek life for decades, but because it has
always been a factor in Mr. Papandreou's political life.

Mr. Papandreou recounts his initiation into the United States in terms and
images that parallel those of many other Europeans of his generation who fled
from right- wing dictatorships and the threat of war in Europe. Arrested in 1939
by the authoritarian regime of Ioannis Metaxas as a student radical at the
University of Athens Law School and beaten into disclosing the names of some of
his comrades, the 20-year- old Andreas joined a friend traveling to New York for
the World's Fair and was granted political asylum.

By Mr. Papandreou's account, a political re-education began for him as he opened
his eyes to his new surroundings. ''I had not ever seen this face of capitalism.
Indeed, since I had imagined capitalism more or less in terms of Greek
conditions, I considered that American society pointed me to an ideology of a
free, progressive, democratic society,'' he recalls.

Mr. Papandreou viewed the United States from the rarefied atmosphere of Harvard.
He took to what he found. In 1943, he received a Ph.D. in economics; the next
year, he became an American citizen and joined the United States Navy.
Discharged in 1946, he began his teaching career at his alma mater. He
subsequently took up professorships at the University of Minnesota and at
Northwestern before becoming chairman of the economics department at Berkeley.

So complete was Mr. Papandreou's identification with the United States that he
felt no desire to return to Greece even for a visit. He admired Franklin D.
Roosevelt. He saw Harry S. Truman as the man who accepted the challenge of
America's postwar role of the world's leading power - ''Truman took it on. He
had tremendous courage to do things.''

''The man who really captured my imagination completely was Adlai Stevenson,''
Mr. Papandreou continues. ''I became active. It was the McCarthy era, and I had
lost quite a few colleagues. I was a friend of Hubert Humphrey. I got involved.
I became state chairman of the Adlai Stevenson committee in Minnesota; I got to
know him a little bit. I was thrilled by his speeches.''

What intensified Mr. Papandreou's alienation from his native country was not
only the fascination of America but also the tragedy of the civil war that set
Greek against Greek from 1944 until 1949. ''I saw the progressive forces were
clearly with the left, but I saw also that this movement was entirely dominated
at the top by the Communist Party. You identified with it, but you didn't know
what you were getting into. And so it was one of the reasons I did not wish,
quite frankly, to come back to Greece.'' EXCEPT FOR THE platoon of police in and
out of uniform that guards it, the Papandreou home in Kastri, a suburb just
beyond Athens's northern edge, is indistinguishable from the surrounding
upper-middle-class residences. The unostentatious and modestly enlarged villa
that the elder Papandreou built remains the center of the Prime Minister's life.
He works there as much as he can, preferring it to his formal office in Athens.
A married son and daughter live nearby and drop in often, says Margaret
Papandreou, the former Margaret Chant from Elmhurst, Ill., a tall, handsome and
carefully groomed woman who is known in Greece as Margarita. Another son has
just completed military service in Greece and has resumed his doctoral studies
in London. A third son is working on a Ph.D. in Princeton. All the children were
born in the United States, which makes English the household language as much as
Greek.


The family is intensely political, says Mrs. Papandreou, who has, according to
critics, wielded considerable leftist influence over her husband. ''What
disagreements there are are on tactics. In basic philosophy we're very close.''
In her much cooler, less Greek way, Margaret Papandreou is considered to be far
more influential on the policies of Greece than the flamboyant actress Melina
Mercouri, who has considerable visibility in her role as Culture Minister but
little political clout.

Mrs. Papandreou's activism began early. At age 12, she wrote letters to the
editor of The Chicago Tribune on behalf of her grandfather's Socialist candidacy
for the state legislature. The Elmhurst American Legion post chose her at age 16
as ''the girl in the country most representative of American ideals.''

''I would have been most active in politics if I had stayed in the United
States,'' she reflects. ''I would have been searching for something very
progressive.'' Instead, in 1953, she persuaded her husband to visit Greece.

The unusually young full professor from the University of Minnesota - he was 34
years old in 1953 - went through a deeply emotional experience common to most
exceptionally successful immigrants on their first return. Having invested so
much of himself to remake himself in the American image, he thought he had put
his Greek self behind him.

A Greek friend of the Berkeley years says that the Prime Minister's alienation
from his past was such that he preferred to converse even with him in English
and resisted the friend's attempts to persuade him to return to work in Greece.
''He had a positive commitment to life in the United States,'' the friend
recalls. ''His life was typically American - jazz, movies and faculty
politics.''

Upon his homecoming, he recalls, all the old memories came flooding back,
especially one particularly traumatic memory. His jaw had been broken by his
interrogators before he left. On his first morning in Athens, while he was
having breakfast at the King George Hotel, he couldn't close his jaw. ''It all
comes back,'' he continues, ''so at one point, emotionally, I had to come back
to Greece.''

As the son of George Papandreou and a distinguished economist, it was natural
that calls went out for him to go back and put his knowledge at the service of
the country. They came in a bipartisan way: personally from his father, who led
the opposition, and officially from Constantine Caramanlis, the elder
Papandreou's opponent and predecessor as Prime Minister.

Urged by his father, who had gained the support of his daughter-in-law, Andreas
Papandreou went to Greece in 1959 as a Guggenheim Fellow to assist the
Government of Mr. Caramanlis in formulating a development program. He went back
to California in 1960, but again returned to Athens the following year to head a
Center of Economic Research, funded largely by the Ford and Rockefeller
Foundations, and to serve as an adviser to the Bank of Greece. Once more, in
1962, Mr. Papandreou went back to live in California. He describes the period
1962-63 as ''the big turning point, when I decided to come back for good and
forever and live and work here.''

What Greeks saw in Andreas Papandreou when he returned was a reflection of their
positive image of America: the economic motor of the world, the beacon of
modernity showing a country shattered by foreign and civil war the way into a
brighter future. In the spirit of the time, Andreas Papandreou represented the
America of John F. Kennedy, the most glamorous President America ever had in the
eyes of Europeans.

''In politics then, in economic, social policy and so forth, I would call myself
at the time what in America is called a strong liberal left,'' says Mr.
Papandreou. ''My basic orientation was modernization, development and social
justice, but through mechanisms of income distribution. It is interesting that
the people at that time in Greece sort of identified me with the Kennedys. I
didn't reject it at all.''

It was always hard to see the basis of the comparison. Unlike his father, a man
always supremely at ease and a natural orator, Andreas when he returned seemed
unsure of how he was to make the transition from the ''cool'' role of big man on
the campus to the heated Greek political scene. By dint of hard work, he has
achieved what seemed to have come more naturally to his father. He is now
considered a masterful orator and manipulator of crowds.

In 1963, George Papandreou was re-elected Prime Minister, a post he had last
held in 1944, when the civil war broke out under his Government. Judging his
parliamentary margin too narrow, the elder Papandreou called new elections the
following year. Andreas, who had earlier in the year renounced his American
citizenship, was swept into Parliament with the tide of his father's Center
Union Party and into the Cabinet as Minister to the Prime Minister.  WHEN HE
REturned to Greece as an American economist, Andreas Papandreou maintained ''a
very close relationship to the American Embassy, among them Stearns himself,''
he says. Monteagle Stearns is the present United States Ambassador, now as then
a man who, like the Prime Minister, values the personal friendship that links
the two and their families while pursuing divergent policies. ''I make the job
difficult for Monty, and he sometimes makes it tough for me,'' says Mr.
Papandreou.

What he observed in the years during which he frequented the American Embassy
was ''not to my liking at all.'' He saw a diplomatic mission acting as the
ultimate arbiter of Greek affairs. Worse than that, the Greek Government
accepted that role.

''The power was everywhere,'' says the Prime Minister. He recalls that during
the 1964 election campaign, while his father was out of town, he was called in
by then-Ambassador Henry R. Labouisse and told that he had just had a visit from
some Greek generals who asked the Ambassador's permission to stage a coup to
prevent the elder Papandreou's re-election.

''So, not so slowly I recognized that Greece was not like any other European
country, but it was a country which basically was an extension, a satellitic
extension, of Washington,'' Mr. Papandreou goes on.

American officials stationed in Greece over the years concede that the Prime
Minister's view bears considerable resemblance to past reality. Greece's heavy
dependence on the United States dating to the Truman Doctrine of 1947, which
provided for full American support and a great deal of American control of the
civil-war effort, had left a ponderous legacy of American involvement in Greek
affairs, motivated largely by Greece's strategic situation at the southeastern
flank of NATO territory and its borders with three Communist states - Albania,
Yugoslavia and Bulgaria.

Such dominance provokes strong reaction, especially in a country in which
foreign powers, friends or foes, have for centuries played determining roles.
''As the ancient Greeks considered themselves manipulated by the gods, modern
Greeks feel foreign governments do the manipulating,'' observes a diplomat with
long and sympathetic ties to Greece.

To a reporter who has observed the country occasionally over two decades, the
principal objective of Greek political thought seems less to discover the road
to the perfect society than to identify the principal demon that menaces it. The
main demons have been successively Turks, Bulgarians, the British and Americans
- with a supporting cast of temporary minor demons. They have never been Greek,
except for Greeks believed to be manipulated by foreigners to serve foreign
interests. Mr. Papandreou returned to a Greece beholden to the United States and
strongly under its influence. The seeds for demonizing America lay in this
dominance.

''So what happened then?'' Mr. Papandreou resumes. ''The notions of national
dignity and independence become key commitments to me. . . . And this, of
course, brings me into clash with the order of things that I found . . .
radicalizes me.''

Still, he continues, the social and economic views that he held were radical
only in the terms of a country still so polarized by the civil war of the 1940's
that any idea to the left of the conservative center was considered dangerous.
What Mr. Papandreou espoused for Greece was what he describes as ''A.D.A.'' -
the liberal world view of Americans for Democratic Action.

A theory current among some political analysts in Greece, sustained by this
reporter's observations during the long crisis that followed the fall of the
elder Papandreou's Government in 1965, was that Andreas Papandreou found that
conventional liberalism had the appeal of forbidden fruit, particularly among
young Greeks brought up on political options ranging from diehard to stodgy
conservatism. He began to play to that audience. In the conflict that ranged his
father against the last King, Constantine, American support of the Royal Palace
was so open, says Mr. Papandreou, that it furthered anti-American feelings and
produced in him ''tremendous radicalization.'' From 1965 on Andreas Papandreou
became the leader of an increasingly anti-American trend.

The 1967 military coup, led by Col. George Papadopoulos, gave anti-Americanism
general currency in Greece. After White House intervention secured Mr.
Papandreou's release from eight months of imprisonment by the military junta, he
propagated the view that the United States had instigated the takeover or at
least had known of it without intervening. Even normally pro- American
conservatives remain embittered at what they considered American collusion with
the junta in its seven years of authoritarian rule.

Mr. Papandreou's exile, largely in Sweden and Canada, hardened the anti-American
theme of his appeal to Greeks and an international public appalled at a return
of military dictatorship to Europe. Infected by the spirit of Vietnam War
protesters and the student revolutions of 1968, Mr. Papandreou linked his
Panhellenic Liberation Movement with ''other liberation movements'' in the third
world, for whom the common foe was the United States.

''There should be no doubt in anyone's mind about the nature of American
imperialism,'' Mr. Papandreou wrote in a preface to a book which Prince Norodom
Sihanouk of Cambodia wrote in 1972, with the help of the late Australian
Communist propagandist Wilfred Burchett (the prince has since disavowed the
book). ''It constitutes a global threat not only to the independence of nations
and the dignity of life, but a direct and immediate threat to human survival.
Unless the anti-imperialist forces coalesce in the common struggle against a
'clear and present' danger, they will be paving the way not to Pax Americana but
to a global American-generated holocaust.''

As things turned out, it was not Mr. Papandreou's movement that overthrew the
junta. Another military cabal took over, but abandoned power after its futile
attempt to seize control of Cyprus in 1974, which paved the way for the Turkish
invasion of the island.

Mr. Papandreou has done nothing to dispel a widespread Greek suspicion that the
United States bears ultimate responsibility for Turkey's resort to armed force
and its continuing occupation of northern Cyprus. Greeks of all political
persuasions tend to believe that the United States favors Turkey over Greece for
strategic reasons and fails to use its power of decision, undoubted by Greeks,
to oblige Turkey to withdraw from Cyprus.

''For us there is really no other mechanism but that. We are not in a position
to do it,'' says the Prime Minister.  IN THIS REALIZATION

of Greece's need for

American support lies the most realistic hope that even Andreas Papandreou's
abrasive style of leadership will not rupture a long-standing political bond. It
is a bond greatly reinforced by the intimacy of many individual links - forged
by emigration and a tradition of study in the United States - of which Mr.
Papandreou himself is an outstanding exemplar.

America's contribution to helping its relations with an old friend through their
most difficult passage must lie in continuing to trust its eyes more than its
ears, looking at what happens on the ground more than listening to the words
that accompany realities.

And perhaps also, America must assume its share of responsibility for the coming
to power of a Government that asserts, however stridently and exaggeratedly,
Greece's independence. Eventually a price has to be paid for a relationship
between a large and a small power in which both have failed to observe a
distance great enough to avoid dominance or subservience.

A European ambassador of long experience believes that the swing from an almost
automatic Greek acceptance of America's lead in international policies was
inevitable; that, when it came, it would by necessity be wide. His conclusion so
far, he says, is: ''It is dangerous in some respects. But it had to come, and it
could have been worse.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

The main article in The Times Magazine today analyzes the political style of
Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou of Greece. On Wednesday, after the magazine
went to press, his Socialist Government announced that it would call for early
elections, with voting expected in June.

GRAPHIC: photo of Muammar el-Qaddafi (Gamma-Liason/Anastasselis) (page 21);
photo of Yassir Arafat and Papandreou (Gamma-Liason/Francolon) (Page 21); photo
of Papandreou and Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski (AP) (Page 21); photo of the
Papandreou family dining at home (Visions/Stephen Shames) (page 21); photo of
Melina Mercouri confering with members of Greek parliment (Alexander Tsiaras)
(page 19); photo of Former President Constantine Caramanlis (page 18); photo of
people rallying (page 18) ; photo of Papandreou toying bead (Visions/Stephen
Shames) ; photo of Papandreou addressing crowd (Visions/Stephen Shames)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOUIS MALLE: AN OUTSIDER'S ODYSSEY

BYLINE: By John Colhane; John Colhane, the author of ''Walt Disney's 'Fantasia,'
'' is writing the history of the circus in America.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4493 words


IN 1980, LOUIS MALLE, THE FILM DIRECTOR, read an article in The New York Times
Magazine about the Vietnamese on the Gulf Coast of Texas, and their difficult
but eventual acceptance in America. Having arrived in this country from France
five years earlier (stung by the reception of ''Lacombe, Lucien''), having
obtained his green card and having established permanent residence, having
bought an apartment on Manhattan's Upper West Side, and having married the
American actress Candice Bergen, Malle identified with these refugees, because
he, too, was becoming accepted by America. He decided to make a ''homage to
America'' - a fictional film about the efforts of one Vietnamese to get into the
shrimping business in Texas, set against the real-life opposition of ''Anglo''
fishermen organized by the Ku Klux Klan.

Five years later - last Wednesday, in fact - that film, ''Alamo Bay,'' opened.
But between inspiration and execution, Malle came to decide that this was no
longer a film about being accepted by America, but about becoming estranged from
a certain kind of America.

Behind this alteration lies a crisis in a distinguished director's career. A
change in story line also signifies how film making is often a voyage of
self-discovery for a director. At last report, Louis Malle has suggested that
this may be the last film he will make about America, and that he is thinking of
returning to France.

IN THE SPRING OF 1984, MALLE, THEN 51, agreed to let me watch a week of night
shooting of ''Alamo Bay'' on location in Rockport-Fulton Beach, Tex. We began
the week with a meal in the Key Allegro Yacht Club.

Malle is a small, trim, dark-eyed man with dark wavy hair, shot with gray at the
temples. He is nervous, intense, restless, and his mind darts from idea to idea
like some bright fish exploring the Great Barrier Reef.

Almost from the beginning of his stay in the United States, Malle explained, he
had wanted to make a picture about America as a melting pot, which he thought he
could get at through the theme of belonging.

''I don't think film is a great vehicle for ideas, frankly,'' he said. ''There
are other media that are better for making statements. In every script I've
filmed - whether it was my script or not - I've found out while shooting a scene
that half of the words were not necessary. And when you need all the words, it
sometimes means you're in trouble. Film is all about behavior, about connecting
or not connecting.''

I asked him about a paragraph in ''Knock Wood,'' Candice Bergen's recent
autobiography, in which she traces her long search for a man she could love as
much as her father, the ventriloquist Edgar Bergen. The first time Malle took
Miss Bergen out, she asked: '' 'But what were you missing? What were you looking
for that you didn't seem to find?' 'To belong,' he said simply. 'Just to feel
that I belong.' ''

Strangely, The Times Magazine article that had caught Malle's eye, ''Vietnam
Fallout in a Texas Town,'' by Ross Milloy, a Texas freelance writer, contained
the admission of a similar search, expressed by a Texas woman whose fisherman
husband had been shot to death by a Vietnamese refugee in self-defense. The
shooting had occurred during a quarrel over the placement of the immigrants'
crab traps off the Gulf Coast town of Seadrift. The woman had said:

''We were always looking for something, for some place to settle down, and we
kept passing through Seadrift, kept coming back, until finally we figured this
must be it, this must be what we're looking for.''

I asked Malle if he remembered that particular paragraph. Not only did he
remember it, he remembered Milloy, whom Malle made executive producer of the
film, taking him to meet the woman.

''I thought it was a great statement about America,'' said Malle, ''because I
think that this country is a country of drifters. It's one of the few general
statements I could permit myself about America. It seems that people here, they
don't really have roots, and at least a part of the population . . . the people
who work with us as extras or consultants, the fishermen, they've been all over
the place. They were not born here. It's such a mobile population.''

''Why are you here?'' I asked. ''You weren't born here. It's not the close-knit
culture you could have stayed in.''

''I've always been immensely curious about this country. Maybe I should have
been born here. . . .''

The conversation moved away from America, ranging widely, because Malle has for
years been a prominent figure in what used to be called the international jet
set; but the theme of belonging ran through our talk the way the plaintive
guitar of Ry Cooder, like reverberations of Vietnam, runs through the finished
film of ''Alamo Bay.'' It is worth recalling that, as a Frenchman, he
experienced agony over Vietnam before Americans did: His best friend, who was
also his cousin, was killed at Dienbienphu, when Vietnam ''belonged'' to France.

LOUIS MALLE'S FAMILY HAS BEEN AN important part of France since the early 19th
century. Napoleon Bonaparte bade Frenchmen start a domestic sugar beet industry
when the British Navy made it dangerous to bring sugar cane by ship from the
French West Indies. Malle's great-grandfather answered that call, and the Malles
became one of France's wealthiest families.  Louis Malle was born in 1932. He
was a 12-year-old in a Carmelite boarding school in Fontainebleau during the
Nazi occupation, and will never forget his French classmates who were Jews, and
the Catholic priest who concealed them under assumed names being taken away by
the Gestapo. In closing the school, Malle recalled, the Nazi in charge had
warned the Catholic children: ''Don't help the Jews. They're not French.'' But
the children shook hands with their doomed classmates and clapped for the doomed
priest. ''The Nazi was furious,'' said Malle.

As a teen-ager in Paris, he spent long hours watching American films at the
Cinemath eque Fran,caise, and loved the Westerns of that ''very stiff
moralist,'' John Ford, whose films insisted, said Malle, that ''you have to
fight for what you believe.'' He was in film school in Paris in 1953 when
Jacques-Yves Cousteau picked him to make a voyage on the Calypso. ''I was the
world's best underwater photographer,'' he says now, ''because I was the only
one.'' That voyage lasted four years, the ultimate professional result being a
co-director's credit with Cousteau on the celebrated underwater documentary
''The Silent World'' in 1956.

For the next two decades, Malle made his own films, in French. Probably the best
known is ''Murmur of the Heart'' (1971), which dealt with an adolescent's
incestuous relationship with his mother. He directed the film from his own
screenplay; critics praised his handling of the tension between the young man's
desire to belong and his need to separate; the screenplay was nominated for an
Oscar.

Still, every seven to nine years, said Malle, ''I have felt like starting over
again.'' He arrived at the first of what he calls his ''crossroads'' in the
1960's - and went to live in India for six months. The results were a
feature-length documentary, ''Calcutta,'' and a seven-part television series,
''Phantom India.'' The series, though acclaimed around the world, was banned in
India, Indira Gandhi's Government protesting that it overemphasized poverty and
overcrowding.

He reached the next crossroads with the release of ''Lacombe, Lucien,'' the
story of a French adolescent during the Second World War who joins the Nazis to
feel that he belongs. The film offended many Frenchmen, who felt that Malle was
too understanding of the collaborator's behavior. To Malle, they missed the
irony that ''the little people, like Lucien, were shot, put on trial; and the
big shots among the collaborators live well in the south of France.'' Despite
the controversy, the film was nominated as France's entry for America's Academy
Award for best foreign film of 1974. Too little, too late. The following year,
the director left for the United States.

Malle originally intended his melting-pot film to focus on illegal Mexican
migrant workers; but when he couldn't get backing for that, he made ''Pretty
Baby'' (1978), based on the life of the early 20th-century photographer Ernest
J. Bellocq, who made photographs in a New Orleans brothel and married a child
prostitute. The emphasis in Malle's film, however, was on the child's sense of
belonging to an extended family - her mother and the other prostitutes.

As is often the case, controversy attended Malle's film. He cast the model
Brooke Shields, then 11, as the 12-year-old prostitute, her first major film
role. Using such a young girl for the part offended many, including organized
religious groups, but the film was a success.

Next, Malle made two highly praised films: ''Atlantic City,'' a study of social
change resulting from the New Jersey resort's conversion into Casinoland, with
Burt Lancaster (1981), from a screenplay by the playwright John Guare; also ''My
Dinner with Andre,'' a virtuoso 110-minute - in real time - table conversation
between the director Andre Gregory and the actor Wallace Shawn (1981).

By then virtually an American film maker, he went to Hollywood and made
''Crackers'' (1984), which he terms ''a 100 percent studio picture,'' using
Universal's personnel rather than his own. Promoted on cable television recently
as ''a wild and crazy crime caper,'' it has been quietly dismissed by critics
and the public as a Mallefunction.

MEANWHILE, IN 1980, DIvorced and the father of two children in France, Malle
married Candice Bergen in France, in a country house Malle had owned for 15
years. She later wrote: ''Though Louis had then lived for five years in America
and knew the country and its people better than I, this corner of France was the
place where he felt most at home.'' Nevertheless, they returned to Manhattan,
and he moved from his apartment into hers on Central Park South. Having married
an American, he could very quickly have become an American citizen; he has not
done so.

Then, mainly on the basis of the success of ''Atlantic City,'' Malle got a
no-frills $5.3 million from Tri-Star Pictures to make ''Alamo Bay.'' Malle and
Ross Milloy searched for a location among the Gulf Coast fishing ports. To
Malle, the point of the film was that, despite deep anger and even violence on
the part of Vietnamese and ''Anglo'' shrimp fishermen in such fishing villages
as Seadrift and Seabrook, a fundamental respect for the rule of law eventually
prevailed. (Today, 15,000 of the half-million or so Vietnamese in the United
States have settled along the Texas coast.) In the last analysis, both sides had
a shared desire to belong to this idea of America.

''It's meant to be a homage to how this country functions,'' Malle said of his
film. ''The United States really is a working democracy. It works in the most
capitalistic terms, but it works. It's a system that has all kinds of things
wrong with it, but I don't see any other country that could deal that way with a
bunch of newcomers.''

I redirected his attention to the emotion at the heart of the film he was
making: ''You tell your wife that you want to belong, to feel you belong, and
you end up doing a movie about people who want to feel they belong. So the core
of this film and also of 'Lacombe, Lucien' is, 'You show me a way I can feel I
belong and I'll do anything.' ''

''Yes,'' said Malle, ''but you could say that also about 'Atlantic City.'
There's a wonderful speech of Susan Sarandon where she talks about going to
Monte Carlo and being a card dealer. It was a belonging speech, because it is
her dream of settling down somewhere.

''But when I said that to Candice . . . I wasn't thinking in terms of countries.
It was not territorial, it was emotional. It was about sharing.''

MALLE, HAVING BEEN IMpressed by an early screening of ''Silkwood,'' the 1983
film about a plutonium worker's suspicion that the plant she worked in was
radioactive, and particularly by its screenplay's ear for American speech, hired
one of its writers, Alice Arlen. I talked to her about the origins of ''Alamo
Bay.'' ''In early May of 1983,'' she said, ''Louis and I went with Ross Milloy
down the Texas coast. Ross would say that it was 'only a three-beer drive' to
wherever. Louis was fascinated by the idea of a three-beer drive. And Louis
loved it that the beer was called Lone Star. . . .

''Well, we walked into a bar about 2 o'clock one afternoon, and people had
already had a lot to drink, and you could tell they always did. There was a lot
of shuffleboard going on. And we had some drinks and played some shuffleboard
with them, and there was a woman who became Diane in the screenplay who was very
friendly with all the guys. . . .''

Later, Alice Arlen recalls, ''Louis said, 'What would happen if Dinh, the
Vietnamese who wants to be a shrimp fisherman, came into this bar and ordered a
beer?' ''

Eventually, she came up with other characters to go with Dinh and a story line
to go with the background. Glory (played by Amy Madigan) is a young woman who
returns to her native Port Alamo to help her widowed father with his fish
business. Her father is already at odds with his community for buying shrimp
from Vietnamese as well as Anglo fishermen. Glory resumes an affair with her
high school sweetheart, Shang Pierce (played by Ed Harris, her off-screen
husband whom she married weeks before shooting began).

Shang now is a local fisherman with a wife and children. She also sells a small
boat for crab fishing to a young Vietnamese refugee named Dinh - and soon, after
her father's death, finds herself involved in the struggle for economic survival
of both her lover and the Vietnamese refugee.

The Anglo fishermen, upset by competition from the Vietnamese, and encouraged by
the Ku Klux Klan, boycott Glory's business. When the bank repossesses Shang's
shrimp boat, forcing him to go back to crab fishing like his father, his
financial anxiety and his soured home life feed his drive to stop the Vietnamese
from establishing themselves. The story is, in essence, a classic Western, with
the overcrowded bay substituted for an overcrowded range. Glory even refers to
Dinh at one point as ''one of the last cowboys left in Texas.'' The big
difference is that Malle's film has two Gary Coopers - one a Vietnamese man, the
other an American woman.

''Louis has a sense of identification,'' Alice Arlen says, ''both with the
privileged people in power - which he is - but also with the foreigner coming in
and trying to work in this country. . . . Our biggest problem was to decide
whose story it was. Well, it's Dinh's story. . . .''

ULTIMATELY, SHOOTING ON THE FILM reached the point where Malle would at last see
what would happen if Dinh walked into a bar like the tough fisherman's bar in
Seadrift. A replica, the Zanadew bar, had been designed by Trevor Williams,
Malle's production director, with a neon Lone Star beer sign glowing red and
blue.

The script called for Dinh - played by Ho Nguyen, a 26-year-old research
scientist whose only previous acting experience was in high school in Saigon -
to enter while local fishermen are meeting with a Ku Klux Klan organizer. Dinh
tries to order a Lone Star beer, but the bartender won't serve him. Dinh
approaches one of the fishermen about buying an outboard motor for the crab boat
he has bought from Glory, but two of the fishermen rough him up and throw him
out.

As the sun went down and shooting began, Malle was even more edgy than usual; it
was his third long night of shooting in a row, and he wasn't sleeping well in
the daytime. But the really dangerous thing was that he had been wondering if he
had lost track of the original impulse to make the film.

So now he sat at a formica table in the middle of the bar set with his eyes
squeezed tightly shut, thinking things through. Opening his eyes, he began
chewing gum incessantly to keep from smoking.

The night's work began. ''He works relentlessly toward what he wants, making
little subtle changes in every rehearsal and every take,'' William Frankfather,
who played the Ku Klux Klan organizer, would say just before dawn on the
following day. But what it was that Malle wanted, what he was looking for that
he didn't at first seem to find, wouldn't really be apparent to me until I saw
the edited film on the screen.

As Ho Nguyen entered, Arlen's shooting script called for a fisherman to tell the
Klansman and his fellow fishermen, ''If the gooks put mines in the bay, I'm
telling you, there's nothing to stop them from blowing us up.'' Malle, going
back to an earlier draft of the script, decided to take the line away from the
fisherman and give it to Diane, the dumb barmaid. This was the one of several
changes that Malle would make in the shooting script that night, changes whose
cumulative effect would shift the focus of the scene from Dinh to Glory.

It took Malle many rehearsals, many takes, and almost all night to get just what
he wanted out of an almost panicky Caroline Williams, a thin, tough- looking
young Texas woman who had little previous acting experience beyond a few local
television commercials. She had, however, given Malle ''a great reading'' in
Houston.

''I try to explain to them that I picked them because I thought they were right
for the part, and they don't have to add too much to it, because then it gets
too much,'' said Malle. He took Caroline Williams aside and showed her how to
relax by breathing deeply

Malle's strategy was this: Diane's paranoid racism must make us dislike her so
that we will like Glory for shutting her up at the end of the scene. And Glory's
speaking up later in the scene, in turn, helps make the character's extreme
behavior at the end of the film both more believable and more sympathetic.

So in rehearsal after rehearsal, Malle worked patiently with Williams: ''Diane
is extraordinarily dumb. Her idea is dumb. And it has to be said with such
enthusiasm that it might get a laugh.''

Malle suspected the actress, who is not dumb, of resisting acting dumb, but
after she had tried the line four or five different ways, he said, ''Caroline,
it's much better like this. This is the way to do it.''

''It's better?'' she said, almost unbelieving.

''It's perfect,'' said Malle. ''Let's do a take.'' (Malle's crew on another film
gave him a T-shirt emblazoned with a typical Malle-ism: ''Well, since we can't
get a decent rehearsal, let's do a take.'')

In rehearsals, Malle may discuss characterization; while shooting, his comments
are largely confined to ''Say it faster'' or ''Try saying it more slowly.'' That
is because he is thinking of the rhythm of the picture as a whole when it is
finally edited. He finally coaxed Williams into saying Diane's line in just the
right rhythm and with just the right shade of dim paranoia.

Next, Malle tackled the sequence with Dinh. While acting in the climactic fight
to the death the week before, Nguyen had misunderstood the stunt coordinator and
turned into another actor's fist when he should have been turning away from it.
Doctors had only this day let him return to work.

''You have to be very careful not to touch his nose,'' Malle told the other
actors. During the shooting, the bartender said, ''Look - this is an American
bar - we're plumb out of brew.'' The line neatly highlighted the bartender's
equating white racism with Americanism.

After Malle had successfully gotten Dinh ejected from the Zanadew bar without
further injury to Ho Nguyen, he faced his most crucial problem: preparing to
shoot the last lines of dialogue in Alice Arlen's scene.

''Big men, pickin' on a kid,'' Glory yelled.

Another actor retorted: ''A gook kid.''

Malle then substituted one line of his own for two lines in the script. In
retrospect, he thus seems to have arrived, on the 29th day of shooting, at the
point of his picture:

''Y'know, Glory,'' said Diane, ''I don't think you belong in this town
anymore.''

In film, of course, it is not enough to write it; it has to be said in a
convincing way - and Caroline Williams was having a bad case of nerves. She
couldn't seem to stop glancing at the floor to see if she was ''hitting her
mark'' - standing in the right spot for the camera to get the shot Malle had
envisioned.

Malle came up with a solution. He walked toward Amy Madigan, the leading lady
who was standing by the cigarette machine, stretched out his left arm and leaned
on the machine - and found that he was in exactly the right spot for Diane to
say her line.

''I think if you do this, you'll be all right,'' he told Williams.

''Yeah,'' said Madigan reassuringly to the other actress. ''You dress yourself
off me. I'll always be in the same place.''

''Perhaps a little more aggressive on your lines,'' Malle said to Madigan.

From exactly the right position, Williams said the new line about Glory not
belonging.

Amy Madigan, understandably spleenful that a key scene might be ruined by an
inexperienced co- player, fairly spat her retort:

''Diane, if your jaw should ever break I'd love to wire it shut!''

This was a line that Milloy had suggested, and Arlen, with her ear for the good,
the true and the ugly, had jumped on it.

THROUGHOUT THE SUMMER and fall of 1984, Louis Malle and his film editor, James
Bruce, cut ''Alamo Bay'' together in a barn behind his house in the southwest of
France. They trimmed scenes with the Vietnamese refugees, and let Glory's scenes
run longer than originally planned. Finally, Malle devised a different ending
from the one in the screenplay, which had never been shot. Arlen had ended with
such scenes as Vietnamese fishermen building big shrimp boats, docking side by
side with Anglos, and with Dinh on vacation in Disneyland with his family. A
line on the screen was to tell of the integration of Vietnamese refugees into
American life.

But in France on his editing machine, Malle saw that what he had primarily
created was the portrait of a young Texas woman who belonged, not to Alamo Bay
or Shang Pierce, but to a principle, the oldest principle in the history of the
United States - that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their
creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty and
the pursuit of happiness.

Malle had finally decided that the ending that belonged on the film was a long,
wordless close-up of the tortured face of Glory, the moment after she kills her
Alamo Bay lover to save ''a gook kid,'' and gives up belonging to that Alamo Bay
forever.

At first, Malle was going to release the film without a musical score, despite
the fact that his love for American music is so longstanding that he hired Miles
Davis to write a film score in 1957. Then he heard Ry Cooder's score for Wim
Wender's film, ''Paris, Texas,'' and hired Cooder to put his classical-country
slide guitar sounds behind ''Alamo Bay.'' When Malle first heard Cooder's score,
he said, deeply satisfied, ''Ry, you've made a John Ford out of me.''

A somewhat un-macho John Ford. On Dec. 4, I had lunch with Louis Malle and his
younger brother and co-producer, Vincent Malle, 40, at Alfredo's on Central Park
South, where the maitre d' greeted the director effusively and urged him to try
the truffles, which he did. Malle seemed defensive about his film. ''My ideal
spectator,'' he said, ''is someone who is prepared to be confused and surprised
and provoked and ready to re-examine certain values.'' And if there weren't a
lot of such spectators, he pointed out that he had only gone about $20,000 over
his modest budget, so that it could not be a financial disaster. ''The picture
is now really, finally, definitely centered around Glory's character,'' he said
- and claimed that he had originally intended it to be that way. ''With Alamo
Bay, I've come very close to summing up my experience in America,'' he said. He
might as well have said, ''Glory, c'est moi.''

And then, leaving the restaurant, he added, ''I thought I should do 'Alamo Bay'
as well as I could, because it may be my last American picture. I may go back to
France.''

As the weeks and screenings went by, I began to suspect the reason for Malle's
mood. I learned in phone conversations with Alice Arlen and Ross Milloy that a
number of viewers were saying that the picture Malle called his ''homage to
America'' was, in fact, ''anti-American'' - and, particularly, anti-Texan. In
this view, the film showed white Texans as unsympathetic - racist and bigoted -
though such a view disregarded such sympathetic Anglos as the schoolteacher and
the Protestant minister, and, particularly, the fact that the film's ''hero''
was a white Texas woman.

Malle, meanwhile, had withdrawn to his house in France, though he promised to
come back to America to see the film through the marketing process. Malle
admitted over the trans-Atlantic telephone that he was ''in a crisis.'' ''It's
the same thing that happened with 'Lacombe, Lucien,' '' he said. ''It's not the
picture people expect to see. And I'm getting a little tired of never being in
the mainstream, of always being the outsider.''

Did Malle really mean that he would leave America for good? He answered that he
had come to another ''crossroads,'' and he really didn't know which way he would
go. ''People showed me so much hospitality,'' he said, remembering his
experience of the United States in general and Texas in particular. ''And now I
feel that by pointing out certain things, I am a troublemaker. But I wanted to
do something which is about the real texture of this country - about its
principles.'' But that brought him back to Glory, ''who estranged herself from
her community.''

He talked about returning to France. ''If I were going to come back to France,
I'd like to settle down and look into my own past. I've accumulated notes over
the past few years.'' Then his spirits seemed to rise, and he talked about
filming another script by John Guare, ''about an American family living in a
foreign country, about Americans in exile. I've always been interested in being
in a position where I'm a stranger.''

Or he might just stay in America. The director couldn't seem to decide what he
wanted to do next, and yet: ''I'm 52. I feel I have to make some kind of a basic
decision.''

All in all, it seems that what really happened when Dinh walked into that Texas
bar and ordered a beer is that Louis Malle discovered that he himself might not
really belong in America anymore than he did in France - that, stay or leave, he
would always be an outsider here, too; belonging mainly to his compulsion to
tell the truth, as he sees it, about human behavior.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ho Nguyen (page 30); photo of KKK burning cross; photo of
Louis Malle

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW AMERICA 'LOST THE PEACE'

BYLINE: By James Chace; James Chace is an editor of The Book Review. His most
recent book is ''Endless War: How We Got Involved in Central America-and What
Can Be Done.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1588 words


NO MORE VIETNAMS
By Richard Nixon.
240 pp. New York: Arbor House. $14.95.

WITH a Wilsonian zeal to participate in great causes - causes ''as big as the
whole world itself'' - Richard Nixon in this strongly argued, often intemperate
polemic urges Americans to contest aggression wherever it rears its head. ''It
is no longer enough to look for the smoking gun,'' he warns us in a metaphor
evocative of Watergate, ''now we must look for the hidden hand.'' That hand is,
more often than not, the Soviet hand. And even when it isn't, Mr. Nixon
contends, ''wherever we lose, (the Russians) win.'' Thus Mr. Nixon calls for
nothing less than the global containment of Communism by the United States. Lest
the reader fear that such a worldwide crusade will lead to worldwide armed
intervention by the United States, the former President reassures us that if we
follow his prescription - a defense buildup at home and a massive economic
program for the third world - we will have ''no more Vietnams'' because ''we
will not fail again.''

This is the third book on foreign policy Mr. Nixon has written since publishing
his memoirs. The first, ''The Real War'' (1980), centered on the threats to the
United States from the Soviet Union. The second, ''Real Peace'' (1984), defended
his policy of ''hardheaded detente'' with the Soviet Union by arguing that the
incentives of East-West trade might moderate Soviet behavior, particularly in
the third world.

''No More Vietnams'' is two books. The first is a highly selective history of
the Vietnam War - a war, as he tells it, that we won. We then, however, ''lost
the peace.'' The second and more interesting book (confined unfortunately to one
of his six chapters) is his program to win the hearts and minds - and stomachs -
of the third world.

Mr. Nixon's history of the Vietnam War expands on the interpretation given in
his memoirs. He stresses throughout his need to threaten to bomb North Vietnam
in order to force Hanoi to sue for peace. This threat was at the heart of his
effort to win the war, a strategy he explained to his aide H. R. Haldeman this
way:

''I call it the Madman Theory, Bob. I want the North Vietnamese to believe that
I've reached the point where I might do anything to stop the war.''

The bombing of Cambodia to wipe out the North Vietnamese sanctuaries in 1969, he
says, made Hanoi resume negotiations with the United States in Paris;
unfortunately, little else happened. Only in the fall of 1972, when the United
States dropped its demand that the North Vietnamese withdraw from the South and
North Vietnam no longer insisted on unilateral American withdrawal, did peace
seem at hand. But since Mr. Nixon had been reducing our armed forces all along,
South Vietnam's President Nguyen Van Thieu, fearing final American withdrawal
would mean the North Vietnamese would ultimately control all of Vietnam, balked.
Hanoi then stiffened its demands.

To compel Hanoi to agree to Washington's terms and doubtless to demonstrate his
willingness to support the Thieu Government after America's withdrawal, Mr.
Nixon unleashed furious bombing raids against the Hanoi-Haiphong complex in
December 1972 - the so-called Christmas bombing. In 11 days, American aircraft
flew almost 3,000 sorties and dropped some 40,000 tons of bombs. It was not, Mr.
Nixon insists, ''carpet bombing.'' But it certainly brought home the message to
Hanoi that the Madman Theory should not be dismissed out of hand.

On Dec. 30, 1972, Washington stopped the bombing. On Jan. 8, 1973, negotiations
reconvened. On Jan. 27, a peace agreement was signed, very little different from
the draft worked out in October. And so, Mr. Nixon writes, ''We had won the
second Vietnam War.''

Following this account of our so-called victory in Vietnam, Mr. Nixon explains
''how we lost the peace.'' His short answer is ''Congressional
irresponsibility'' - Congress refused to finance United States air support and
supplies to sustain the South Vietnamese Government. He also cites the ''outcry
over Watergate'' that prevented him from countering Hanoi's shipments of
additional men and supplies to its forces in the south in violation of the Paris
peace accords.

Had there been no Watergate, would it have been different? Would Mr. Nixon's aim
- to maintain, by American aid and the threat of bombing, a non- Communist
government in South Vietnam - have succeeded? If I read him correctly, Mr. Nixon
thinks not. He is too much of a politician not to understand the ''profound
backlash against our involvement in the war, which antedated our Watergate
problems.'' But he seems not to comprehend why the American people did not
support the war after the mid-1960's. Americans simply did not perceive Vietnam
as vital to American interests, and therefore saw a gross disparity between ends
and means in the war. Most Americans felt that the means used - the bombs, the
money, the lives - far exceeded the ends to which they were employed: to
preserve a government in Southeast Asia, a region of marginal importance to our
strategic concerns.

In his insistence on combating Communism worldwide - all the more necessary
after ''losing'' Vietnam to the Communists - Mr. Nixon insists as well on a very
broad definition of America's vital interests. He rejects as too narrow the
defense of Western Europe, Japan, and oil supplies in the Persian Gulf. For
example, he makes a persuasive case for including Israel, even though Israel is
not an American vital interest from a strategic viewpoint. But, as Mr. Nixon
points out, the United States does have a moral and political commitment to
preserving the integrity of Israel - ''an island of democracy in a sea of
totalitarian states'' - if Israel should prove unable to defend itself. But then
the list simply peters out into ''other small countries where our interests, and
the interests of the people of those countries, may be served by U.S. assistance
in their efforts to resist Communist aggression.'' All this leads to Mr.
Nixon's call not to let any ''instance of Soviet aggression anywhere in the
Third World . . . go unchallenged by the West.'' His vast program would return
the United States to the days of global containment, recalling the rhetoric of
John F.  Kennedy, who wrote that Americans are ''by destiny rather than choice
the watchmen on the walls of world freedom.'' Mr.  Nixon, not surprisingly,
prefers to quote Thomas Jefferson, who expansively declared, ''We act not for
ourselves alone but for the whole human race.'' To combat Communism, Mr. Nixon
believes, we should not wait for danger to emerge over the horizon. Instead, he
says we should encourage peaceful change in the third world, for ''if there is
no hope for peaceful change, violent change is inevitable.'' To do that, his
third world economic program ''must be structured in such a way that those who
receive (aid) will have a strong incentive to adopt political and economic
policies that promote both progress and justice.'' He points out that ''we spend
7 percent of our gross national product on defense and two-tenths of 1 percent
on economic aid,'' but he does not simply recommend government-to-government
foreign assistance. He insists that governments receiving help adopt policies
that will attract foreign investment. Equally important, the United States
should establish trade policies that will help third world countries.

THE central problem is implementing these proposals - many of which are
eminently desirable. As Mr. Nixon should know better than most people, there
seems little disposition these days to embark on a policy of global containment
of Communism through trade and aid, even less to put into effect an ambitious
economic program for the third world. Congress gutted most of President Reagan's
Caribbean Basin Initiative, designed to lower United States trade barriers.
Moreover, under the Reagan Administration, America's trade deficit in 1984
reached $123.3 billion - hardly an incentive for the United States to lower
trade barriers. If anything, more protectionism is likely. And high interest
rates in the United States only make it harder for third world debtor nations to
service their debts to American banks.

The world Richard Nixon envisages is not the world we live in now. If economic
assistance is unlikely to win enthusiastic support at home, military
intervention to contain Communism is also certain to come under strong criticism
from Congress and the American people - largely as a consequence of America's
Vietnam ''victory.'' True, the Reagan Administration could get away with a
military action to topple a Marxist government on Grenada because the operation
was quick and small. But the Administration, much to its frustration, has not
been able to increase the small number of United States military advisers in El
Salvador; and Congress has cut off all aid to the rebels fighting the Marxist
Sandinista Government of Nicaragua. Like his hero Woodrow Wilson, Mr. Nixon may
well find himself crying in the wilderness for a world that cannot be.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Nixon (NYT/Neal Boenzi)

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET SEEKS SOUTHEAST ASIA DIPLOMATIC ROLE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, April 7


The Soviet Union, which has been increasing its military presence in Southeast
Asia through the use of port and air installations in Vietnam and Cambodia, is
now apparently trying to play a larger diplomatic role in the region.

Mikhail S. Kapitsa, a Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, who has been on a
monthlong tour of Southeast Asian capitals, said at a news conference here last
week that Moscow was prepared to act as a ''guarantor'' of peace in the region,
once the countries in the area reached agreement on Cambodia.

He supported Vietnam's call for an international conference on Indochina, in
which nations such as India, Sweden and Australia, in addition to neighboring
countries, would take part. All three maintain strong links with Hanoi. India
recognizes the present Government in Phnom Penh, Cambodia's capital.

The Soviet initiative comes at a time when the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations - Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and the Philippines -
is trying to persuade the Reagan Administration to take a more active role in
stabilizing the region. Asean is also pressing Hanoi to make some significant
gestures toward Washington that could open the way to setting up diplomatic
relations between Vietnam and the United States. Hanoi has repeatedly expressed
interest in ties with Washington.

Soviet Union Criticized

Several Asean leaders, including Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Mochtar
Kusumaatmadja, who serves as the group's spokesman on Cambodia in talks with
Vietnam, have criticized the Soviet Union for trying to divide the non-Communist
Asean bloc.

Moscow and Hanoi have for some time fostered the idea that Indonesia and, to a
lesser extent, Malaysia, have been more amenable to Hanoi's position on
Cambodia. The Vietnamese have portrayed Thailand, which has taken the hardest
line against Hanoi, as the problem, largely because of its direct involvement in
the conflict.

On this trip Mr. Kapitsa has been urging Asean nations to accept Hanoi's formula
for a Cambodian solution. He said at his news conference here that he believed
several Asean nations were moving toward that position.

Hanoi's position was outlined in a statement issued in Ho Chi Minh City in
January by the Foreign Ministers of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. The statement,
while alluding to the ''irreversibility'' of the present military and political
situation in Cambodia, nevertheless made the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops
from that country contingent on the elimination of the Khmer Rouge leadership.

The Khmer Rouge under Pol Pot, remnants of the Cambodian Communist Government
that was ousted in 1979, are the most powerful fighting force in the three-part
anti-Vietnamese Cambodian resistance coalition. Vietnam, which invaded Cambodia
in 1978, still has more than 160,000 troops in the country.

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, a former Cambodian head of state who now serves as
president of the resistance coalition, responded to Hanoi's condition for
withdrawal at a news conference in Bangkok in February. He said, ''If Vietnam
has not been able to remove the Khmer Rouge in six years of fighting, how can
they expect us to do it for them?''

Sowing Confusion in Asean

In a briefing for reporters here Saturday, Mr. Mochtar, the Indonesian Foreign
Minister, took exception to some of Mr. Kapitsa's comments. Mr. Mochtar, who had
just returned from talks in Hanoi, New York and Washington when he met Mr.
Kapitsa last week, suggested that the Soviet Union was sowing confusion within
Asean.

''It should be made clear here once and for all,'' Mr. Mochtar said, ''that
Asean does not accept the Ho Chi Minh City declaration. Because if you read it
carefully, it amounts to recognizing the status quo, which we never have done
and never will do. We do not accept the situation created by the Vietnamese
invasion of Kampuchea.'' Kampuchea is the Cambodians' name for their country.

He added: ''I don't know what Mr. Kapitsa means. I don't want the public,
especially our Thai colleagues, to be confused, because he said it after his
talks in Jakarta. While he may not have the intention to create disinformation,
confusion is the result.''

Mr. Mochtar said that on his visit to Hanoi last month - a visit he had earlier
postponed because of Vietnamese attacks along the Thai-Cambodian border - the
Vietnamese seemed ''more confident.'' Vietnamese troops were able to take
control of most major Cambodian resistance bases along the border earlier this
year, including several belonging to the Khmer Rouge.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Forces Retake Cambodian Guerrilla Camp

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 143 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, April 7


Vietnamese forces recaptured a Cambodian guerrilla camp near the Thai border
today in a two-hour battle that began at dawn, Thai military sources said. They
said six guerrillas were killed and 35 wounded.

No figures on Vietnamese casualties were available.

The Vietnamese drove about 1,000 guerrillas from the camp at Prey Chan, the
sources said. They said the guerrillas tried to recapture the base a few hours
later, but were repulsed by Vietnamese tank and artillery barrages.

Prey Chan, about 18 miles northeast of this key border town, was controlled by
the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, one of three major groups fighting
Vietnamese troops who invaded Cambodia in 1978.

Vietnam began its fiercest dry season offensive to date on Nov. 18 with the
seizure of Prey Chan, but guerrillas recaptured the camp the following month.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Tracking Down Voices Of a Generation

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


''Johnny Boy.''

At first, that signature was the only clue Peter P. Mahoney had.

Years ago, ''Johnny Boy'' wrote a letter to the mother of a buddy killed in
Vietnam. Last year, the mother sent the letter to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Commission, thinking it might have a place on the monument in lower Manhattan.

Mr. Mahoney, a Vietnam veteran and deputy director of the commission, said the
writer's words captured clearly how it felt to lose a friend: ''I'm hollow. When
I'm scared, I rattle.''

To use it on the monument, however, Mr. Mahoney had to find ''Johnny Boy'' and
get his permission. A two-month search turned up only a last name.

Then, with the help of a man he calls ''Deep Vet,'' a source in the Washington
bureaucracy, Mr. Mahoney tracked down the writer: John Houghton, a tugboat
deckhand now living in New Jersey.

Excerpts from Mr. Houghton's letter will take their place on the monument, along
with 82 other selections. To obtain permission from the writers or their
relatives, Mr. Mahoney relied on ''Deep Vet,'' the national phone books at the
New York Public Library, fading memories and sheer luck.

In one case, a chain of calls through Houston led Mr. Mahoney back to New York,
where he was able to reunite two veterans living in Brooklyn who had not seen
one another since their combat days 15 years ago.

Last Thursday, the glass wall on which the excerpts are etched began to rise in
Vietnam Veterans Plaza at Coenties Slip and Water Street. It is to be finished
next month.

Mr. Mahoney's detective days are over, but the letters stay with him. ''You
figure you'd become immune after being immersed in them, that they'd lose their
potency. Yet, every time I read them, I start to cry again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE AND DEBATE;
BATTLES LOOM OVER IMPORTS



BYLINE:
By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1530 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 7


Imports are at record levels in many industries, hitting jobs and profits and
spurring widespread demands for protection.

Makers of everything from shoes and copper wire to paint brushes and castor oil
are actively seeking higher tariffs or import ceilings to preserve their
markets. Industries that have already won protection, such as textiles and
steel, want more.

Many have become interested in proposals before the Senate Finance Committee and
House Ways and Means Committee to levy up to a 20 percent tax on all imports, a
so-called import surcharge. The tax would raise prices of imports, thus chilling
demand for them.

Opponents and proponents are lining up for big battles expected later this
spring and summer. Foreign governments are monitoring the debate.

''We run a very big risk that something sudden, dramatic and unstoppable will
take place this summer in Congress and that an import surcharge will be the
result,'' Senator John Heinz, Republican of Pennsylvania, warned at a meeting of
the Institute for International Economics.

The Background

Protectionism is a response to the trade deficit, which has been growing since
the early 1980's. Last year the excess of imports over exports jumped 78
percent, to $123.4 billion.

The deficit has been financed by foreign savings, attracted to this country by
high interest rates, the relative safety of the United States as a haven for
investments and a reasonable chance of making money.

The huge flows from abroad combined with reduced foreign investment by Americans
have suddenly shifted the United States in global accounts from a position as
net creditor to one as net debtor for the first time in seven decades.

The surge of imports has corresponded with the surge in the international buying
power of the dollar, up 40 to 70 percent since 1980, depending on what measuring
stick is used.



Effect of Dollar's Strength

A rising dollar pulls in foreign shoes, wines and other imports for the simple
reason that it lowers their price tag. Conversely, it lifts the prices of
machinery, farm products and other American exports, making those tougher to
sell.

The United States has faced substantial threats of protectionism in earlier
postwar years. The most serious came in the late 1960's and early 1970's when
inflation induced by the Vietnam War led to overvaluation of the dollar.

The import surcharge is not a new idea. President Nixon and his Treasury
Secretary, John B. Connally, put a 10 percent levy on all imports in August 1971
to enforce demands growing out of the refusal of other countries to revalue
their currencies upward.



Currency System Altered

Currencies at that time were under a ''fixed rate'' system, pegged at
relationships that rarely changed. Monetary upheavals led to its abandonment in
1973 for the present ''floating rate'' system in which currency values
continually fluctuate.

The Nixon-Connally surcharge, which drew heavy fire from America's trading
partners, lasted four months - until other countries finally agreed to changes
under the so-called Smithsonian accord of December 1971. Those changes helped
the United States within two years to redress what in today's terms was a much
more modest trade deficit - less than $10 billion.

In that period, protectionist pressures were also manifested by the Burke-Hartke
bill, mandating not only import ceilings but also curbs on American overseas
investment, steel import limitations negotiated by the State Department and a
widening of textile industry protection under the Multifiber Arrangement.

For the Surcharge

The appeal of the import surcharge is that it would reduce the Federal budget
deficit while diverting production from foreigners to domestic industry.

Advocates argue, moreover, that it represents the drastic action that is
required to ''level the playing field'' of world trade, which they say is tilted
against the United States because foreigners subsidize exports and invent import
barriers.

The expanding foreign presence has made the situation critical. Although the
nation's economy is buoyant, manufacturing jobs are being lost - 2 million since
1980, according to a study by Data Resources.

Donald H. Straszheim, chief economist at Merrill Lynch Economics, found that
foreign producers were capturing 30 cents of every extra dollar spent on goods
and structures in the last half of 1984.

Burdened by intense international competition, the economy in the first quarter,
according to the latest Commerce Department figures, was growing less than half
as fast as in the final three months of 1984.



Examples of Trade Barriers

Advocates cite numerous examples of foreign barriers. The European Common Market
levies tariffs of 16 percent to 18 percent against foreign semiconductors,
against zero tariffs in this country. ''Buy Japan'' policies exclude a wide
range of American- made telecommuncations products.

The United States Government has complained that Nissan Motors wants to buy a
Cray ''supercomputer'' but cannot because of domestic pressure to buy Japanese.

Asked why Motorola Inc., one of the leading high-technology companies, has
become the principal corporate advocate of a surcharge, Richard W. Heimlich,
vice president and a former American Government steel negotiator, replied, ''The
simple answer is we want to be able to continue manufacturing in this country.''

Another selling point is the impact of the surcharge on the Federal budget
deficit. At 20 percent, on $400 billion of imports projected for 1985, it would
yield $80 billion, or about 40 percent of the budget deficit.

That would let both interest rates and the dollar fall, advocates maintain,
while easing pressure for domestic spending cuts.

Against the Surcharge

Opponents of the import surcharge compare it with the Smoot-Hawley tariffs of
1930, warning that it could severely disrupt the trade and international
financial system and touch off a new depression.

''I'd give the European Community and Canada about a week to retaliate,'' saud
Harvey Bale, assistant United States trade representative.

Not only would it provoke retaliation, says the Congressional Budget Office, but
also it would mean ''significantly'' higher interest rates, falling output and
income and a ''skyrocketing'' Federal debt. It ''would unambiguously result in a
net overall loss of worldwide economic efficiency and welfare,'' the
Congressional agency said in a preliminary study.

Retaliation against the Smoot-Hawley tariffs slowed world trade to a trickle in
the 1930's, turning the 1929 financial collapse into the Depression, surcharge
opponents say.



Common Market's Position

Dietrich von Kyaw, West Germany's Ambassador to Washington, served notice
recently that the European Economic Commission ''would no longer be able to
resist'' curbing imports of American soybeans and corn gluten, which represent
more than a $4-billion-a-year market for American farmers in Europe.

Unless developing countries were exempted, the surcharge would hurt their
earnings and, in the words of C. Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute for
International Economics in Washington, ''ignite the oft-predicted onset of
default.''

Opponents challenge the assumption of surcharge supporters that the dollar's
value would fall. On the contrary, opponents believe it would rise, reflecting
an increased demand for dollars as the American trading position improves.

The surcharge, it is also argued, would aggravate inflation, imposing an income
loss on consumers.

The Outlook

The Reagan Administration does not like the import surcharge and says so. ''It's
just a bad idea,'' commented Bill Brock, United States trade representative,
shortly before he was nominatated to become Labor Secretary.

But two forces could keep it in the forefront of discussion. One is a weakening
of the American economy. Despite the loss of manufacturing jobs, the economy has
produced a net increase of 6 million new jobs since 1980, and unemployment has
fallen to close to 7 percent.

Economic weakness accompanied by increases in joblessness could intensify the
search in Congress for a ''quick fix'' solution to the job, trade and budget
problems - making the surcharge politically irresistible.



The Conflict With Japan

The second force is the growing conflict with Japan for more market access for
American products. Should Tokyo rebuff Washington, a surcharge could be designed
to affect only shipments from Japan. Such a bill, in fact, has just been
introduced by Senator Heinz. ''The time is past for continued discussion and
endless negotiation,'' he said.

One Congressional staff member familiar with the Japanese problem commented,
''This bill could have strong appeal.''

Although the Administration does not like the surcharge, it is not altogether
displeased by the talk about it, which has thrown a scare into America's trading
partners and made them more amenable to a new round of trade liberalization
negotiations - one of Washington's goals.

So the threat of the import surcharge, paradoxically, could trigger more
liberalization.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Senator John Heinz (AP); photo of C. Fred Bergsten (Camera
Press)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
CAMBODIA FORGOTTEN (2)

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 752 words


''Now let's look at Cambodia. We've made a conscious decision not to send
American troops in. There will be no American combat troops or advisers in
Cambodia. We will aid Cambodia. Cambodia is the Nixon Doctrine in its purest
form. . . . in Cambodia what we are doing is helping the Cambodians to help
themselves.'' - President Richard Nixon, at a press conference, Nov. 15, 1971.

''That's what we paid for. That's why we built the Cambodian Army. To fight for
us. To help us with our withdrawal from Vietnam. And it worked.'' - Brig. Gen.
Theodore Mataxis, retired, former head of the U.S. military mission in Phnom
Penh, at a cocktail party in Singapore in 1973, referring to a military
offensive by the American-supported Cambodian Army in 1971 in which at least 25
Cambodian battalions were wiped out, an operation that the general defined as
''an unmitigated success'' because it had distracted North Vietnamese troops
from their main arena in Vietnam.


The difference between these two

descriptions of American policy

in Cambodia - Mr. Nixon saying we were ''helping the Cambodians help
themselves'' and the general saying we ''paid'' them ''to help us'' - is the
difference between obfuscation and candor. The general was offering a rare
moment of official truth about the war in Indochina.

Richard Nixon's new book about that war - ''No More Vietnams'' - doesn't offer
many moments of candor. He rails and blusters and heaves mightily to preserve
his flame. Throughout, he blames everyone but himself for the messes and the
failures and the tragedies.

Mr. Nixon is far from the only distorter of this piece of our history, and a
former President certainly has a right to try to make a buck by hustling his
product in our free-enterprise marketplace (the book is $14.95); but the buyer
should be aware that Mr. Nixon and the other revisionists are counting on a
public that is either uninformed or has a short memory.  He seems to forget that
lots of people were there on the ground in Indochina, watching his handiwork -
not just the press he so disdains but such people as his military officers, his
diplomats, his aid officials. And many of these witnesses - his people - will
not remember things the way they are in this book.  Of Cambodia, for example,
Mr. Nixon writes: ''Our critics accused us of engaging in indiscriminate terror
bombing, which they claimed slaughtered hundreds of civilians. But the record
shows that our air strikes were directed against enemy military targets and were
highly accurate.'' What the record actually shows - and Mr. Nixon is depending
on no one remembering this - is that the bombing was carried out on the basis of
very old, very inaccurate maps and that many hundreds and indeed possibly
thousands of civilians in the countryside were killed. Anyone who visited the
refugee camps in Cambodia and talked to the civilian survivors of the bombing
learned quickly about the substantial casualties.

He talks of efforts to negotiate peace for Cambodia and Laos, but everyone with
eyes in Indochina knew that the Paris agreement he and Henry Kissinger produced
in January 1973 involved only Vietnam and was meaningless and toothless vis-
a-vis the two other countries.

He talks of peace efforts later in 1973 but he forgets that his own Ambassador
in Phnom Penh, Emory Swank - at a time when Washington was saying ''delicate
negotiations'' were in progress for Cambodia - called these nothing more than
''normal diplomatic contact'' that he would not describe as negotiations.

He talks still more about peace efforts and forgets to tell us that a later
Ambassador, John Gunther Dean, appealed to Henry Kissinger to initiate contacts
with the Khmer Rouge and was rebuffed twice.

Mr. Nixon also forgets to tell us that in April 1970, when he sent American
troops on a two-month incursion into Cambodia, he never even informed the
Cambodians that he was intruding on their territory (and thus making a
full-scale war there inevitable). He told the Phnom Penh Government after the
fact.

From start to finish, nothing in the actual history of our involvement in
Cambodia suggests that the fate of the Cambodian people was a major concern. On
the contrary, the Nixon book makes it clear that Washington's overriding concern
was getting out of the quicksand in neighboring Vietnam.

This was an understandable goal, but when we got out, the Cambodians sank. An
honest book would have acknowledged our share in that calamity.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DEFYING JUDGE'S ORDER, COLUMBIA STUDENTS CONTINUE SIT-IN, BUT 7 END FASTS

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 710 words


Defying a court order, students at Columbia University continued to barricade a
campus building yesterday to protest the university's holdings in companies
doing business in South Africa.

From 100 to 150 students and a sprinkling of faculty and staff members were
camped out on the front steps of Hamilton Hall in the fifth day of the
demonstrations. The protesters are demanding that Columbia rid itself of $33
million of investments.

But seven protesters who began fasting on March 22 ended their fast last night
after the president of Columbia, Dr. Michael I. Sovern, granted them a meeting
and agreed to convey their concern to a committee of trustees studying the
investment issue. Five of the fasters - two were too weak to attend - met with
Dr. Sovern for more than 90 minutes. said a university spokesman, Judith Leynse.

Despite the protests, classes continued to be held at Hamilton Hall yesterday,
with students and teachers entering the building through an unblocked entrance.
Protesters said that many students with classes in the building were staying
away in sympathy, but university spokesmen said attendance appeared to be
normal.

In an echo of the 1960's, the folk singer Pete Seeger made an appearance and led
the demonstrators in a medley, including the South African folk song, ''The Lion
Sleeps Tonight.''

On Sunday, a State Supreme Court Justice in Manhattan, Harold Baer Jr., issued a
temporary restraining order forbidding the protesters from blocking any campus
building or interfering with classes and other activities.

Copies of the court order were handed out to the protesters Monday morning, but
they vowed to continue the sit-in until their demands were met. Columbia
officials said that they would seek to have the temporary order made permanent
tomorrow.

Protesters said yesterday that they were prepared to go to jail and would not
resist arrest if the police were called in to carry out the judge's order. But
university officials have given no indication of if or when they would have the
restraining order enforced.

''There is nothing we can say in that respect,'' said Mrs. Leynse. ''We expect
the students to obey, and I cannot speculate what the next step will be.''

The university has, however, begun disciplinary proceedings against 35 of the
student demonstrators, according to officials. Some of those students said
yesterday, though, that they had agreed among themselves to refuse to appear at
the administrative meeting that has been called to hear their cases.

''This intentional abuse of the rights of others is plainly prohibited by the
Rules of University Conduct and punishable by censure, suspension or
expulsion,'' Dr. Sovern said in a letter that was distributed on campus Sunday.
''Disciplinary proceedings have been instituted against a number of the
offenders; as others are identified, they will be charged.''

The protesters contend that Columbia's investment in Mobil Oil Corporation,
International Business Machines Corporation, the Ford Motor Company, General
Motors Corporation and other companies that do business with South Africa
amounts to approval of South Africa's system of racial separation, called
apartheid. Since the founding of the Coalition for a Free South Africa, a campus
political group, in 1981, they have been pressing the university's trustees to
issue a formal statement of divestiture.

''Our point is that the university, as a moral institution, cannot act just like
a bank with its money,'' said Walter Hayes, a spokesman for the Coalition for a
Free South Africa. ''And as students, we have a special moral and ethical duty
to oppose apartheid.''

In 1978, the Columbia trustees agreed to sell investments in companies ''which
show indifference through act or omission to the prevailing repressive racial
policies in South Africa.'' Last year the university announced a freeze on
further investments in companies that do business in South Africa.

The current protest began last Thursday with a campus rally, sponsored by the
Coalition, protesting that policy. The group then chained shut the doors of
Hamilton Hall, a classroom and administration building that was the site of many
anti-Vietnam War protests in the late 60's and early 70's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of protesting students at Columbia University (NYT/Chester
Higgins Jr.) (Page B2)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'CRISIS IN CENTRAL AMERICA,' ON PBS

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words


''CRISIS IN CENTRAL AMERICA'' confronts a question it does not explicitly raise:
Is the United States responsible for the crisis? The four-part ''Frontline''
series provides no answer, expecting us to find it ourselves. We can, although
we must work at it, perhaps harder than we may wish. The series, beginning on
Channel 13 at 9 tonight, continues through Friday.

The episode tonight, ''The Yankee Years,'' begins with flickering old film: it
is 1898; United States troops land in Cuba. Interventionism has begun. The
Panama Canal is dug. United Fruit reaps its harvests. Marines are sent to
Nicaragua. The Central Intelligence Agency manipulates Guatemala. For more than
50 years, American interests flourish.

Tomorrow night's program deals with the Cuban revolution and its aftermath.
Nicaragua is examined on Thursday, and El Salvador on Friday. The final image in
the series, a freeze frame, is ''a crowd of Salvadorans,'' the narrator tells
us, ''who came to witness the prospect of peace.''


The series, using old film and interviews, is even-handed, determinedly so. For
example, a former Marine, who fought Augusto Cesar Sandino, the Nicaraguan
rebel, in 1926, says, ''I think the natives really favored the Marines.'' A
Nicaraguan says, ''We wanted to shoot them, and run them through with
machetes.'' Thus the format: credit the United States, if only for good
intentions; then penalize it for insensitivity or something worse. There is
balance.

Therefore, ''Crisis in Central America'' suggests that the United States was
neither as malevolent as critics claim, nor as benevolent as apologists insist.
The most interesting sequence in the first program looks at an inglorious
episode: the Central Intelligence Agency-sponsored coup that overthrew Jacobo
Arbenz Guzman in Guatemala in 1954.

The Arbenz Government, democratically elected, was influenced, but apparently
not led, by Communists. Mr. Arbenz began labor and land reform, including the
appropriation of 80 percent of the land owned by United Fruit. Secretary of
State John Foster Dulles, alarmed, dispatched an envoy, who demanded that Mr.
Arbenz remove Communist labor leaders. Mr. Arbenz refused.

Consequently, the Eisenhower Administration decided to remove Mr. Arbenz.
Richard Bissell, a former Special Assistant to the Director of Central
Intelligence, says in an interview that there ''is absolutely no reason to
believe'' the desire to help United Fruit played ''any significant role'' in
reaching the decision.

The dominant factor was presumably Mr. Dulles's obsession with Soviet
expansionism. Whatever it was, however, was incidental. The coup, fabled today,
was carried out largely by a C.I.A. radio station that broadcast news of a
''liberation'' army. The army was actually 150 Guatemalans in a few trucks and
station wagons.

As coups go, this wasn't much. Reasonable people may agree that it was wrong for
the United States to intervene, although the principal result was unintended.
Mr. Bissell hints at it delicately: ''In other situations, in other countries,
too much reliance was placed on the method that had been successful.''

Possibly, he is thinking of the disastrous 1961 invasion at the Bay of Pigs in
Cuba. Meanwhile, Jose Figueres Ferrer, the former President of Costa Rica, notes
that ''the leftists have great propaganda machinery'' and that the Guatemalan
intervention provided the left with a cause.


''The Yankee Years'' suffers from omission - it suggests that Central American
history began around 1900, which ignores 300 years of wars, revolutions,
European adventurism and local politics. But certainly unrest did grow after
Guatemala in 1954. Anastasio Somoza Garcia was assassinated in Nicaragua in
1956; Carlos Castillo Armas, the C.I.A.'s Guatemala heir, was killed a year
later. By then, Fidel Castro had landed in Oriente Province in Cuba. Two years
later, he entered Havana.

''Crisis in Central America'' is addressing another foreign policy concern here.
It is implicit and unspoken, but it is there: no more Vietnams; no more Cubas,
either. Tomorrow night's episode, ''Castro's Challenge,'' looks at the problem.

Fidel Castro overthrew Fulgencio Batista, a thug. American moderates rejoiced,
but too quickly. Cuba soon became a Soviet client. ''Castro's Challenge'' does
not argue that world peace would have been better served with Batista, although
it does note that Mr. Castro's ascension led to the Cuban missile crisis, and
that Cuba dispatched 30,000 troops to Angola in 1975 and 10,000 troops to
Ethiopia in 1978. Batista may have been odious, but he did not export violence.

Moreover, right-wing dictatorships such as Batista's sometimes evolve into
democracies, while left-wing dictatorships such as Mr. Castro's do not. More
than one million Cubans have fled their country. Does this mean the United
States should support right-wing dictators? This is an unpalatable proposition,
and ''Crisis in Central America'' is cautious.

Therefore, we get Fred C. Ikle, an Under Secretary of Defense, raising the
possibility that Nicaragua may turn into another Cuba. Hence we should oppose
the Sandinistas. We also get Michael D. Barnes, a liberal Democratic Congressman
from Maryland, saying that the Administration has chosen the worst possible way
to deal with Nicaragua: C.I.A. involvement with old allies of the Somozas. If
anything, Mr. Barnes says, this will unite the Sandinistas and their allies
against us.


It is possible that Mr. Ikle and Mr. Barnes both share a part of the truth.
''Crisis in Central America'' is often plodding, and sometimes repetitious.
Visually, it is not nearly as gripping as ''Vietnam: A Television History,'' the
public television series with which it will most often, even if unfairly, be
compared. But it does give us a sense of complexity. In an age in which
simplistic rhetoric flourishes, that's an accomplishment of note.

''Crisis in Central America'' was produced for ''Frontline'' by WGBH in Boston
in association with the Blackwell Corporation, an independent production
company. The executive producer for the Blackwell Corporation is Neal B.
Freeman.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Fidel Castro

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DEADLY LUNG AILMENT HAS BATTLEFIELD ORIGINS

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN, M.D.

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: LOUISVILLE, Ky., April 8


It is an often fatal lung condition

that strikes suddenly and unexpectedly, often among healthy

people, producing calamitous breathing problems. Doctors first recognized it
when treating battlefield wounded in recent wars.

Now doctors diagnose the problem perhaps as many as 100,000 times a year among
American civilians who suffer it as a complication while recovering from
accidents, serious infections or operations. Two of the most recent cases were
artificial heart patients.

The condition stiffens the lungs, fills them with water and causes shortness of
breath from respiratory failure. It is called adult respiratory distress
syndrome, or ARDS, and it was invariably fatal when doctors first became aware
of it under different names in World War II and in the Vietnam War.

There is no specific therapy for ARDS, but the survival rate has improved as a
result of quicker diagnosis during its early stages and from the newer medical
technology that doctors have used as supportive therapy while giving the lungs a
chance to heal. Most important, many individuals who recover from ARDS suffer no
ill-effects thereafter.

Although doctors have called these diagnostic and therapeutic steps an extremely
important medical advance, ARDS is still often fatal.

According to surgeons at the University of Arizona Medical Center in Tucson,
ARDS killed Thomas Creighton, the 33-year-old automobile mechanic who was given
two heart transplants and the Phoenix artificial heart in a marathon of
operations there last month.

Murray P. Haydon, the third man to receive a permanent Jarvik-7 heart, appears
to be a more fortunate victim of ARDS. Mr. Haydon's case was ''mild'' and not
life-threatening, according to his surgeon, Dr. William C. DeVries.

Mr. Haydon, a 58-year-old retired factory worker, received his new heart Feb. 17
at Humana Hospital Audubon here in Louisville. On March 18, after developing
ARDS, Mr. Haydon returned to an intensive care unit where he was put back on a
mechanical ventilator to help him breathe and to give him more oxygen.

Two weeks ago, Dr. DeVries cut a hole in Mr. Haydon's neck - a tracheotomy - to
help wean him from the mechanical respirator.

Yesterday, a Humana spokesman said Mr. Haydon was breathing with the aid of the
respirator about 25 percent of the time, mostly at night.

When Mr. Haydon breathes entirely on his own again, Dr. DeVries said, there is a
good chance that the patient will make a full recovery because all of his other
organs ''are working beautifully.''


ARDS has gone by various names such as shock lung, wet lung, and white lung
(from the appearance it can make on chest X-rays). In the Vietnam War it was
called Da Nang lung because so many cases were treated at a medical center in
that Vietnamese city.

But none of those names was particularly helpful medically, and in 1967 four
American researchers coined the current name and acronym in an article in the
British medical journal Lancet in an attempt to broaden the concepts of the
condition and to distinguish it from a problem with a similar name, respiratory
distress syndrome of newborns.

In many respects ARDS is a disorder of modern technology, striking critically
ill people whose lives have been saved by rapid medical treatment, often because
they are flown from the battlefield to military hospitals or from highway
crashes to civilian medical centers.  Yet ARDS, which covers a broad spectrum of
severity, strikes only a small percentage of those who reach the hospital under
such conditions.

As military doctors returned to private practice, they encountered a similar
lung condition among patients of all ages and many became suspicious that it was
Da Nang lung.

One of the most striking features of ARDS is that it often affects people who
have had no prior lung problem. ARDS is a syndrome that can result from a wide
variety of causes, among them: open-heart and other major surgery; pneumonia and
other serious infections; large numbers of blood transfusions; shock; burns, and
drug overdoses.

Moreover, a patient's recovery depends in part on properly identifying and
treating or removing the underlying medical condition.

Even so, the damage from ARDS to the lungs poses a major therapeutic challenge.
The lungs of an ARDS victim are stiff, heavy and almost airless. The
microscopic-sized air sacs within the lungs collapse from a condition called
pulmonary atelectasis. The lungs fill with water from another condition called
pulmonary edema, and the lungs cannot extract enough oxygen for the body's
needs.

When pathologists examine ARDS lungs at autopsy, the organs usually sink in
water instead of floating.

To counter these effects doctors became much more aggressive in their treatment
of ARDS. They used mechanical ventilators to deliver air enriched with oxygen.

Physicians who specialize in pulmonary care have also relied on other forms of
technology to provide rapid calculations of pulmonary vascular resistance and
other physiologic measures that are important guidelines in treatment.

But such therapies have their dangers.

Because the mechanical respirator must deliver air at high pressure to overcome
the stiff lungs, there is a greater chance for the development of another
complication called pneumothorax. It is the abnormal presence of air outside of
the lung but still in the chest cavity. The air compresses the lung and if the
pneumothorax is large it can kill suddenly.

Another danger is oxygen toxicity.  There is a paradox here because oxygen is
the most abundant element on earth. But it becomes highly destructive and causes
permanent damage when humans breathe it at high concentrations for more than a
few days.

Though the underlying conditions that lead to ARDS often are known, the precise
physiological factors that cause it remain a mystery. One leading theory is that
ARDS results from the activation of white blood cells, which play important
roles in the body's response to injury. In ARDS, white cells migrate to the lung
and produce the biochemical changes that lead to the cascade of complications.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 10, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON IDENTIFIES 6 SOLDIERS' REMAINS RETURNED BY HANOI

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 465 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 9


An Army laboratory has identified the remains of six American servicemen killed
in the Vietnam War, the Pentagon announced today.

The identifications were made over the past month at the Army's Central
Identification Laboratory in Honolulu, Hawaii, after the of the remains were
returned on March 20 to United States officials in Hanoi, said Michael I. Burch,
a Pentagon spokesman.

Four of the six men identified were Air Force officers who were shot down in
their aircraft over North Vietnam and later listed as missing in action. The
others, an Army officer and a Marine Corps officer, were listed as prisoners of
war who were known to have died after being captured, the Pentagon said.

The Pentagon identified the remains as belonging to these men:

Col. Melvin J. Killian of the Air Force, from Council Bluffs, Iowa, reported
lost over North Vietnam on Sept. 30, 1965.

Maj. Cleveland S. Harris of the Air Force, from Birmingham, Ala., reported lost
over North Vietnam on Feb. 29, 1968.

Maj. Chambliss M. Chesnutt of the Air Force, from Little Rock, Ark., reported
lost over North Vietnam on Sept. 30, 1965.

Capt. Michael D. Chwan of the Air Force, from Bayonne, N.J., reported lost over
North Vietnam Sept. 30, 1965.

Sgt. Gerasimo Arroyo-Baez of the Army, from Maunabo, P.R., reported as captured
in South Vietnam on March 24, 1969, and later dying in captivity.

Sgt. Robert C. Sherman of the Marine Corps, from Danville, Ill., reported as
captured in South Vietnam on June 24, 1967, and later dying in captivity.  Maj.
Keith Schneider, an Army spokesman, said there were 35 other men listed as dying
in captivity in South Vietnam whose remains had not been recovered.

Remains to Arrive on CoastIn releasing the names, the Pentagon said the six
bodies would be transported by plane from Hickam Air Force Base in Hawaii to
California on Wednesday.

''We appreciate this return of remains, and combined with the recent Vietnamese
agreement to hold a minimum of six technical meetings per year, we hope it marks
the beginning of the fulfillment of the Vietnamese pledges to accelerate their
search efforts,'' the Pentagon said. It added the next meeting to discuss the
return of additional bodies would be held April 17-20 in Hanoi.

Vietnam last returned the remains of eight people to the United States in July
1984. Six were later identified as Americans.

According to the Pentagon, before the latest identifications were made 2,483
Americans were listed as missing in action in Southeast Asia as a result of the
Vietnam War. Hanoi has maintained it is not holding any American prisoners.

Since 1974 Hanoi has returned the remains of 93 Americans lost in Vietnam and in
Laos. The remains of four others have not been identified as Americans.

1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 10, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FUMIHIKO TOGO IS DEAD AT 69; FORMER TOKYO ENVOY TO U.S.

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 351 words


Fumihiko Togo, a Japanese diplomat who served as Ambassador to the United States
in the 1970's, died of cancer yesterday in Tokyo, the Japanese Foreign Ministry
announced. He was 69 years old.

After his return from Washington and retirement in 1980, Mr. Togo continued to
serve the Foreign Ministry as an adviser. He also wrote a memoir, ''Twenty Years
of Japan-United States Diplomacy.''

Mr. Togo joined the Foreign Service in 1939, a graduate of what was then Tokyo
Imperial University. Sent to Harvard University for further studies, he was
stranded by the outbreak of war and briefly interned before returning to Japan
in an exchange of diplomats.

In 1960, Mr. Togo became chief of the security section of the Foreign Ministry's
North American Affairs Bureau. As such, he figured in negotiations to revise the
two countries' security treaty.

Consul General in New York

He came to New York in 1963 as Consul General after holding the same position in
Calcutta. By the late 1960's, Mr. Togo headed the North American Affairs Bureau
in Tokyo.

He was named Ambassador to South Vietnam in 1970 but returned to Tokyo to become
assistant to the senior Deputy Foreign Minister. Infighting among the governing
conservatives propelled him in 1974 into the post of Deputy Foreign Minister.

He arrived in Washington as Ambassador in early 1976. During his tenure, Mr.
Togo rebutted charges in Congress and elsewhere that Tokyo was manipulating the
exchange rate for the yen, unfairly subsidizing steel and television sets sold
in this country and engaging in other questionable trade practices.

''The right remedy for an industry faced with competition,'' the Ambassador told
American steelmakers, ''is to become more competitive.''

Mr. Togo also sought to impress American audiences with the need for a continued
United States presence in the Far East as the key to the region's security and
political stability.

Mr. Togo is survived by his wife, Ise, and their twin sons, Shigehiko, who
reports from Tokyo for The Washington Post, and Kazuhiko, a Foreign Ministry
official.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

The Urge to Help Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 492 words


Cambodia remains perhaps the most pitiful victim of the Indochina wars and it is
again contending for a modest American involvement. The House Foreign Affairs
Committee, hardly a nest of hawks, has voted 24 to 9 for a $5 million military
aid program to two small non-Communist armies resisting Vietnam's six-year-old
occupation. If that is a policy worth adopting - and the Administration has
changed its mind and thinks it may be - that meager sum ought to be an
embarrassment.

Surely the sponsors either mean only to churn a few headlines or to clear the
way for a much larger new commitment. If it is a down payment, then Americans
had better decide what they really seek to achieve and what the total bill might
be.

The conflict in Cambodia has been mainly a war between two distasteful Communist
forces, the Cambodian Khmer Rouge and the Vietnamese. A decade ago this month,
Phnom Penh was ''liberated'' by the indigenous Communists, led by Pol Pot. They
murdered millions in a horrendous attempt to lobotomize a whole society. But
they also attacked Vietnamese villages along the disputed border, giving Hanoi a
long-sought pretext to invade. The Russians backed Vietnam, China the Khmer
Rouge.

Though recoiling from direct involvement, the United States has refused to
recognize Hanoi's Cambodian puppet regime. That has required awarding a United
Nations seat to an insurgent coalition dominated by the detestable Khmer Rouge.
But Washington has rejected China's importunings to supply the resistance,
leaving it only with frustrated mutterings.

In recent months, Thailand and its allies in the Asean bloc have urged American
help for two non- Communist armies whose camps on the Thai border are under
fierce Vietnamese attack. One is led by former Prime Minister Son Sann; a still
smaller army is loyal to Cambodia's former chief of state, Prince Norodom
Sihanouk.

Prominent House Democrats have taken up the idea, contending that strengthening
the non-Communist forces might induce Vietnam to pull out its 160,000 troops.
They argue that even $5 million means a lot to insurgent forces totaling 25,000,
and that in any case helping them is a principled act, comparable to helping
insurgents in Afghanistan.

However principled, that pittance won't make the non-Communists a match for Pol
Pot's Khmer Rouge army of 30,000 inside Cambodia. And it is their zealotry that
gives the Vietnamese the pretext for remaining in Cambodia. No diplomatic deal
seems feasible as long as Pol Pot lurks in the wings. And no modest American aid
will undermine Pol Pot until China rejects him and helps to create a broader,
more palatable resistance coalition.

Even a large aid program is likely to be matched by Vietnam's Soviet allies.
Perhaps there are inducements that would persuade Vietnam to withdraw - notably
guarantees against the Khmer Rouge's return to power. But that is not now a
guarantee the United States can credibly give.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD ;
Cambodian Rebel Says He Needs U.S. Arms

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 114 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 10


The leader of the main non-Communist Cambodian guerrilla group said today that
his forces needed American military aid to help it fight against Vietnamese
forces in Cambodia.

After meeting with Secretary of State George P. Shultz, Son Sann, who leads the
Khmer People's National Liberation Front, said in an interview that with new
arms his group planned to regroup into small hit-and-run guerrilla units of
about 100 men each.

Previously, the Cambodian insurgents were grouped around large camps housing
Cambodian refugees along the border with Thailand. But in recent months,
Vietnamese forces have largely destroyed these camps, forcing the population to
flee to Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FAMILIES RELIEVED BY RETURN OF SIX BODIES FROM VIETNAM

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 826 words


Capt. Michael Chwan, an Air Force flier from Bayonne, N.J., met Dana Bass at a
party in February 1964, and they were married soon thereafter. Fourteen months
later, in September 1965, his jet was shot down over North Vietnam. Mrs. Chwan
was three months pregnant at the time.

On Tuesday, almost 20 years later, she was told that her husband's body had been
identified as one of six returned in March by Vietnam.

''I was shocked after 19 and a half years,'' Mrs. Chwan said. ''I never really
expected that his body would be returned to be buried in American soil.'' She
and relatives of the other servicemen voiced a sense of relief at the return of
the remains.

Mrs. Chwan was not at her home in Tampa, Fla., when two Air Force officers
arrived to tell her the news. Instead, they met her daughter, Michelle, now 19,
who had never seen her father. ''I didn't think I would cry but I couldn't help
it,'' Miss Chwan said.

Officials of the United States Pacific Command said the United States and
Vietnam have agreed to meet in Hanoi for three days beginning April 17 for
discussions on the possible return of more bodies.

102 Bodies Returned

To date, the Vietnamese have returned the remains of 102 people. Of these, 99
have been identified as missing Americans. An Air Force spokesman, Lieut. Col.
Richard Stevenson, said that 2,477 Americans, including 42 civilians, lost in
the war in Southeast Asis remained unaccounted for.

Besides Captain Chwan, the other servicemen whose remains were released in Hanoi
March 20 by the Vietnamese Government were Col. Melvin J. Killian of the Air
Force, of Council Bluffs, Iowa; Maj. Cleveland S. Harris of the Air Force, of
Birmingham, Ala.; Maj. Chambliss Chesnutt of the Air Force, of Little Rock,
Ark.; Sgt. Gerasimo Arroyo-Baez of the Army, of Maunabo, P.R., and Sgt. Robert
Sherman of the Marines, of Danville, Ill.

The bodies were identified at the Army's Central Identification Laboratory in
Honolulu. Vietnamese authorities originally indicated that the remains of five
men were being returned, but the investigators found that the remains of a sixth
man also were included.

Wife Was Told of Crash

Mrs. Chwan said she never expected to see her husband alive again because
another pilot told her he saw the plane crash and that the crew could not have
survived.

Captain Chwan was the navigator of the F4-C fighter-bomber. The pilot was Major
Chesnutt, whose remains also were returned Tuesday. Patti Chesnutt, his wife,
who now lives in Houston, characterized the return of her husband's remains as
''the last chapter.''

''I didn't know what to say 20 years ago,'' she said. ''I still don't know what
to say.''

In Danville, Ill, David Sherman, 42, a brother of Sergeant Sherman, said the
family had been notified in 1967, first that his brother was missing and later
that he was a prisoner of war in South Vietnam. In 1968, the family was informed
that the sergeant had died. Two years later, in 1970, two fellow prisoners who
had been released told the family they had been with Sergeant Sherman when he
died of malnutrition.

''After 16 years, you figure he's over there and is going to stay over there,''
David Sherman said. ''You don't expect it when they say they're bringing your
brother home.''

''I can go to bed at night now and know where he is,'' said Clara Harris, the
mother of Major Harris. ''Just not knowing, that's what hurts.''

Harold Killian, the brother of Colonel Killian, said he never thought his
brother had survived. Mr. Killian, a retired Air Force colonel now living in San
Diego, said his brother was flying a Thunderjet when he got hit. ''When they
last saw him, his head and helmet were lying over against the canopy,'' he said.
''He was either dead or unconscious when the airplane hit the ground.''

Daughter in Flying School

Mr. Killian said his brother's nine children were grown now and that the
youngest daughter, who was 18 months old when her father was shot down, is now
in flying school.

The four Air Force fliers all died in crashes in the 1965-1968 period. Sergeant
Arroyo-Baez, like Sergeant Sherman, died in captivity. The Pacific Command said
it was the first time the Vietnamese had returned the remains of anyone who had
died in captivity.

Sergeant Arroyo-Baez was 38 years old and serving his second tour of duty in
Vietnam when he was taken prisoner March 24, 1969, but it was not until Oct. 15,
1976, that the Government in Vietnam said he had died in a prison camp. The
announcement did not say how or when he died. He entered the Army in 1954 and
was promoted to staff sergeant after his capture.

Sergeant Arroyo-Baez, the father of nine children, was married when he was 16
years old. His widow, Agustina Arroyo-Baez, said she was 15 at the time they
were married. ''I now have 22 grandchildren,'' she said. ''I wish they had given
more information about how and when he died.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'Tracers' Is Extended

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 41 words


Performances of ''Tracers,'' a play about the Vietnam War featuring the Vietnam
Veterans Ensemble Theater Company, have been extended through May 26 at the New
York Shakespeare Festival Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, near Astor
Place.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U. S. EDITORS DESCRIBED AS REMISS ON REPORTING THE PLIGHT OF BLACKS

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 11


A politician, an academic and a journalist, all black, today told the nation's
newspaper editors that they were not reporting vital aspects of the black
experience in the United States, especially what were described as damaging
changes in civil rights policies by the Reagan Administration.

''For the first time in 25 years, there is an Administration hostile to
aspirations of racial equality,'' Julian Bond, a Georgia State Senator, told the
members of the American Society of Newspaper Editors, whose members represent
most of the nation's daily papers. They are here for their annual convention.

''It's a radical, radical, radical, radical shift, and it's a frightening
story,'' Mr. Bond said, adding that the ''public has no idea'' that it had
happened.

Mr. Bond's denunciation of the press coverage on the issue was vigorously
seconded by Eleanor Holmes Norton, a professor of law at Georgetown University,
and Wallace Terry, a journalist who has worked for Time and The Washington Post.
He is the author of ''Bloods,'' a recently published book about black soldiers
who served in Vietnam.

''The press is reporting from a well of ignorance on affirmative action,''
Professor Norton said, adding that the performance was especially troubling
because of the vital role played by the nation's news organizations in the civil
rights movement of the 1960's. She said they ''did as much as all the marches,
speeches, posturing and probably legislation'' to help blacks.

'A Very Important Story'

''I think they put their finger on a very important story,'' said Richard D.
Smyser, president of the society, who is editor of The Oak Ridger in Oak Ridge,
Tenn.

Mr. Terry was also critical of the editors for assembling an all-black panel to
discuss the black experience but having no black panelists for other segments of
the program, such as a discussion of criticism of the arts.

The relationship of minority groups to the nation's newspapers has emerged as an
important, if unsettling, theme of this year's meeting of the society.

Earlier in the week, the editors were given a study showing there had been no
growth in the proportion of members of minority groups in the nation's newsrooms
in 1984 after several years of increases.

A.S.N.E. defines minorities as American Indians, Asian-Americans, blacks and
Hispanic Americans. They accounted for 5.72 percent of the nation's newsroom
employees in 1984, a drop from 5.76 percent in 1983.

Of the nation's approximately 53,800 newsroom employees, about 3,080 are from
minority groups, according to a census of minority employment, which the society
has conducted annually since 1978 in an effort to increase hiring of minority
group members.

A.S.N.E. has formally adopted a minority hiring goal for the year 2000 under
which newsrooms would have proportionally as many members of minority groups as
society does as a whole.Minority groups constituted about 20 percent of the
population in 1980, a figure expected to reach 25 percent by 1990, according to
census data.

Newsroom Representation

In 1978, members of from minority groups filled 1,700 of 43,000 newsroom jobs,
or 3.95 percent, according to the census, which estimates that about 60 percent
of the nation's newspapers have no members of minority groups on their news
staffs.

''It's going to take us 20 or 30 years to fully integrate our newsrooms,'' said
Robert P. Clark, the society's vice president, who is vice president for news
for Harte-Hanks Newspapers, a Texas-based communications company. ''There are a
lot of editors who just don't believe in it because of their own bias or because
they say, 'I don't have any minority readers, why should I have any minority
staff members?' ''

But despite the report on lack of progress in minority hiring, Mr. Clark and
many other editors working for integrated newsrooms say they are encouraged by
events of the past year.

The society sponsored eight job conferences in 1984 aimed at helping minority
journalists find jobs, and 16 such conferences are planned for 1985.

Other projects have been undertaken aimed at special problems. For instance, the
Institute for Journalism Education, which is financed by the Gannett Foundation,
the New York Times Foundation and other communications companies and
foundations, created a program to prepare journalists from minority groups for
management positions. The program is run in cooperation with Northwestern
University's Kellogg Graduate School of Management and its Medill School of
Journalism.

Workshop Is Packed

An early-morning workshop at the convention on how to recruit minority group
members was packed.

''The problem is that the industry as a whole, knowingly or not, has a double
set of standards, and isn't willing to take a chance,'' said Mervin Aubespin,
president of the National Association of Black Journalists, who is special
assistant to the executive editor for The Courier-Journal in Louisville, Ky. He
was referring to the frequent complaint by editors that they cannot find
qualified journalists from minority groups.

But Mr. Aubespin was also critical of journalists from minority groups who were
unwilling to start at small newspapers.

Although about 39 percent of the nation's daily newspapers have circulations of
less than 10,000, only about 5 percent of the nation's minority group editors,
reporters and photographers work for them. Minority group journalists frequently
complain that they are uncomfortable at such newspapers because they are
frequently the only journalists from minority groups employed there, and they
may be in towns with few residents from minority groups.

According to the census, all newspapers with circulations of more than 100,000
employ journalists who are members of minority groups. The larger the newspaper,
the more likely it is members of minority groups occupy senior positions.

But though large newspapers are aggressive in interviewing minority group
members at job conferences for new and relatively inexperienced journalists,
they do little hiring at them, according to Mr. Aubespin.

''It's a farm club industry,'' he said, ''and minority journalists are going to
have to look at jobs in smaller communities, regardless.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ENVER HOXHA, MASTERMIND OF ALBANIA'S ISOLATION

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1570 words


Enver Hoxha, the Albanian leader, who died in Tirana yesterday, kept his
isolated mountain country rigidly cordoned off for four decades.

Historically preyed on since Greek and Roman times, Albania maintained its
independence under his defiantly Stalinist leadership. But his policies also
left Albania with few friends abroad as his Government broke with a succession
of more powerful foreign benefactors and protectors.

Mr. Hoxha derived his absolute powers at home from his positions as First
Secretary of the Albanian Workers (Communist) Party and Commander in Chief of
the armed forces.

''Let everyone understand clearly, the walls of our fortress are of unshakeable
granite rock,'' he wrote in one of the many volumes of memoirs, some containing
reminiscences of Stalin, that he penned over the years. More than 40 volumes of
speeches and reminiscences by Mr. Hoxha were published.

 Resonant Passages

His writing contained resonant passages. In 1982, after asserting that
''imperialists and their lackeys say that we have isolated ourselves from the
'civilized world,' '' he added this ringing sentence:

''Both the bitter history of our country in the past and the reality of the
'world' that they advertise have convinced us that it is by no means a
'civilized world,' but a world in which the bigger and stronger oppress and flay
the smaller and the weaker, in which money and corruption make the law, and
injustice, perfidy and backstabbing triumph.''

Albania was one of the first Communist countries to denounce the revisionism of
Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia, siding with Stalin in 1948. Then, Mr. Hoxha cut
his ties with the Soviet Union, too, at the height of Nikita S.  Khrushchev's
de-Stalinization campaign in 1961, about the time of the Chinese-Soviet split.

Mr. Hoxha began to rely on China for material support. True to the old Balkan
saying that the enemy of my enemy is my friend, Mr. Hoxha became a vocal, albeit
increasingly irrelevant, supporter of Mao Zedong when he found himself isolated
from the Soviet bloc.

 Chill in Ties With China

But again Mr. Hoxha grew disillusioned. The thaw in Chinese-American relations
chilled Albania's friendship with China, and their cordiality turned into a rift
that, by 1982, stopped just short of a break.

Albania then nurtured tentative contacts with Greece and Turkey, though the
Hoxha Government's treatment of ethnic minorities, particularly the ethnic
Greeks, strained such efforts. In fact, Vietnam remained just about the only
country with which Albania had a close, if hardly profitable, relationship.

Domestically, Mr. Hoxha's objective was to modernize and industrialize what was
generally regarded as one of the most backward countries in Europe, although
travelers from more developed lands have reported, in recent years, that Tirana,
with its old cobblestone streets and sparse auto traffic, retained an almost
19th-century air.

Over the years, the Hoxha Government was given credit for eliminating
illiteracy. But it also repressed religion, true to Mr. Hoxha's dictum that
Albania had been made into ''the world's first atheist state, whose only
religion is Albanianism.'' Public observances of religion were prohibited.

 Problems for Ethnic Greeks

Ethnic minorities among the nearly 3 million people of Albania were harassed to
the extent that ethnic Greeks, for instance, were forced to change Greek-
sounding names. Only recently, according to visitors, some teaching of Greek was
allowed in the schools as Albania edged toward a more open policy toward Greece.

Through it all, Mr. Hoxha maintained his grip on the tiller, foiling plots,
presiding over bloody purges and mass imprisonments of those opposing or not
quick enough to heed official changes in course.

Soon after Albania announced in 1981 that Mehmet Shehu, the longtime Prime
Minister, had committed suicide, there were unconfirmed reports that he had in
fact been killed. But Mr. Hoxha, in a book published in 1982, affirmed that Mr.
Shehu had committed suicide.

Accordingly, Western analysts gave attention to a sentence in an article that
appeared last February in the Albanian party daily, Zeri i Popullit. In a
translation distributed by the Albanian mission to the United Nations, Mr. Shehu
was called a ''secret agent of the Americans, Soviets and Yugoslavs'' who ''was
liquidated because he met with the unbreakable unity of the party with the
people.''

Doubts About Slaying Remain

Members of the Albanian-American community in New York contended that the
translation was misleading and that the Albanian verb translated as ''was
liquidated'' had been used in a figurative sense, which did not mean that Mr.
Shehu had been killed.

They noted that the article also said: ''The story on Mehmet Shehu's case has
been described at length in all its aspects in the already known book by Comrade
Hoxha.''

In addition to concentrating on internal security, the Hoxha Government, in its
last years, took steps to open transportation ties with its neighbors, Greece
and Yugoslavia, although relations with them were chill.

And by last year, there were other indications that Albania was becoming less
isolated and was looking for new ties to other countries. In March 1984, it
signed a more extensive trade pact with Italy, which also agreed to enlarge
cultural ties.

 Son of a Moslem Merchant

Enver Hoxha - the name is pronounced enn-VEHR HAW-dja - was born Oct. 16, 1908,
in Gjinokaster, a market town in southern Albania. His father was a Moslem cloth
merchant. He was educated on a scholarship at a French secondary school in Korce
and, at age 22, he went to France to study at the University of Montpellier.

While in France, he wrote for the Communist newspaper L'Humanite. In 1934 he was
appointed a secretary in the Albanian consulate in Brussels, where he took a law
course and continued writing for the French daily.

Since his articles were critical of the Government of Albania - then a monarchy
under King Zog - his consular appointment was canceled after two years, but he
managed to return home and accept a job as a French teacher at his old school in
Korce. His continuing attacks on the Government resulted in a brief jail term in
early 1939.

Underground During Italian Rule

The Italian Army of Mussolini conquered Albania later that year, forcing out
King Zog and placing Albania under the Italian crown. An Albanian puppet
government, having joined the Axis in World War II, declared war on the Allies
in 1940.

Mr. Hoxha, who had gone underground, became the founder and leader of the
Albanian Communist Party in 1941. He was also editor of Zeri i Popullit, the
party paper.

He first operated out of a Tirana tobacco shop that served as a front for his
Communist activities. The Italians never caught him, but he had to take to the
mountains, where he received assistance from Soviet officers who landed in
Albania by parachute as well as from American and British liaison officers.

The former French teacher built a guerrilla force of 70,000 men that battled the
Italian and later the Germans, who sought to back up their ally for about a
year.

After Italy's surrender to the Allies in World War II, its forces withdrew from
Albania and the Communist guerrillas proclaimed a provisional government in
October 1944, with Enver Hoxha, by then holding the rank of general, as Prime
Minister and Defense Minister. This government was recognized by the Western
allies later in 1945 with the understanding that free elections would be held.

Single List of Candidates Offered

When the balloting took place, there was only a single list of candidates,
sponsored by the Communists. A People's Republic was proclaimed in Albania in
January 1946, and the United States and Britain revoked their recognition and
blocked Albania from joining the United Nations until 1955.

The Yugoslav Communists, who had helped the Albanian guerrillas from the
beginning, had a monetary and customs union with the new Albania. But Mr. Hoxha,
fearful of Belgrade's supremacy, cut all ties with the Yugoslavs at the time of
the Stalin-Tito break in 1948. He also renamed his ruling Communist Party the
Workers Party.

In 1954, Mr. Hoxha turned over the premiership to Mehmet Shehu, but remained the
overlord as party chief, changing his title from General Secretary to First
Secretary.

After Albania's break with the Soviet Union in 1961, Mr. Hoxha prevailed in a
number of power struggles and in an attempted military coup in 1974, involving
his own Minister of Defense. The minister and several army officers were
executed.

Half of Central Committee Killed

In fact, nearly half of the 31 members of the party's Central Committee of 1948
were put to death in the years that followed. More recently, economic
difficulties led to renewed political strife and hundreds of officials were
reportedly thrown into prisons for resisting such policy moves as the break with
the Chinese, who had served as one of Albania's main supports in its quest for
economic development.

General Hoxha, a tall and impressive-looking man, was married to Nexhmije Hoxha,
a schoolteacher whom he had met in the wartime guerrilla movement. She became a
member of the Central Committee and served after 1969 as director of the
Institute for Marxist-Leninist Studies in Tirana.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Enver Hoxha

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

37 DOCUMENTARY FILMS AT THE PUBLIC

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 706 words


The film maker John Grierson, who first used the term ''documentary'' in
connection with movies, once said such a film created ''a magical opening in the
theater wall, through which one may look out to the wide world.''

Thirty-seven films that seek to create that same magical opening can be seen,
starting tonight, at the Global Village 11th Annual Documentary Festival,
presented by the New York Shakespeare Festival at Joseph Papp's Public Theater.

Grierson, a producer, director, critic and the founder of the British
documentary movement, used the word in a review of Robert Flaherty's ''Moana''
in The New York Sun in 1926. Although he derived the term from documentaire, a
word the French used to describe travelogues, he believed documentaries should
be much more than travel films, urging that they be used for social and economic
good, to help eliminate poverty, oppression and war.

The festival at the Public, which continues through next Thursday, contains many
examples from Grierson's descendants. The subjects of the films include women
speaking out on sexual politics in rural China; angry employees stricken with
cobalt poisoning; the struggles of Indians in North and South America;
teen-agers coming of age in Muncie, Ind.; the legacy of a father, a son and the
Holocaust; life in a Puerto Rican community in the Williamsburg section of
Brooklyn, and the United States presence in El Salvador.



'Daring' Works Sought

''We looked for works that are on the cutting edge of the documentary form,
works that look at the world in daring new ways,'' said John Reilly, who, with
Julie Gustafson, directs Global Village, a nonprofit video production group and
media center in SoHo, at 454 Broome Street.

There will be showings at 7 and 9:30 P.M. weekdays and at 4:30, 7 and 9:30 P.M.
tomorrow and Sunday. Many programs feature two or more films.

At tonight's opening, the winner of the Best Film Award, ''Small Happiness:
Women of a Chinese Village,'' will be honored and screened at 7 P.M. The film,
by Carma Hinton and Richard Gordon, was shown earlier this week in the New
Directors/New Films series at the Museum of Modern Art. It is a look at village
women as they begin to evolve from the status of servants to their husbands and
in-laws, becoming fuller members of the community. They speak about love and
marriage, childbearing and birth control, foot binding and a strike in an
all-female workshop.

The title ''Small Happiness'' refers to the Chinese society's preference for
male children. One man explains: ''To give birth to a boy is considered a big
happiness. To give birth to a girl is small happiness. Well, you can't say it's
no happiness at all.''

One film to be screened at tonight's 9:30 show is Helena Solberg-Ladd's ''Home
of the Brave,'' an honorable- mention winner about Indians in North, Central and
South America battling for self-determination.



'Seventeen' Scheduled Tomorrow

Joel Demott and Jeff Kreines's ''Seventeen,'' about teen-agers in Muncie, will
be shown tomorrow at 7. Anthony Herrera's ''Mississippi Delta Blues,'' a
portrait of the blues singer Son Thomas, will be seen at 9:30. It also won
honorable mention.

Among Sunday's highlights are ''West of Hester Street,'' the story of Eastern
European Jews who migrated to Texas at the turn of the century, at 4:30, and at
9:30, another honorable-mention winner, ''Kaddish,'' about the Holocaust's
legacy.

''Los Sures'' (''The Southside''), portraits of five people who live in the
''Southside'' part of Williamsburg, will be seen Tuesday at 9:30, and ''Witness
to War: Dr. Charlie Clements,'' about a former pilot in Vietnam who is a doctor
behind rebel lines in El Salvador, will be shown Thursday at 9:30. Both received
honorable mention.

The winner of the Best Video Award, John Alpert's ''Hard Metal Disease,'' will
be screened Wednesday at 9:30. It deals with people who worked for one
corporation and who all have cobalt sickness. The winners were chosen by Mr.
Reilly, Deirdre Boyle, a film critic, and St. Claire Bourne, an independent
producer.

The Public is at 425 Lafayette Street, near Astor Place. Admission is $4, with a
special rate of $3 for students and the elderly (966-7526).


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WEEKENDER GUIDE

BYLINE: By Leslie Bennetts Friday SPENDER LOOKS AT SHAKESPEARE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1173 words


During the 1930's, Sir Stephen Spender and some of his fellow ''bright young
poets'' - W. H. Auden, Christopher Isherwood, Louis MacNeice, C. D. Lewis -
revolutionized English poetry, influencing an entire generation of writers.
They, of course, were influenced by their own literary antecedents, and this
weekend Sir Stephen will share his views on one of literature's most
inexhaustible sources of inspiration - William Shakespeare. Tonight at 8
o'clock, Sir Stephen will deliver the Groves Lecture on ''Shakespeare and the
Literature of the 20th Century'' at Adelphi University. Tomorrow, the poet will
take part in an all-day poetry conference - from 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. - on
''Poetry Between the Wars,'' reading from and discussing his own works. Both
events are free and will be held at the Ruth S. Harley University Center, which
is on South Avenue, between Nassau Boulevard and Rockaway Avenue, in Garden
City, L.I. Information: (516) 663-1120.  OPERA FOR YOUNGSTERS AND GROWN-UPS


Performances of Scarlatti operas are rare, and this one had to wait 255 years to
receive its American premiere in 1976. Tonight, Alessandro Scarlatti's
''Griselda'' will be presented by the Opera Shop of the Vineyard Theater in a
production said to be only the second ever staged in this country. Based on the
10th tale of the 10th day in Boccaccio's ''Decameron'' - a legend best known as
the ''Clerk's Tale'' in Chaucer's ''Canterbury Tales'' - ''La Griselda'' is the
story of a long-suffering queen abused and tormented by her husband. For younger
audiences - including those young at heart - the Vineyard is also presenting
Giovanni Battista Pergolesi's comic opera ''La Serva Padrona'' as part of its
program of introducing opera to young people. ''La Griselda'' will go on tonight
at 7:30; tickets are $10 and $12. ''La Serva Padrona'' begins tomorrow at 1 and
3 with tickets at $5. The address is 309 East 26th Street. Information:
683-0696. POETRY FROM THE HOLOCAUST


Based on the posthumously discovered poems of a 17- year-old girl, ''They Never
Had a Chance to Live'' is an original presentation that will mark the annual
observance of Holocaust Day during the Sabbath eve service at Temple Rodeph
Sholom in Manhattan tonight. The program, which also draws on the writings of
Anne Frank and other young victims of the Holocaust, will be narrated by Rabbi
Gunter Hirschberg, who translated the poems, accompanied by original music by
Gershon Kingsley. The service will be held at 8 P.M. at 7 West 83d Street.
Another memorial - ''The First Tribute to the One Million Chil


GOG jump

dren of the Holocaust'' - will be held on Sunday at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall
in Lincoln Center. The program, which is free, will feature such luminaries as
Mary Tyler Moore, Roberta Peters, Tony Roberts, Joseph Papp and Tovah Feldshuh
presenting music, readings and dramatizations of the poetry, letters and diaries
of children who died in concentration camps.

Saturday OFFBEAT CHOREOGRAPHY


A version of Handel's ''Hallelujah Chorus'' celebrating female rather than male
divinity, and a quintet combining Latin nightclub dance with juggling routines
may sound a trifle unusual, but then Johanna Boyce is a choreographer noted for
her originality. Her programs are regularly praised for their vividly evocative
intelligence and wit. ''Johanna Boyce With the Calf Women and Horse Men'' is
being offered this weekend by the Dance Theater Workshop, with performances
Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 in the Bessie Sch"onberg Theater at 219 West
19th Street. Tickets are $7; reservations may be made by calling 924-0077.  ART
FAIR EXTRAVAGANZA


Whether your passions run to the use of robotics, holography and laser systems
in art or to theater-related art and stage memorabilia, you should find
something of interest among the paintings, sculpture, etchings, lithographs,
tapestries, video and electronic art, photography, posters and other exhibits at
''ArtExpo N.Y.,'' an international art exposition at the New York Coliseum. It
is said to be the world's largest art fair, and it is big indeed, featuring more
than $50 million in art from 350 exhibiting galleries, artists and dealers
representing more than 20 countries. The fair is open Saturday from 11 A.M.
until 8 P.M. and Sunday from 11 until 7. Tickets are $6; the number for
information is 935-7607.  RICHARD WRIGHT DRAMA


''Almos' a Man,'' Richard Wright's short story about a 16-year-old black field
hand during the Depression, provides the inspiration for a musical drama by
Paris Barclay now being presented by the SoHo Rep. Performances Saturday are at
6 and 9:30 P.M. and Sunday at 4, at 401 East 29th Street. Tickets are $8. The
number for information is 925-2588.  Sunday POE EVERMORE


He came looking for literary recognition, and he got it. Exactly 141 years ago,
Edgar Allan Poe arrived in New York City, and wrote some of his best- known
works - including ''The Raven'' and ''Annabel Lee'' - while living in what is
now known as the Edgar Allan Poe Cottage in the Bronx. It is, therefore, Edgar
Allan Poe Week, and the annual tribute by the Bronx County Historical Society
will include a Poe film festival, song and dance, lectures and other programs
that begin Sunday with a one- man show called ''Poe in Person.'' Conrad
Pomerleau, a veteran of the Shakespeare Repertory Theater in Stratford, Conn.,
will offer interpretations of Poe's prose and poetry at 7:30 P.M. in Gillet
Auditorium at Lehman College, Bedford Park Boulevard and Goulden Avenue.
Admission is $3. Information: 881-8900.  MUSIC FROM VIETNAM


A rare opportunity to hear traditional Vietnamese music played on authentic
instruments will be offered Sunday at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in a
concert sponsored by the Society for Asian Music. Love songs, Buddhist hymns,
chants and instrumental pieces from Vietnam will be presented by Dr. Phong
Nguyen and Kim Oanh on the dan tranh, a 16- string board zither; a dan nguyet,
or two-stringed moon-shaped lute; a ty ba, or pear-shaped lute with four
strings; coin clappers and wooden clappers, drums and cymbals. The concert will
take place at 2:30 P.M. at the Uris Auditorium at 81st Street and Fifth Avenue.
Tickets are $7. Information: 663-0584.  MAXIMUM MINIMALISM


When ''Three Voices'' was given its premiere at the 1983 California Institute of
the Arts Contemporary Music Festival, a New York critic said it justified a trip
across the country all by itself. This weekend, New Yorkers only have to go
downtown to hear Joan La Barbara perform this minimalist piece for voice and
pre- re corded tapes composed for her by Morton Feldman. A pioneering figure in
experimental music, Miss La Barbara has been hailed as a vocal wizard whose
works explore a new vocabulary of sound. Her exceptional voice has made her a
popular vocalist for such avant-garde artists as John Cage, Philip Glass and
Steve Reich. Sunday's performance will be at 8 P.M. at the Alternative Museum,
17 White Street. Admission is $8. Information: 966-4444.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 13, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PROTESTS AT COLUMBIA: STUDENTS AND ISSUES HAVE CHANGED SINCE THE 60'S

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1107 words


Columbia students are sitting-in on the steps of Hamilton Hall again, just as
they did in something called ''the 60's'' - a phrase that conjures both a time
and a state of mind.  To some, these new protests at Columbia University are
like the buds of spring on the quadrangle, the first signs of a new student
activism after a long winter.

But these are very different times, others say. The issues are different, the
attitudes are different - the only real constant is the building.

Yet that earlier time is a presence, nonetheless, that in tangible ways is
influencing what happens today.

To the students, the Columbia protests of the spring of 1968 are a received
memory, something they learn about almost the way they learn of such events as
the assassination of President John F. Kennedy or the war in a land called
Vietnam. It is a legacy they may not have fully understood at first and would
now just as soon separate themselves from.

To the university administration, the protests - in which the police were called
to clear out students who had occupied Hamilton Hall and four other buildings -
are a specter and a lesson, a symbol of how badly things can go wrong when
mishandled.

In 1968, the protests focused at first on defense-related research, then
broadened to issues including support for the Harlem community's objections to a
gymnasium Columbia was planning for Morningside Park.

In 1985, the students have taken the steps of Hamilton Hall to demand that
Columbia University, which has an endowment of just under a billion dollars, not
invest any of this money in companies doing business with South Africa because
of its policy of apartheid.

The university has already restricted such investments to $32.5 million, but it
is reluctant to simply write off many of America's biggest corporations.

The protest comes as opponents of the South African government almost daily
offer themselves up for arrest at the South African consulates in New York and
Washington, on a charge of what could be called trespasssing with intent to end
apartheid.

The Columbia students, conducting the first real sit-in anyone can remember on
the campus since the end of the Vietnam War, say they are prepared to be
arrested, too, in the same peaceful fashion. They have even tried to negotiate
with the university on terms for the arrests.

But they have underestimated the impact of history. Calling the police on campus
is, in the words of one senior administrator, ''anathema'' to much of the
Columbia faculty and administration who remember the fire last time.

The administrators who run Columbia cannot help but have in mind the events of
the spring of 1968 when thousands of students participated in what was variously
described as an uprising, a protest, a rebellion or a riot.

The students seized five buildings, and after a week of indecision, mediation
and debate, the college president, Dr. Grayson Kirk, asked the police onto the
campus in the dead of night to clear the buildings.

The result was awful, everyone now agrees. The students resisted. The police
officers used fists and nightsticks. Many students were injured, and hundreds
were arrested. There was a law professor on campus that spring named Michael I.
Sovern. After the clash between the police and students, Professor Sovern was
named to head a 10-member faculty committee that, to state it simply, was given
the job of putting Columbia back together.

Today, Professor Sovern is Columbia's president. He is the one who must decide
what to do about the students on the steps of Hamilton Hall.

Knowing history is not the same as learning the lessons of history, or even
knowing which lessons to learn. Dr. Sovern points this out to acquaintances by
reminding them that a cat that sits on a hot stove will never sit on a hot stove
again, but neither will it sit on a cold stove.

Little Sign of Crisis

Dr. Kirk was criticized for calling the police. But he was also criticized for
not calling them sooner, thus allowing the situation to build to a crisis.

Dr. Sovern and his aides are watching Hamilton Hall closely. But there is little
sign of crisis on the campus. Most students are going about business as usual.

That is one difference. Perhaps even more important, the students on the steps
of Hamilton Hall, almost all of them undergraduates, are very different from the
earlier protesters.

If there is one word that everyone uses to describe the students on the steps of
Hamilton Hall today, it is ''disciplined.'' Their protest has been neatly
organized to draw maximum attention with minimum disruption.

They have even computerized all of their statements and the statements of the
administration ''so we can respond quickly,'' said Wally Hays, who oversees the
desktop computer used by the protesters.

These students are not fighting the generational war of their predecessors.
''These students are often very close to their parents,'' said Dennis Dalton, a
Barnard political-science professor who has been advising several students. He
said many of the students felt considerable pressure from parents to end the
protest.

The college and the world of adults is not their enemy. ''We don't hate
President Sovern,'' said David Goldiner, a 20-year-old protest leader who
remembers being wheeled to anti-Vietnam war protests in a stroller. ''We think
we have a better argument than he does.''

Dr. Sovern met this week with five of the protesters, who had been conducting a
fast. Anyone steeped in the campus culture of the 60's might have expected
tension and invective. Instead, they had two hours of serious discussion, said
Eric Foner, a history professor who accompanied them.


Professor Foner and others say that far from being an exception to the
career-minded students who have become prevalent on campus, the protesters are
quite concerned about the danger the protest holds to their academic careers and
their chances for getting into good professional schools.

The students have clearly succeeded in getting attention for their cause, and
there are beginning to be demonstrations on other campuses.

What they have not been able to do, at least yet, is rally the student body
behind them. In 1968, a few hundred students occupied buildings, but hundreds
more, maybe thousands, milled and marched outside in support.

''In 1968 you had a spark thrown in a tinderbox,'' said Diane Ravitch, an
historian of American education. Protesters, she suggested, were able to tap a
deep well of discontent then. ''Here,'' she said, ''There's the spark but there
is no tinderbox.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 13, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM WAR MEMORIAL TO GET 300 MORE NAMES

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 568 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 12


The names of more than 300 Vietnam veterans who died outside the official combat
zone will be carved into the glossy black marble of the Vietnam Memorial,
officials said today.

''These veterans have been done an injustice,'' said Senator Don Nickles,
Republican of Oklahoma, who is behind the move. ''Just because of an arbitrary
line, they're not on the memorial.''

According to the Senator, 330 veterans were left off the V-shaped monument
because they died outside the official combat zone: Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos and
nearby coastal waters.

The two-year-old memorial already bears 58,022 names of dead or missing. It is
visited by thousands of people each day.

The delicate engraving work is to be begin as soon as the Defense Department
draws up a list of the names to be added. Many on the list will be air crews who
were killed when their bombers crashed into the Pacific en route to Vietnam.

''This was an unfortunate oversight,'' said Paul M. Lee, a spokesman for Senator
Nickles. ''If you died in a combat mission, you should be on that memorial.''

Officer's Name Left Off

The Senator became involved when an Oklahoma couple complained that their son,
Lieut. Larry Broadhead, had been left off.

Lieutenant Broadhead and five other Air Force officers died on May 10, 1969,
when their B-52 bomber crashed 12 minutes after takeoff from Guam. The plane,
fully loaded with bombs, was on its way to Vietnam. Lieutenant Broadhead, 25
years old, from Piedmont, Okla., left a wife and two children.

Until last summer, Mary Broadhead, his mother, had believed that Larry's name
was on the memorial.

''But some friends of ours went to Washington in August and I asked them to take
a picture of Larry's inscription on the memorial,'' said Mrs. Broadhead. ''They
came back and told me his name wasn't there.''

She and her husband, Leo, a retired Air Force colonel who also served in
Vietnam, approached the Air Force about their son.

''They sent us a cold letter and said Larry wasn't eligible to be on the
memorial,'' Mrs. Broadhead said. ''We were very upset. I remember that I
cried.''

Fund Reaches Agreement

''His name should be on there,'' she said. ''All these men who died, their names
should be on there, even if they have to build another memorial.''

The names originally placed on the memorial were gleaned from official lists of
casualties in the combat zone. Because Lieutenant Broadhead had died more than
1,000 miles out into the Pacific, he was not included.

Senator Nickles was contacted, and his staff met with the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial Fund, the private group that raised $8.8 million to erect the monument.
An agreement was quickly reached to add the names.

''The fund was very sensitive,'' said Paul M. Lee, a spokesman for the senator.
''They want to be as inclusive as they can. If you were a combat casualty in the
Vietnam War, you should be on that memorial.''

''We're glad to do it,'' said Jan Scruggs, president of the fund. ''I don't see
that this is anybody's fault.''

The fund has asked the memorial's architects to determine where the names should
be added.

''We can probably get close to 500 more names on the wall,'' said William Lecky,
one of the architects involved in the project. He said they would probably be
carved along the bottom of the two polished, 200-foot-long walls that make up
the memorial.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Civilians Go Farther Into Thailand

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 135 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, April 13


More than 19,000 Cambodian civilians began moving today to a site deeper inside
Thailand after intelligence reports circulated that Vietnamese forces were
closer to their camp.

Thai and international relief officials started moving the Cambodians in 55
trucks and buses from what has been called Site 6 to Site 2. Thai officers said
the move would take two days.

Site 6, straddling the Thai-Cambodian border, is opposite the Cambodian
resistance camp of Prey Chan, which has been breached by Hanoi's troops.
Fighting is continuing there between Vietnamese troops and guerrillas of the
Khmer People's National Liberation Front, one of three major guerrilla groups
opposing the Vietnamese presence in Cambodia.

Site 2 is about a mile into Thailand and already has a large Cambodian refugee
population.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CABLE TV NOTES;
EXPERIMENTATION SHAPES 'CAST IRON TV'

BYLINE: By Steve Schneider; Steve Schneider frequently reports on developments
in cable.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 28, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1367 words


For many viewers, public access - air-time provided free by cable operators to
their community - remains a virtually impenetrable forest of programming,
overgrown with erratically scheduled presentations that take up only the most
parochial of concerns. Yet, several public-access programs belie that image, and
endeavor to use cable as a means of providing innovative and substantial
alternatives to conventional television fare.

Among the most long-standing of these more ambitious projects is ''Cast Iron
TV,'' a showcase for independent video artists and documentarians, whose newest
13-week season gets underway this week. Manhattan Cable, which services the
borough south of 79th Street on the West Side and 86th Street on the East,
presents the series' 30-minute shows on its Channel D on Wednesday evenings at
7:30, with rebroadcasts on Fridays at 3 P.M.; Group W Cable, which covers the
northern end of the borough, picks up the Friday afternoon presentation, also on
Channel D.

The series was launched in 1979 by the video producer Liza Bear under the title
of ''Communications Update,'' its territory the exploration of issues in
telecommunications and related technology. In 1983, the program was somewhat
fancifully rechristened to reflect its changing orientation as a forum for
experimental video makers.

According to Milli Iatrou, who took over as the series' executive producer in
1984, ''Cast Iron TV'' has now presented about 100 different programs. These
days, said Miss Iatrou, who is 29 and has studied film production at City
College, the programs in the series tend to fall into three categories:
documentaries, satires and what she termed ''experimental narratives.''

Most of them share a playful street- smartness and a deep affinity for the
textures of life in New York City. Their looseness of form and less-than- lavish
production values are frequently used for purposeful effect, to provide an
ironic commentary on commercial television's glossiness and tired formulas.

This week's premiere, for example, is a documentary called ''What's Cooking?''
It looks at the effects of gentrification on three Lower East Side restaurants
and was produced by Lyn Tiefenbacher, Nolan Poole and Dave Pentecost. Next week
brings a pair of experimental films by Katerina Borelli, lumped under the title
''Daydreaming'': The first, ''The Date,'' follows the course of a woman's
romantic reverie; next comes ''Glances,'' an impressionistic piece about
watching and being watched. And for satire, one need look no further than ''The
Very Reverend Deacon B. Peachy,'' a spoof of unctuous television evangelists,
produced by Miss Iatrou and Ronald Morgan.

The series features not only productions that ''Cast Iron'' commissions but
previously existing video works as well, most of which are brought to Miss
Iatrou's attention by word of mouth. A ''core group of five or six'' video
artists contributes regularly to the series' original productions, Miss Iatrou
said, ''with everyone working in several capacities.''

''We're the cable equivalent of The Kitchen,'' she continued, referring to the
downtown performance and exhibition space dedicated to presenting the
experimental and the iconoclastic. ''It's our goal to show works by new video
artists who don't get shown other places, and in so doing to expand the medium
of television a little.''

Over the years, several of the productions that originated on ''Cast Iron TV''
have been shown in video festivals held in Bonn, Bologna and The Hague, as well
as at the Museum of Modern Art. The latest tribute to the series came earlier
this year when the American Museum of the Moving Image, the film archives
located in the Kaufman Studios in Astoria, Queens, screened four ''Cast Iron
TV'' segments.

''We try to show things that are experimental in form or content, but which are
accessible as well,'' Miss Iatrou explained. Accessibility, however, is somewhat
inhibited by the extremely limited budget on which the series operates - ''the
toughest thing we have to deal with,'' she said. A half-hour of ''Cast Iron TV''
typically costs $500 to produce, with some of the segments coming in for as
little as $200. Grants from the New York State Council on the Arts have helped
defray production costs.

''There's absolutely no profit to be made from this, and so we have to find
people who are willing to produce this work because they feel a need to,'' Miss
Iatrou said. ''As a result, the content is usually interesting, but the form can
be somewhat rough. I fear that it may be difficult for viewers used to the
slickness of commercial television just to see what's going on.

''The importance of public access is that it lets other voices be heard on
television,'' she added. ''It's one of the more democratic aspects of
telecommunications.'' Double Duty


Both HBO and Showtime have recently signed 10-year licensing agreements with
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer/ United Artists, giving the pay-cable giants access to the
some 4,700 films in the M-G-M/UA library. The collection includes all M-G-M and
UA movies, as well as all Warner Brothers titles made before 1950.

''The M-G-M/UA library is generally considered the greatest treasure trove of
films in the world,'' said Fred Schneier, Showtime's senior vice president of
program acquisition and program enterprises. Among its titles are such Academy
Award-winners for best picture as ''An American in Paris,'' ''Casablanca,''
''West Side Story,'' ''Grand Hotel'' and ''Rocky''; other acclaimed films
include ''The Maltese Falcon,'' ''North by Northwest,'' ''The Philadelphia
Story,'' ''Gaslight'' and ''Coming Home.''

Both pay services have been pursuing separate deals with M-G-M/ UA for several
years, spokesmen said, and each was aware that the other service had undertaken
similar negotiations; the deals were only consummated in March, however, because
syndication commitments had kept parts of the library unavailable until then.

Showtime and HBO will each be able to select approximately 800 titles - though
not necessarily the same ones - from the library over the next decade, and both
have said that the deal was made to enhance the quality of their schedules.
''Not only are viewers going to see some of the greatest movies ever made, but
we will have fewer repeats and fewer plays of some of our weaker movies,'' said
Steve Scheffer, HBO's executive vice president of film programming.

The M-G-M/UA films will begin to appear on HBO and Showtime, and on their sister
services, Cinemax and The Movie Channel, respectively, sometime in June. Both
services said they will concentrate on presenting the library's more well-known
offerings, rather than trying to unearth its neglected gems. ''We're a
broad-appeal medium, and will tend to go with the broad-appeal titles,'' Mr.
Scheffer said.

Channel Hopping


''Heartbreak House,'' George Bernard Shaw's apocalyptic farce about the leisure
class in Britain on the eve of World War I, will have its premiere Tuesday
evening at 8 on Showtime. Rex Harrison, Rosemary Harris and Amy Irving star in
this 1984 television production by the Program Development Company, which uses
an adaptation of Shaw's text by Mr. Harrison and the director, Anthony Page. . .
. Del Webb's Sahara Tahoe Hotel is the setting for ''Tony Bennett With Love,''
in which the jazz vocalist performs with the singer Nancy Wilson and Woody
Herman and his band, the Thundering Herd, this evening at 9 on the Arts &
Entertainment network. A national cable premiere, this 90-minute 1982 production
features performances by Mr. Bennett of songs by Cole Porter and George
Gershwin, as well as of his signature tune, ''I Left My Heart in San
Francisco.'' . . . Tomorrow, CNN will begin a 20-part series of reports on the
consequences of the Vietnam War and its current significance in American life
and government. To be scattered through CNN's schedule, the three- to
five-minute reports feature interviews with, among others, Daniel Ellsberg, Joan
Baez, Abbie Hoffman, Gen. William Westmoreland, a former Kent State University
student shot by a National Guardsman in 1970, and one of the National Guardsmen
who did the shooting.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Rex Harrison

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CREATE A SYSTEM OF UNIVERSAL NATIONAL SERVICE

BYLINE: By Gary Hart and Robert G. Torricelli ;
Gary Hart, who sought his party's Presidential nomination in 1984, is Democratic
Senator from Colorado. Robert G. Torricelli is a Democratic Congressman from New
Jersey. They are co-sponsors of a measure that would establish a Select
Commission on National Service Opportunities.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Our nation recently marked two important anniversaries. Fifty-two years ago,
President Franklin D. Roosevelt created the Civilian Conservation Corps
(C.C.C.), which enlisted the efforts of three million young people to transform
the American landscape into a more beautiful and bountiful resource. And 24
years ago, President John F. Kennedy established the Peace Corps, which has sent
more than 85,000 volunteers to promote peaceful change in the lives of people
throughout the developing world.

These programs invited young people to contribute their energy to the needs of
our nation and the world. They tapped into a rich vein of idealism. They arose
from a recognition that, while our ability to borrow and spend the national
wealth may be limited, our people represent a large reservoir of national
talent. And they operated on the assumption that citizenship entails both
opportunities and obligations.

It can happen again. Awaiting action in the House and Senate is legislation that
would create a commission to explore the potential of a system of universal
national service. It is our hope that appointment of such a commission would
generate a debate that will culminate in the adoption of such a system. We are
under no illusion that this will be an easy undertaking - there are many
questions that must be answered. But the time has come to begin addressing them
in a serious and a sustained way.

The need for a program of national service is clear. Too many young people
graduate from school only to find a society that will not employ them - youth
unemployment now hovers at 20 percent na- tionwide, and is more than 50 percent
in some communities. At the same time, we have an Administration that seeks to
reduce basic assistance to the poor, the elderly and the disabled.

But the United States can do better than play the politics of concern while
budgeting for austerity. A program of national service would help meet vital
needs - from tutors in Appalachia and health clinics in Harlem, to day care for
the poor and companions for the elderly - and an old compact would be given new
life.

A program of national service has

relevance for our security as well.  As a nation, we're going to face severe
manpower problems in our military, given demographic trends and diminishing
manpower pools. Just last week, published reports noted a decline in the
willingness of qualified young people to enlist in the armed forces, and
Pentagon officials have warned that we are entering ''a different and more
demanding recruiting climate.'' Next year, while the United States will spend 42
percent of the Defense budget on personnel, the Soviet Union will devote just 9
percent of its budget to the same task. There may come a time when our country
will have to resume some form of conscription. Before that happens, it would
make sense to put in place a program of universal national service in which all
young people would be given the option of serving in either a military or
nonmilitary capacity. Such a program would almost certainly be more equitable
than the system of conscription that encountered so much resistance during the
Vietnam War.  Some say that government has no place in teaching a larger sense
of values to our young people, or helping them find their roles in our economy
and as citizens. But this attitude discounts our history and disparages our
future. As Thomas Jefferson said in a letter to Edward Rutledge almost two
centuries ago: ''A debt of service is due from every man to his country
proportioned to the bounties which nature and fortune have measured to him.''
The real issue we face is whether we can devise opportunities and challenges for
young people that will invite them to set aside personal ambition and inspire in
them the same sense of idealism that motivated earlier generations. The present
generation has failed neither in its compassion nor its commitment. But we have
not provided the means for them to serve.  Universal national service is an
opportunity for this generation to achieve with its hands what others sought to
buy with their dollars. We can do more for our young people by asking more from
them.B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Black Gash of Shame

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 476 words


As the cobblestone path sinks gradually below ground level, the black marble
reaches gradually higher. In the grass above panel W66, someone has planted a
tiny flag near the name GARY E. BECKER. At W52, there's another flag, near HENRY
F.  NUGENT. By W20, the panels rise taller than the people who inspect them with
such urgent solemnity. ''There's Mike's name!'' says a young man in pressed
designer jeans.

At 32E, two white-haired women talk reverently: ''His whole battalion went. In
June.'' At 50E, a slim black woman kneels. As she rubs a crayon onto green paper
held against the wall, the letters J-O- H-N start to appear. Back where the east
and west walls meet, a Navy commander stands motionless, staring into the
marble's gleam. Nearby, a woman points. ''Those are the saddest names . . .
WALTERBOYD, ANDRES GARCIA, ELWOOD E. RUMBAUGH, RICHARD VANDE GEER. They must
have been the last four Americans killed in Vietnam.''


It cannot be surprising that the chasms broken open in American society by
Vietnam are taking years to heal. What is something of a surprise is how quickly
America has overcome the divisions caused by the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

Barely three years ago, some critics denounced as hideous the design by a Yale
architecture student named Maya Lin. In a new book about the memorial, Jan
Scruggs, its indefatigable sponsor, and Joel Swerdlow recount the opposition. It
was called a repugnant memorial to a dreadful war, and also an insult to the
Americans who died there, a monument wholly lacking in heroism. One critic
called it an erosion-control project; another called it ''Orwellian glop'';
others tried to block construction of this ''black gash of shame.''

Yet the 15,000 people now visiting the memorial every day in Washington find no
insult and feel no shame. They fall silent, men in blue pin-striped suits and
Gucci loafers, women in Columbus Equipment Co. windbreakers and children in
camouflage- pattern shirts. For all, this is a place for reverence, for homage,
for silent tears.

What explains such rapid triumph over controversy? Some opposition was quieted
by the addition nearby of three bronze statues. Other opponents became
transfixed by the mysterious marble panels, glassy black windows reflecting the
present and overlooking the past.

Most of all, the explanation is the names. Jointly and severally, as the lawyers
say, they create a memorial at once national and personal. In each sharply
etched name one reads the price paid by yet another family. In the sweeping
pattern of names, chronological by day of death, 1959 to 1975, one reads the
price paid by the nation.

Vietnam gashed our history, but this memorial is no gash. Ten years after the
war, America may not yet comprehend the loss of those 58,000 lives; but it has
at least found a noble way to remember them.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION WATCH;
LIBERAL ARTS STUDENTS MEET TECHNOLOGY

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1075 words


To John S. Morris, the president of Union College, the gas leak at the Union
Carbide plant in Bhopal, India, last year represents an academic challenge as
well as a human tragedy. ''Methyl isocyanate makes it possible to grow good
crops and feed millions of people, but it also involves risks,'' he says. ''And
analyzing risks is not a simple matter.'' Mr. Morris's college, in Schenectady,
is at the fore of a growing movement in American higher education - bringing the
study of technology into the standard liberal arts curriculums.

Several years ago Stanford became the first major university in the country to
require all students to take at least one course in technology. ''It comes from
our idea of what the educated person will need in the future,'' says Carolyn C.
Lougee, associate dean of its School of Humanities and Sciences.

Marymount Manhattan College in New York City is developing a new ''introduction
to technology'' course that plunges students into topics ranging from
decision-making theory to the analysis of nuclear waste disposal. Grinnell
College in Iowa sends students to Washington, D.C., for a ''technology
semester'' in which they work at such places as the Environmental Protection
Agency and study such topics as the ''social costs of technological change.''

At Union and elsewhere, engineering is taking its place alongside the arts,
humanities and social and natural sciences as the building blocks of the
curriculum. ''Technology is not only a process of designing and creating, but
also a way of knowing,'' says Robert P. Lisensky, executive vice president of
the Council of Independent Colleges.

To some extent the new fascination with technology grows out of a general
discontent with the teaching on college campuses. A survey published by the
American Council on Education last month found that nearly six out of ten
colleges are reviewing their curriculums, especially their ''general education''
programs. More fundamental, however, is the sheer pervasiveness of technology in
modern society. Curriculum planners note that many political decisions - those
involving the MX missile, for example - require some technologically informed
common sense.

American colleges began concentrating on the study of technology in the 1960's,
when what were usually known as ''science, technology and society'' programs
were organized at scores of institutions.

Although the intention was to promote conversation between scientists and
nonscientists, many of the programs ended up as vehicles for social scientists
who preferred to attack technology rather than understand it. ''It was the time
of Vietnam, and technology had a bad name,'' says Colton Johnson, dean of
studies at Vassar.

By contrast, most of the new programs seek to teach students ''about''
technology. Wilson College in Pennsylvania, for example, requires a course that
explores the ''philosophical and historical'' basis of science and technology,
while Wheaton College in Massachusetts is embarking on a three-year, $300,000
curriculum overhaul designed to assure that its graduates will be conversant
with ''technology issues.''

Many of the courses are team- taught by, say, a scientist and a historian, and
many include ''hands- on'' projects. At the State University at Stony Brook, for
example, students do field work on topics such as Long Island's water supply.
Implicit in many of the new programs is the notion that engineering is not only
an increasingly important intellectual tool but also that it differs in
significant ways from other disciplines, including the natural sciences.

''The engineer works with a special set of intellectual tools,'' says James D.
Koerner of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, which has encouraged the trend with
$10 million of grants. ''While the scientist wants to understand the
environment, the engineer is a practical-minded chap who wants to change it.''
The scientist works with absolutes, the test of a theory is whether it conforms
to the natural world; but the engineer lives in a world of relative values and
trade-offs. There is no such thing as a ''perfect'' bridge.

At Union College, engineering is treated as a distinct ''mode of thought,''
alongside the traditional academic trinity - the humanities, the social sciences
and the natural sciences. As part of Union's ''liberal learning'' program, every
student is required to take a course that deals with technology.

Colleges seeking to integrate the study of technology into liberal arts programs
face numerous problems, beginning with finding people to teach it. ''Thus far it
doesn't have the allure,'' says John P. Crecine, senior vice president for
academic affairs at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh. ''There's no Carl
Sagan of engineering.''

Some scholars compare the debate over teaching technology to the one that took
place a century ago around the natural sciences. Up through the late 19th
century, the study of literature, especially the classics, was viewed as
sufficient for coming to understand the world; the natural sciences, where they
were taught, were viewed as an extracurricular activity.

(The Science Center at Harvard College is built on the site of the Lawrence
Scientific School, which, beginning in the 1840's, offered noncredit courses
just outside the brick walls of Harvard Yard). After prolongued debate - notably
between Thomas Huxley and Matthew Arnold - the sciences were brought into the
college curriculum.

Many academics believe that the new interdisciplinary curriculums could help to
bridge the ''two cultures'' gap between science and the humanities made famous
by C. P. Snow. ''Few engineering problems are without their social, economic,
moral and esthetic components,'' says Henry Petroski, the director of graduate
studies in civil and environmental engineering at Duke University.

Others, however, question whether society's need to understand technology
requires any direct involvement with engineering. ''You don't have to get inside
the world of technology to understand its impact,'' says Colin Campbell,
president of Wesleyan University. ''The problem of how to teach the impact of
technology lies with the social scientists.''

Henry Rosovsky, former dean of the faculty of arts and sciences at Harvard
University, takes a similar position. ''If you want to understand Bhopal, don't
study technology,'' he says. ''Take a good course in India.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of English majors learning to use computers at New York's Union
College (NYT/David Jennings)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY SPENDING LACKS ITS USUAL EFFECTS ON ECONOMY

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 884 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Like so many other features of the economy these days, military spending no
longer has the effect it used to.

In the past, rapid military buildups have strained the nation's productive
resources, leading to accelerating inflation. And Pentagon spending has jumped
from 4.5 percent of the gross national product in 1979 to more than 6 percent
today. But, as last week's report on wholesale prices in March demonstrated, the
underlying inflation rate has gone up just three-tenths of 1 percent in the last
12 months. Meanwhile, unemployment, which generally falls as military spending
rises, has stayed high; it was 7.2 percent in March.

The reasons for the absence of military spending's usual effects seem clear
enough. On average, factories are operating just above 80 percent of capacity,
far short of the levels where constraints develop that force companies to raise
prices or bring bidding wars that push salaries up, and of the levels that would
bring unemployment down. And prices of the critical materials the contractors
require are stable and in some cases falling.

The Raytheon Company of Lexington, Mass., the weapons-systems giant of Route
128, sensed early signs late last year of a hiring battle like those of the
Vietnam era, a company spokesman who asked not to be identified says. But the
needs of the company, which had nearly $3 billion in military sales last year,
coincided with troubles of the computer industry, a victim in part of foreign
competition. It turned there for its new engineers.

But many economists find little satisfaction in the change in the relationship
of the Pentagon economy to the overall economy. They are concerned with the
Federal deficit produced by President Reagan's reluctance to finance military
spending with new taxes rather than with Government borrowing. The effect of
that, they say, is an economic imbalance. ''Do we pay a price for that?'' asked
Murray L. Weidenbaum, former chairman of President Reagan's Council of Economic
Advisers and now director of the Center for the Study of American Business in
St. Louis. ''Yes,'' he said. ''Look at the Rust Belt and the Farm Belt,'' which
he called the two most visible victims of the deficit-driven overvalued dollar.

Military spending, however much larger it is than in the past, is not big enough
to swing the whole economy. Services, such as banking, insurance, retailing and
the like, represent about two-thirds of the overall economy and account for most
economic growth.

Within the industrial sector where the Pentagon largely operates, however, armed
forces contracting has become the biggest game in town. One measure of that came
in a Federal Reserve Board report last month: Over the 12 months through
February, all industrial production grew only 2.9 percent. The defense and space
category rose 13.5 percent. Military spending, estimates Lawrence Chimerine of
Chase Econometrics, a forecasting firm in Philadelphia, accounted for a third of
the overall rise in industrial production in February.

The two strongest industries during most of last year were automobiles and
defense. Both, significantly, were the most protected from the buffeting of the
dollar and foreign competition, one by the restraints on Japanese imports that
President Reagan let expire March 31, the other by the exigencies of national
security.

A Change in Spending Patterns

One reason that the rise in military spending has not produced its usual effects
is that the way the money is being spent has changed. In the Reagan
Administration, a larger share has been destined for procurement of weapons and
a lesser share for recruiting, wages, military bases and other support spending.
Support spending tends to spread fairly evenly throughout the economy.
''Procurement used to take about 25 cents of every defense dollar,'' said Joseph
G. Carson, an economist at Merrill Lynch Economics. ''Now it's about a third.''

As a result, the rewards of military spending are more concentrated than in the
past, bringing prosperity only to the geographical centers of military
contracting. Michigan remains one of the nation's most depressed states, but
Warren, Mich., where General Dynamics builds the Army's M-1 tank, is thriving.

The Pentagon has also contributed to the industrial renaissance of New England.
With 6 percent of the population, the region now receives 12 percent of the
procurement budget. (California is far and away the biggest beneficiary,
however. The Pentagon reported last month that California received prime
contracts worth $28.4 billion in 1984, nearly three times as much as New York,
the No. 2 recipient. California's military payroll is also the nation's
biggest.)

In only one area, the specialized job market, is the growth in nonwartime
military spending behaving as it normally does. Pentagon contractors provide
jobs, of course, but they use fewer and more highly skilled workers than the
Government does when it undertakes other large programs, such as highway
construction.

''A typical defense worker is a 48-year-old white male with an advanced degree
or high technical skills,'' said Gordon Adams, a defense expert at the
nonpartisan Center on Budget and Policy Priorities in Washington. ''He's an
unusual part of the work force.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1436 words


April 14, 1985

Fiction*1

16

FAMILY ALBUM, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $16.95.) A married couple with five
children cope with the crises of contemporary America.*2

212

IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon.  (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman destroys
the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.  *3

37

THINNER, by Richard Bachman. (NAL Books, $12.95.) In this pseudonymous novel by
Stephen King, a young lawyer finds his body mysteriously wasting away.  *4

52

THE LONELY SILVER RAIN, by John D.  MacDonald. (Knopf, $15.95.) A yacht's
disappearance, a debutante's murder and other puzzles Travis McGee must solve to
save his life.  *5

44

INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A traditionalist Jew's
quest for identity in glittery contemporary America.  *6

64

THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy.  (Naval Institute Press, $14.95.) A
Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States with the Soviet Union's
most advanced nuclear secrets.  *7

74

PROOF, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $16.95.) A young wine merchant gets caught in a
scam involving murder and vengeance.  *8

810

GLITZ, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $14.95.) The escapades, romantic and
melodramatic, of a cop on the lam after a murder in Miami.  *9

95

MINDBEND, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $15.95.) A drug company gains control of the
medical profession.  10*

118

SEE YOU LATER ALLIGATOR, by William F.  Buckley Jr. (Doubleday, $15.95.) John F.
Kennedy sends Blackford Oakes to Havana on the eve of the missile crisis.  11

125

HOTEL DU LAC, by Anita Brookner. (Pantheon, $13.95.) A successful novelist
learns that a solitary life is still worth living.  12

109

THE FINISHING SCHOOL, by Gail Godwin.  (Viking, $16.95.) A young girl's
relationship with an extraordinary older woman unintentionally leads to her
mentor's downfall.  13

137

MEXICO SET, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $16.95.) The espionage game begun in
''Berlin Game'' resumes in Mexico City.  14*

1422

THE SICILIAN, by Mario Puzo. (Linden Press/ Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A
fictionalized life of Salvatore Giuliano, the Sicilian bandit-hero of the
1940's.  15

154

VIRGIN AND MARTYR, by Andrew M. Greeley.  (Bernard Geis/Warner, $17.50.) The
life of a Chicago-born nun who meets a horrendous fate in Central America, told
as a parable.

Nonfiction*1

124

IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam, $19.95.)
The rise of the automobile executive from immigrants' son to top jobs at Ford
and Chrysler.  *2

27

BREAKING WITH MOSCOW, by Arkady N.  Shevchenko. (Knopf, $18.95.) The
autobiography of the highest-ranking Soviet official ever to defect. *3

333

LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia.(Slack/Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $13.95.)
Suggestions for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the
fullest.'' *4

410

CITIZEN HUGHES, by Michael Drosnin. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $18.95.) Howard
Hughes's attempts to control the Government during his last years of life.  *5

109

THE COURAGE TO CHANGE, by Dennis Wholey.  (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.)
Conversations with two dozen men and women, many of them celebrities, about
their problems with alcoholism.  *6*

92

SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder. (Clarkson N.
Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze the successes and failures
of modern women in looking for acceptable men.  *7*

732

THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The author of
''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' tells of his search for love.  *8*

518

SON OF THE MORNING STAR, by Evan S.  Connell. (North Point, $20.) A biography of
Custer that is also a history of the Plains Indian wars.  *9*

12125

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $13.50.) Light verse
and drawings. 10

65

''SURELY YOU'RE JOKING, MR. FEYNMANN,'' by Richard P. Feynmann. (Norton,
$15.95.) A Nobel laureate in physics recounts his curious misadventures inside
and outside his profession.  11

1127

MOSES THE KITTEN, by James Herriot. (St.  Martin's, $9.95.) A waif kitten is
adopted by a pig; illustrated.  12

85

THE LIVING PLANET, by David Attenborough.  (Little, Brown, $25.) The land and
waters of our earth and the creatures that call them home. 13

4

CRY OF THE KALAHARI, by Mark and Delia Owen. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A young
couple's experience living seven years in an African desert.  14*

153

DISTANT NEIGHBORS, by Alan Riding. (Knopf, $18.95.) A portrait of modern Mexico
and Mexicans.  15

139

THE SEVEN MOUNTAINS OF THOMAS MERTON, by Michael Mott. (Houghton Mifflin,
$24.95.) The life of the American religious writer.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

FORTUNE'S DAUGHTER, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $15.95.) In

a universe of elemental forces and mighty mysteries, ice storms

and childbirth, the two heroines of this rather terrifying novel lose

their children to death, strangers or adolescence.

. . . THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH: A Political History of the

Space Age, by Walter A. McDougall. (Basic Books, $25.95.) An

exhaustively researched account of the growth of technocracy

around space programs in the United States and the Soviet Union.

NO MORE VIETNAMS, by Richard Nixon. (Arbor House, $14.95.) A

vigorous polemic, arguing that this country won the Vietnam War

but ''lost the peace'' and that Communist aggression should be

opposed - not necessarily with arms - everywhere.

MUSEUM PIECES, by Elizabeth Tallent. (Knopf, $14.95.) In this

novel the debris of a marriage - broken fountain pens, used movie

tickets, fragments of experience - is examined to show what went

wrong between Peter, an archeologist, and Susan, a painter.

THE SPOILS OF TIME: A World History From the Dawn of

Civilization Through the Early Renaissance, by C. V. Wedgwood.

(Doubleday, $19.95.) The distinguished historian of the 16th and

17th centuries ventures a one-volume narrative of the world to

1550; the product is scrupulous, disciplined and readable.

MEN AND ANGELS, by Mary Gordon. (Random House, $16.95.) The

nature and limits of love, its failures and excesses, inform this

disturbing domestic novel whose poles are a mother preoccupied

with her children and a housekeeper preoccupied with God.

THE ELEVEN MILLION MILE HIGH DANCER, by Carol Hill.

(Holt, $16.95.) An intense, well-researched fantasy in which the

other-dimensional adventures of a female astronaut hold out hope

mankind may yet be saved under the rules of quantum physics.


Advice and Self-Help*1

219

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money; revised edition of a 1980 book.  *2

113

WEIGHT WATCHERS QUICK START PROGRAM COOKBOOK, by Jean Nidetch. (NAL Books,
$17.95.) A cuisine that slims.  *3

330

WHAT THEY DON'T TEACH YOU AT HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL, by Mark H. McCormack.
(Bantam, $16.95.) Notes and tips of a ''street- smart'' executive.  *4

421

THE ONE MINUTE SALES PERSON, by Spencer Johnson and Larry Wilson. (Morrow, $15.)
Advice on increasing selling skills.  *5

2

THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.  (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for delicious
dishes prepared at moderate cost.  The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all bookstores. In
Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales in
this category are not generally large enough to make a longer list statistically
reliable.  *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted
to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PACIFISTS WITH THEIR DUKES UP

BYLINE: By Robert R. Harris; Robert R. Harris is an editor of The Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1881 words


LATER THE SAME DAY

By Grace Paley.  211 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $13.95.

ASK writers of varying dispositions and sensibilities, and Grace Paley's name is
almost certain to be mentioned in any list of admired colleagues. During the
last 25 years she has published just three slim volumes of short stories - ''The
Little Disturbances of Man'' (1959), ''Enormous Changes at the Last Minute''
(1974) and now ''Later the Same Day.'' The three books contain 45 stories, and
not all are first-rate. Yet Miss Paley has achieved a reputation as a writers'
writer, as one of the best short-story writers we have, because of her uncanny
ability to juxtapose life's serious and comic sides in stories whose essential
truths are set forth with freshness and lucidity. Her best stories have staying
power, and a few can justifiably be called brilliant.

Miss Paley's work has an honesty and guilelessness about it, qualities made all
the more luminous by an artfully intricate prose style full of surprises. Her
(mostly) plotless narratives seem straightforward until a turn of phrase catches
you off guard and, quietly but purposefully, breaks your heart. Irony is crucial
in her stories, though she does not use it to sentimentalize or mock her
characters but to delineate the offbeat ways in which they muddle through their
lives, facing up to hurt without forfeiting their humanity.

The people Miss Paley writes about are likely to be, as she said in ''Enormous
Changes,'' ''revisionist Communist revisionist Trotskyite and revisionist
Zionist registered Democrats,'' New York Jews who still find that ''new little
waves of anti-Semitism lap the beaches of their accomplishment.'' They are also
New York's blacks, Italians, Puerto Ricans and Irish. Her female characters tend
to be ''somewhat combative pacifists'' (as Miss Paley has described herself)
from Greenwich Village, who counseled draft resisters during the Vietnam War and
who are worried about nuclear power and chemical pollution. These women raise
their children alone, live with divorced men, have love affairs. They are, Miss
Paley writes in ''Later the Same Day,'' ''the soft-speaking tough souls of
anarchy'' who are apt to consider ''the mistake of the World Trade Center,
Westway, the decay of the South Bronx, the rage in Williamsburg'' their
''private'' troubles.



Some 30 years ago, Miss Paley was one of the first writers to portray accurately
the hard, at times desperate, lives of divorced mothers. Hers is a feminism that
while hardly strident is still intense. In ''Little Disturbances,'' men are
likely to ''dedicate with seeming good will thirty days and nights, sleeping and
waking, of truth and deceit to the achievement of a moment's pleasure.'' And
they often act badly. As one woman puts it in ''Later the Same Day'': ''They pay
me with a couple of hours of their valuable time. They tell me their troubles
and why they're divorced and separated, and they let me make dinner once in a
while.'' The women take it all in stride, still connect with men even if in a
desultory way. Here is a description, from Miss Paley's new collection, of a
divorced woman's affair with a man who is not the divorced man she is living
with: ''Their lovemaking was ordinary but satisfactory. Its difference lay only
in difference. Of course, if one is living a whole life in passionate affection
with another, this differentness on occasional afternoons is often enough.''

But Miss Paley allows her male characters to explain why they might be thought
of as less than perfect. ''I was once a pure-thinking English major,'' a hard-
working businessman says in ''Later the Same Day,'' ''but alas, I was forced by
bad management, the thoughtless begetting of children, and the vengeance of
alimony into low practicality.''

The finest stories in Miss Paley's first two collections are those about Faith
and her sons, Richard and Anthony (Tonto). Faith figures in nine of the 17
stories in ''Later the Same Day''; three tell of events witnessed by her during
a single day. And once again, Miss Paley is at her best in the Faith stories. In
''Dreamer in a Dead Language,'' she relates a painful encounter between Faith
and her parents at an old-age home in Coney Island and then shows how that pain
is transformed and transcended as Faith and her sons walk on the beach. Faith,
whose ''tears made their usual protective lenses for the safe observation of
misery,'' tells her sons to ''bury'' her. The boys at first misunderstand. Faith
reassures them, and then, ''giving her lots of room for wiggling and whacking,
(they) cover most of her with sand.'' Most but not all of her - Faith's
children, and her parents, who are now like children, can almost crush her to
death with worry, but Miss Paley assures us that Faith will always emerge from
her trials wiggling and whacking.

''Friends'' - in which Faith and two friends visit the gravely ill Selena -
brings Faith's life story up to the present. She is now 48. Her mother is dead.
Richard and Tonto, still boys in ''Dreamer in a Dead Language,'' have grown up.
Richard has turned to radical politics.He is a member of something called the
League for Revolutionary Youth and is apt to call collect from Paris. Tonto, 18,
''believes that the human race, its brains and good looks, will end in his
time.'' Selena's daughter, Abby, ''one of that beloved generation of our
children murdered by cars, lost to war, to drugs, to madness,'' was found dead
long ago in a distant city. Reminiscing, Selena tells Faith, ''You know the
night Abby died, when the police called me and told me? That was my first
night's sleep in two years. I knew where she was.''

The concern of parents for the vulnerability of their children is pervasive in
Miss Paley's stories, and the deft handling of this what's-to-become-of-them
theme gives her writing extraordinary power. In ''Anxiety,'' Faith watches some
children riding on their fathers' shoulders after school and worries ''how to
make sure that they gallop safely home through the airy scary dreams of
scientists and the bulky dreams of automakers.'' In ''Ruthy and Edie,'' Ruth's
granddaughter, Letty, who is just learning to talk, complains that Ruth is
squeezing her too hard, but Ruth senses that ''she'd better hold her even
closer, because, though no one else seemed to notice - Letty, rosy, and
soft-cheeked as ever, was falling, already falling, falling out of her brand-new
hammock of world-inventing words onto the hard floor of man-made time.''

Faith acts as host to a woman visiting from China in ''The Expensive Moment.''
What turns out to be the foreigner's main concern - how to raise children - is
foreshadowed by Faith's thoughts about Richard, perhaps too much influenced by
her own politics: ''What if history should seize him . . . a moment in history,
the expensive moment when everyone his age is called . . . by conscience or
passion . . . and they are the ones who . . . blow up some building full of
oppressive money or murderous military plans; but, oh, what if a human creature
(maybe rotten to the core but a living person still) is in it? What if they
disappear then to live in exile or in the deepest underground and you don't see
them for ten years . . .? Then you think sadly, I could have worked harder at
raising that child, the one that was once mine. I could have raised him to
become a brilliant economist or finish graduate school and be a lawyer or a
doctor maybe. He could have done a lot of good, just as much that way, healing
or defending the underdog.''


THE half-dozen very short stories (two to five pages long) Miss Paley has
included in ''Later the Same Day'' don't work. They seem pat, offering quick
bits of insight in clever contexts not developed enough to allow Miss Paley's
artistry to shine through. No matter, in light of the accomplishment of the
longer stories.

In ''Zagrowsky Tells,'' a bigoted Jewish pharmacist learns to love his
half-black grandson. Set in Puerto Rico, ''In the Garden'' is about an island
couple whose children have been kidnapped and who come to hate their neighbors,
''witnesses to the entire event,'' whose own children skate up and down the
street. Faith distributes antiwar leaflets in ''Listening,'' and overhears first
a soldier who has left a wife and baby in Vietnam asking his uncle for a new
start in life, and then the man she lives with planning his suicide. ''The Story
Hearer'' exposes a butcher who can shuffle from sexism to anti- Semitism without
missing a beat. And in ''Somewhere Else,'' Miss Paley executes a wry turn on
liberal guilt, taking us from China to the South Bronx to show that owning a
camera doesn't confer ownership of the world.

Ever since ''Little Disturbances'' appeared in 1959

, rumors have circulated that Miss Paley was writing a novel. When ''Enormous
Changes'' was published 15 years later, she seemed to defend herself when she
said she wrote short stories because ''art is too long and life is too short.''
A decade later, she has given us another collection of remarkable stories. It's
been worth the wait, for Miss Paley is one of the few who write about people who
actually believe in things passionately (for example, feminism, helping the
poor, civil rights) and say so. She demonstrates how history and politics can
move and change - and victimize - people, and makes us care about her characters
even if we disagree with them. This is fiction of consequence.



'WE ARE ALL STORYTELLERS' Grace Paley has the grin of a 12-year-old and tends to
use the same kind of depth-charge shrug- understatements as her short-story
characters. ''I think language comes from the literature,'' she says, buttering
morning toast in her Greenwich Village apartment, ''but it also comes from your
home and the street and what you hear as a child. I heard three languages at
home in the East Bronx - English, Russian and Yiddish. When I write, I do a lot
of talking out loud. I like the story told. We are all storytellers. There isn't
any one of us who doesn't tell 20 stories before supper: 'You know what happened
to me today . . .?' '' Why does she think her writing is so admired? ''Some
people don't like it, you know. Those who do? I don't know. I tend to look for
the hopeful side, even when there's no hope.'' She is quick to say that Faith, a
character in many of her stories, is not autobiographical. Though the son and
daughter who might populate the vastness of her farm-size kitchen have grown up
(like Faith's sons in Miss Paley's three story collections) and moved out, her
own life, she says, ''is very different from Faith's, though it's as if she were
one of my friends. I didn't bring up my kids alone; I married a second time. I
was always interested in the lives of women and in the idea of a woman alone
bringing up two boys.'' Other interests - the peace and antinuclear movements,
politics - are as much a part of her stories as the characters. ''Writers have a
responsibility to look at the world straight and to think about it. What they
see is up to them. But all writing is political.'' Is there a longer political
statement in preparation? A novel? She grins. ''If I live I can do anything.'' -
Andrea Stevens

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE TREASURES OF LUXORA BEACH

BYLINE: By Caroline Seebohm; Caroline Seebohm is working on a book about English
country houses.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 828 words


STARS AND BARS

By William Boyd.  334 pp. New York: William Morrow & Company. $16.95.

WILLIAM BOYD'S novels ''A Good Man in Africa'' and ''An Ice-Cream War'' were
greeted with cries of approval from both literary critics and readers, so
''Stars and Bars'' raises more than the usual anticipation. It is about an eager
but shy Englishman, Henderson Dores, who comes to New York hoping to lose what
he regards as his terminal Englishness in the brash, open, unreserved world of
America.

The novel starts with considerable brio. As Henderson walks up Park Avenue,
dreaming of blending with the Manhattanites who pass him on their way to work,
he is accosted by a lunatic who tells him, ''The furrier at midnight thinks his
hands are full of clouds.'' After an embarrassing struggle, Henderson gets rid
of him but not before musing on the line, which seems to him not too bad,
actually, for a crazy: ''It was like a coded spy- greeting, or a line from a
better symbolist poem.''

Henderson works for an art auction house (not unlike Sotheby's), for whom he is
sent on a mission to obtain a potentially valuable art collection from a
reclusive Southern millionaire named Loomis Gage. Much of the novel concerns
Henderson's efforts to claim these paintings, which are kept in a locked room in
a house in Luxora Beach, Ga., amid one of the most eccentric families one is
likely to encounter: Freeborn, who promises to break Henderson's head if he
doesn't leave immediately; Shanda, Freeborn's sexy, pregnant young wife, who
lives with him in a trailer attached to the Gage mansion; Cora, who on first
encounter pretends to be blind; Beckman, who tells endless stories about his
exploits in Vietnam but turns out to have been 4-F and never to have gone there;
Alma-May, who cooks vegetarian meals and has a son who never appears but plays
deafening rock music all day; and Loomis Gage himself, the ancient, enigmatic
paterfamilias.

Nothing is what it seems. To complicate matters, Henderson is involved with two
alluring but demanding women in New York - his former wife, Melissa, whose
teen-age daughter, Bryant, attaches herself to Henderson and ends up in the Gage
mansion too, and Irene, whose attraction for Henderson hinges on her resemblance
to a Spanish girl who worked in a butcher's shop and around whom he spun a
''tingling sexual fantasy'' on a boring holiday some years earlier.

After many farcical adventures in Luxora Beach, Henderson returns to New York.
The plot then has him staggering up Park Avenue again, for reasons too
complicated to relate here, dressed only in a cardboard box. On this occasion,
as the busy pedestrians avoid him, muttering about yet another lunatic, he
enjoys a brief epiphany. ''Of course, Henderson suddenly realized with tender
elation, they think I'm mad. . . . It was a moment of true liberation. A
revelation. He felt all the restraints of his culture and upbringing fall from
him like a cloak slid from his shoulders.''

Henderson is a changed man, make no mistake. There are, however, problems with
the novel. Storiesabound about an agreeable but hopelessly incompetent fellow's
search for identity in an irrational world, and Henderson's virtues do not
particularly distinguish him from the crowd. Books about the English experience
in America, or vice versa, are not uncommon. This is splendid territory to mine,
but it does require an original viewpoint when you enter the lists with
novelists ranging from Henry James to Alison Lurie. Mr. Boyd has some funny and
perceptive things to say about English shyness as opposed to American
spontaneity. The great feature about reserve, Henderson muses, is that ''it
walked hand in hand with regret; left you sadder but no wiser. You never knew
what you might have been.'' But the author seems also to latch on to what are
now fairly well aired differences between the English and Americans -
pronunciation, for instance, and that old cliche about Americans ruining whiskey
with ice.

THE major scenes in ''Stars and Bars'' take place in Luxora Beach, a place of
unremitting bleakness and despair. Mr. Boyd's talent in evoking a place, which
worked for him so well in his earlier two novels, serves him brilliantly here.
In fact, the reader is forced to ask why on earth Henderson, wimpish though he
is, does not get out when he can. One remembers Evelyn Waugh's version of the
civilized man's descent into primitivism in ''A Handful of Dust.'' In that case,
poor Tony Last, desperate to escape, is condemned to read Dickens aloud to his
mad captor for the rest of his days. Mr. Boyd is more charitable to Henderson,
but there are times when it seems that charity is not what the benighted twit
needs. The point about Henderson's liberation from his roots is well taken, and
his adventures through the jungle are amusingly narrated, but the ''new
clarity'' with which he views the world at the end remains, for the reader, a
lingering fog.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAVALIERS AND SENORITAS

BYLINE: By Frank Freidel; Frank Freidel, the author of a pictorial history of
the Spanish-American War, ''The Splendid Little War,'' is completing a
one-volume biography of Franklin D. Roosevelt.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 37, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 983 words


TO THE HALLS OF THE MONTEZUMAS

The Mexican War in the American Imagination.  By Robert W. Johannsen.
Illustrated. 363 pp. New York: Oxford University Press. $25.

FOR an America still convalescing from the shock of the Vietnam War, the longest
and most frustrating in its history, the Mexican War (1846-48), one of the
shortest and most successful, is little more than a minor memory. Although at
the time ebullient writers hailed it as one of the greatest events in the
history of the United States, 13 years later it was eclipsed by the Civil War.
So it has remained, although it forced Mexico to relinquish title to half its
territory and precipitated quarrels over the territorial spoils that widened the
schism between the North and the South.

In ''To the Halls of the Montezumas,'' Robert W. Johannsen, the author of
''Stephen A. Douglas,'' which won the Francis Parkman Prize of the Society of
American Historians in 1974, casts aside the conventional military, diplomatic
and political approaches to the war and presents it as contemporary Americans,
both combatants and civilians, perceived it. He draws primarily on the period's
vast outpouring of articles and books, which on the whole are monotonously
mediocre. Their portrayal of the war can become wearisome and repetitious, but
Mr. Johannsen lightens his study with many lively quotations and provocative
insights.

From the popular viewpoint, the war was a patriotic celebration of nationalism
instead of sectionalism. ''When fighting a common enemy, in one great common
cause,'' a South Carolinian noted, ''we are all united.'' It was a relatively
easy war, ending in only 16 months with total triumph and rewards for the
victors. Only a fraction of the volunteers could be accepted, and those
fortunate enough to fight came home, whether to North or South, as heroes.



In some respects the Mexican War reflected advances in technology and
industrialization in the United States. It was the nation's first war to be
covered by correspondents, who rushed their dispatches to New Orleans, where
pony express riders carried them to the end of the advancing telegraph lines.
Cheap newspapers, the ''penny press,'' heralded the exploits of the United
States forces to millions of readers. During the landing at Veracruz, Raphael
Semmes (later the commander of the Confederate raider Alabama) pictured Cortes
viewing ''our gallant fleet, interspersed with that most wonderful and most
potent of all modern machines, the steam ship.''

It was a war as modern as the amphibious landings in specially designed craft
yet as traditional as the charging Mexican lancers thrusting their spears into
the dying Lieut. Col. Henry Clay Jr., who slashed back at them with his sword.
Feats of modern technology helped make possible the invasion of Mexico, yet the
triumphs reaffirmed for many the patriotism of the American Revolution, the
chivalry of the French military hero Chevalier de Bayard and the noble qualities
of the ancient Romans and Greeks. While one volunteer wrote, ''I think I have
the grit of '76,'' others sought to relive the novels of Sir Walter Scott or the
adventures of Cortes.

Even on their arrival in Mexico, United States soldiers and correspondents
sensed romance everywhere. Towns that some soldiers dismissed as ''a jumbled
collection of filthy and nondescript hovels'' glowed for others with the aura of
the Alhambra. William H. Prescott's ''History of the Conquest of Mexico'' (1843)
served almost as a guidebook for Gen. Winfield Scott's forces. The troops
imagined Aztec ruins to be, as one of them wrote, the site of ''the bloody tale
of tragedy, or the softer one of a princess's love.'' In the plethora of popular
novels that the war inspired, the heroes were ''often thinly disguised Natty
Bumppos'' and the heroines beguiling senoritas. The Mexican women seemed, as one
soldier put it, the ''ethereal embodiment of all that man has learned to love
and admire.'' Some became war brides.

For most of the soldiers, 6,000 of whom died of disease (10 times as many as in
combat), the war's realities were less glamorous. Their attitude toward the
Mexicans, despite the allure of the women, was one of superiority. In turn, the
Mexicans called them ''half savages'' and ''infidels who worship the devil.'' An
officer of a Kentucky regiment on the march to Mexico City noted, ''My men are
feeble . . . with diarrhea. They trudge along, curse the war.'' An Englishman in
Tampico described the volunteers as ''wild-looking, hairy- faced savages . . .
who galloped about the streets and plazas mounted on mules and Mexican ponies
and armed with sabres, bowies, and revolvers.''


BACK home, the war brought a surge of national pride. The victories ''must
elevate the true self-respect of the American people,'' Walt Whitman wrote.
President Polk hailed the outcome as demonstrating that the volunteer army of a
democracy could defeat a military dictatorship. It seemed a reaffirmation of the
nation's mission. There were dissenters, to be sure, John Greenleaf Whittier
among them. Yet James Russell Lowell, despite his satiric ''Biglow Papers,''
affirmed that it was the ''manifest destiny of the English race to occupy this
whole continent.'' Ralph Waldo Emerson opposed ''war, as a means of achieving
America's destiny,'' but accepted the annexations with the comment that ''most
of the great results of history are brought about by discreditable means.''

Less felicitous results of the war were the immediate sectional strife it
brought about in the United States and Mexico's enduring resentment. Is it not
possible too that the very ease of the victories, the pervading romanticism and
the glorious reception given the returning troops later encouraged angry
Southerners and Yankees to plunge with heedless optimism into the bloodiest of
United States wars?


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


Brady Coyle, the Boston lawyer who ministers to the very rich, made his initial
appearance about a year ago. He is now back in William G. Tapply's second novel,


THE DUTCH BLUE ERROR (Scribners, $12.95).

So is our old friend the evil millionaire. This one has what he thinks is the
only copy of a stamp, the Dutch Blue Error. But another turns up and is offered
to him for only $250,000. Coyle is engaged to handle the transaction.

Thus he enters the world of philately, and the reader will learn something about
rare, valuable stamps. Coyle, working with a specialist, learns that the new
stamp is authentic. He is all set to close the deal when the owner of the new
Dutch Blue is murdered. The stamp disappears, and more murder follows.

Perhaps it takes no great deductive powers to figure out the identity of the
culprit long before the denouement. But ''The Dutch Blue Error'' is nevertheless
a great deal of fun. Mr. Tapply has a smooth and sophisticated style,
interlarded with humor. Even his stereotypes - one of them is a liberated black,
studying law, with a chip on his shoulder - manage to be agreeable. A neat piece
of work all around.



Even lighter and fluffier is MURDER ON MIKE by H. Paul Jeffers (St. Martin's,
$12.95). How far back does the action of a book have to go to qualify it as a
historical mystery? Here the setting is New York in 1939, and Mr. Jeffers leans
heavily on the nostalgia. As for the mystery, a star actor who is a detective in
a radio series is murdered on mike. The program's announcer is arrested, and
apparently the police have an open-and-shut case.

Enter Harry MacNeil, private investigator, ''the hope of the helpless.'' Mr.
Jeffers is not above affectionate kidding of the genre. MacNeil's girlfriend
talks him into taking the case, and before he is through, the reader is
presented with a sort of digest of the American tough-guy private eye. ''We can
have polite conversation or we can have the other kind, Shoemaker,'' he snarls.
''Don't make me get physical, Freddy.''

This book is really a Black Mask short story blown up to novel size, with an
unbelievable ending. But as Mr. Jeffers does not intend anybody to take it
seriously, nobody will. In its way, it is sort of fun.



The McGarr books of Bartholomew Gill have been respectfully received, but even
his fans will have trouble with

MCGARR

AND THE METHOD OF DES

CARTES (Viking, $14.95). Peter McGarr is the head of a select police unit in
Dublin. The book starts with a harrowing account of the Belfast riots of 1971.
Then it jumps to today, with an I.R.A. plot to assassinate a demagogic
Protestant clergyman who is the head of a paramilitary right- wing group. McGarr
gets into it when a rugby star tied up with the plot is murdered.

The trouble is that some of the story is hard to follow. What with the politics
of the Irish revolutionary movement, some complications involving computer codes
and a confused ending, the book does not make for easy reading. Mr. Gill has
attempted something very ambitious, but he fails to bring it off. There are
touches of brilliance here but also of turgidness. At least the method of
Descartes is clear: ''Accept nothing as true which you do not clearly recognize
to be so. . . . Divide each problem into as many parts as possible. . . . Make
enumerations so complete, and reviews so general, that you should be certain to
have omitted nothing.''



A football player who acts as a private eye, though without a license, is Cam
McArdle in A COOL, CLEAR DEATH by Tucker Halleran (St. Martin's, $12.95). This
is a first novel. McCardle, formerly a star with the New York Giants, is brought
into a case through a clergyman. A parishioner has been accused of murdering his
wife, and the clergyman - who saved McArdle's life in Vietnam - turns to his old
friend for help.

McCardle is thus an amateur sleuth. Yet he discovers things the police have
missed and finally breaks the case. None of this is very believable. Nor is the
organization of the book as good as it should be. There are too many flashbacks
interrupting the continuity. And the dialogue can sound clumsy and stilted. One
thing, though - the football sequences ring true, and there is something genuine
and even sweet about the author's obvious identification with Cam McArdle as a
football player. Unfortunately, that is not enough to redeem the book.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Julius Rudel (NYT/Fred R. Conrad)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HIS INNOCENCE PROVES HIS GUILT

BYLINE: By Ronald Radosh; Ronald Radosh, co-author of ''The Rosenberg File,'' is
working on a book about the 1945 Amerasia magazine case, in which Government
officials and journalists were indicted for the possession and publication of
classified documents relating to China policy.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1324 words


THE PIED PIPER

Allard K. Lowenstein and the Liberal Dream.  By Richard Cummings.  569 pp. New
York: Grove Press. $19.95.

ALLARD K. LOWENSTEIN (1929-1980) was perhaps the quintessential liberal
activist: a creator of the Mississippi Freedom Summer of 1963 and the man who
forged the ''dump Johnson'' movement within the Democratic Party. He was a one-
term congressman from Long Island, and his last public post was Human Rights
Ambassador to the United Nations during the Carter Administration.

Richard Cummings is a lawyer, teacher and active Democrat who has written what
appears at first glance to be a political biography of Lowenstein. ''The Pied
Piper,'' however, focuses on Mr. Cummings's charge that between 1962 and 1967
Lowenstein was a full-time agent of the Central Intelligence Agency. Serving as
a representative of the C.I.A.'s so-called good wing, a group that believed
America's interests called for supporting the democratic left in Latin America
and Africa, Lowenstein, according to Mr. Cummings, was precisely the type ''with
credibility who could gain the trust of the third world leaders the CIA wanted
in the fold.''

The only problem with Mr. Cummings's theory is that it is based entirely on
guilt by association. For example, Walter Reuther's United Automobile Workers
once took C.I.A. funds to finance democratic unions in postwar Germany. When
Lowenstein put together a new committee for a free Spain, whose real purpose was
''the derailment of the Communists inside Spain,'' he turned to the auto workers
since they ''might also be expected to get CIA money for such a project.'' One
searches for proof but finds only Mr. Cummings's assertion about what might ''be
expected.'' He never offers evidence that C.I.A. money was forthcoming.

Readers might well wonder how one of the most ardent critics of Lyndon Johnson's
escalation of the Vietnam War can be said to have been a C.I.A. agent. ''In
actuality,'' Mr. Cummings asserts, Lowenstein's ''opposition to the war confirms
his CIA involvement as much as anything.'' His dovish position, Mr. Cummings
argues, coincided with that of the C.I.A.'s good wing. Therefore, Mr. Cummings
concludes, there were ''many reasons why Lowenstein, one of the leading anti-
Communists of his time, and a CIA operative, would become a powerful opponent of
a war America was fighting to stop the Communists.'' By this standard, of
course, virtually anyone who worked in the antiwar movement could conceivably
have been a C.I.A. opera tive. Careful readers will note that no evidence is
presented beyond the author's peculiar logic and his own repeated assertions
that Lowenstein was an agent.

Mr. Cummings also asserts that Lowenstein was involved often in covert action.
During a 1959 trip to South Africa, Lowenstein supposedly was asked by the
C.I.A. to smuggle out of the country one Hans Beukes, a ''colored'' South West
African, so that he could testify about apartheid before a United Nations
committee. The author's proof: ''Sources report that while Lowenstein was in
Johannesburg he was contacted by the CIA and asked to perform a mission which
must have been highly appealing to his romantic side.'' The ''sources'' are
never identified, and Mr. Cummings does not tell readers that Mr. Beukes has
said he alone approached Lowenstein to help him find a way out of Africa, or
that the two Americans who accompanied Lowenstein in South Africa emphasize how
wary he was of getting involved in such an endeavor.

Mr. Cummings, however, makes a case that the C.I.A. wanted Mr. Beukes to appear
at the United Nations in order to demonstrate that ''contrary to Communist
claims, Americans did care and that South West Africa's opposition to South
Africa was not revolutionary.'' The C.I.A., in other words, would have had a
good reason. But Mr. Cummings has omitted the contrary evidence that indicates
the C.I.A. had nothing to do with the episode, and his theorizing obscures the
reality that he has no evidence the agency was involved in any way.

Mr. Cummings does attempt to provide evidence of a C.I.A. tie at one point, when
he discusses letters home written by Peace Corps volunteers in Africa. He found
copies of these letters in Lowenstein's personal papers, and he reveals that
they start with the words ''Dear Family.'' These seemingly innocent letters, he
writes, ''were intelligence reports to the 'family' of trusted Americans within
or at the periphery of that amorphous mass known as the 'intelligence community'
'' and were circulated among agents concerned with African politics. But the
excerpts he offers appear to be little else than real letters by the volunteers
to their actual families, letters forwarded by the kin to Lowenstein, who had
been a great influence on the particular students.

And Mr. Cummings's assertion that he has ''deep respect'' for Lowenstein's quest
''to achieve change without violent revolution'' does not ring true. Indeed,
throughout the book, each time Lowenstein is revealed to have supported those
who favor either nonviolence or reform within the system, Mr. Cummings implies
that this is proof that he was an agent - since he was not supporting the real
revolutionaries. After the Sharpeville massacre in 1960, during which police
fired into an unarmed crowd and killed more than 70 black South Africans,
Lowenstein, Mr. Cummings writes, ''never called for violent retaliation or
revolution; all he advocated was more pressure on the government of South
Africa.'' Somehow, that choice is supposed to make Lowenstein look bad and to
give us more reason to suspect that he was a C.I.A. operative.


IN Mr. Cummings's eyes, evidently, Lowenstein can

never do right. His work with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
(S.N.C.C.) to create

the Mississippi Freedom Summer is attributed to evil motives because he defined
the event as ''an anti- Communist activity'' meant to force Federal intervention
in Mississippi on behalf of civil rights so that there would be no rise in
Communist influence among militant blacks. But when Lowenstein dissented from
the extremist turn taken by S.N.C.C., a result of honest differences, Mr.
Cummings ridicules him. His sin? ''He didn't believe the Democratic party was a
corrupt institution hostile to change.''

There is a serious critique of Lowenstein to be made. In fact, it was made more
than a decade ago by the journalist Paul Cowan and more recently by David Harris
in ''Dreams Die Hard.'' They were deeply critical of Lowenstein's hostility to
those he had once influenced who had since moved farther left than he.
Lowenstein, in turn, condemned what he saw as their ''new politics of
alienation.'' Had Mr. Cummings used Lowenstein as a vehicle to examine the
weaknesses and strengths of mainstream liberalism during the 1960's, he might
have come up with something of merit, for Lowenstein and his career give us a
focus through which to examine these issues.  Unfortunately, Mr. Cummings has
not written such a book. Rather, he offers a conspiracy theory marked by guilt
by association and a failure to examine evidence that contradicts his own views
(such as C.I.A. and F.B.I. documents that firmly establish Lowenstein was not an
agent). Lowenstein's friends and family were so upset about the allegations in
''The Pied Piper'' that they have gone to great lengths to gather affidavits
from scores of individuals mentioned or interviewed by Mr. Cummings, affidavits
that dispute the author's research and conclusions. It has been unnecessary.
Lowenstein's reputation and good works will easily outlive this deeply flawed
biography, a book so reckless that one can only regret that a responsible
publisher has seen fit to produce it.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Allard K. Lowenstein (AP)

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LEARNING SOCIETY;
THE MILITARY IS MAKING SERVICE A GOOD ROUTE TO COLLEGE DEGREE

BYLINE: By William R. Greer

SECTION: Section 12; Page 52, Column 1; Survey of Education Desk

LENGTH: 1271 words


NEARLY a decade after the United States armed forces launched advertising
campaigns that sought to recruit young men and women by offering them a good
education, the quality of that education is only now reaching the level that the
advertisements promised, according to some educators.

''There is a more real sense now that voluntary education at military bases is
not just something for the military person to do in his spare time,'' said Dr.
Richard M. Millard, the president of the Council on Postsecondary Accreditation.
''The services have expanded the educational opportunities. They're more aware
of the importance of voluntary education as it relates to the life of the
servicemen. And they've become much more concerned about the quality of their
programs.''

The breadth and number of educational programs in the four branches of the
service have mushroomed in the last 10 years. They now range from courses that
teach English as a second language and remedial writing to training in computer
literacy and doctoral programs. A serviceman's choices of when and where to take
classes seem nearly limitless, with professors from Central Texas College
teaching classes on aircraft carriers and others from the University of Maryland
offering bachelor's degrees at Air Force bases in Kunsan, Korea, or San Vito,
Italy.

A new version of the G.I. Bill takes effect July 1, replacing the more limited
Veterans' Educational Assistance Program, which was created in 1976 when the
previous G.I. Bill expired. With the new bill in place, a soldier in the Army
will be able to walk away from a four-year tour with a $25,000 credit toward
college. And if he signs up to return later he can call his departure a leave of
absence and continue to collect his base pay while in school. In short,
according to Col. William A. Scott, the Director of Education for the Defense
Department, ''We've put our resources where our rhetoric is.''

After the Vietnam War the Defense Department sought in its recruitment
advertisements to polish an image that had become tarnished. ''The first thrust
of the Army's campaign,'' according to George H. Eversman, an executive vice
president for N.W. Ayer Inc., the advertising agency that has handled the Army's
advertising account since 1967, ''was to change those negative attitudes and
position itself as a constructive organization that offered many advantages to
all kinds of people.''

By the late 1970's the negative feelings involving the war had subsided, Mr.
Eversman said, and Army advertisements began hawking education and skills
instead of a better image. The Army's ''Be all you can be'' jingle hit the
airwaves in 1981, marking the beginning of what is still one of the military's
most successful recruitment campaigns.

In the late 1970's and early 1980's, however, several higher-education
officials, including Prof. Stephen K. Bailey of Harvard University, criticized
the educational programs offered on military bases for what he called ''academic
shoddiness.'' The Council on Postsecondary Accreditation, which is a voluntary
association of accrediting associations, published a study in 1980 of the
courses that were offered on 20 military bases. Faculty members giving those
courses, the study said, had lower credentials and taught less-demanding
courses; in addition, it said, some of the courses were ''substandard extensions
of associate degree programs,'' and the college credit given for ''experimental
learning'' was sometimes excessive.

At least in part as a result of the council's and Professor Bailey's studies and
critical reports from the General Accounting Office, a Congressional support
agency, the four service branches began looking harder at the kinds of courses
they were offering and the quality of those courses. In the Navy, for example,
education officials decided in 1980 that they needed an effective method to
evaluate their educational programs. ''What we did in 1980 was to determine if
there were sufficient problems to warrant further action,'' said Dr. Frances
Kelly, head of the Navy's education services section. ''We needed to have some
sort of objective means to evaluate on-base courses. We believe it has to be
done.''

The Navy subsequently asked the Council on Postsecondary Accreditation to send
accrediting teams to its installations on a regular basis. Last month the first
such team, led by Dr. G. Jack Allen, an associate executive director for the
Commission on Colleges for the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools,
arrived at the Naval Air Technical Training Command in Millington, Tenn. The
Southern Association is responsible for accrediting postsecondary schools in 11
Southern states.

''The military was becoming extremely interested in the quality of the programs,
where before that was not the case,'' said Dr. Allen. ''Generally the facilities
are a little better now. There is more attention to the availability of library
resources.''

Dr. Kelly said the visit by Dr. Allen's team was the first of a series of
similar visits to each of the Navy's bases to evaluate the curricula offered the
servicemen. The teams are to spend three or four days at each base, evaluate the
educational programs and report their findings to the Navy and the heads of the
institutions that are supplying the professors and curriculum. The Air Force has
expressed interest in conducting a similar program, said Dr. Millard of the
accreditation council.

Dr. Allen, who participated in the council's original 1980 study, would not
discuss specifics of his findings at the Navy base in Millington, but said that
in general ''things have improved in military base education.''



THE SIZE and popularity of the courses offered on military bases have increased
dramatically. Colonel Scott said that last year about 700,000 courses were taken
by the military's approximately 780,000 members; 35 percent of all Air Force
servicemen took postsecondary-level courses, and 18,134 servicemen in all
branches earned high-school equivalency diplomas through the General Educational
Development examination. Dr. Kelly of the Navy said that 30,000 sailors took
college-level courses on surface ships last year. Most who enrolled, she said,
were working toward an associate degree.

The Navy and the other service branches rely on established and accredited
colleges to teach courses on their bases. Ninety different institutions are
providing courses on navy bases, and two others, Central Texas College and the
City College of Chicago, conduct them on ships.

Five years ago the primary reason cited by servicemen in a regular survey for
joining the Air Force was their desire to get training in a skill, according to
William A. Gill, chief of the Air Force's education services branch. But for the
last four years, the number one reason was ''to continue my education.''

Last year, Mr. Gill said, 6,200 servicemen in the Air Force earned associate
degrees, 2,100 earned bachelor's degrees and 2,200 earned graduate degrees. At
the graduate level, he said, two out of three degrees were awarded in a broad
area that the Air Force calls ''management.''

Each of the four service branches pays between 75 percent and 90 percent of the
tuition costs. All credit courses are taken during the serviceman's off hours,
and the military estimates that it usually takes between three and four years
for a serviceman to earn an associate degree.

''The whole idea of what we are striving for is comparable programs with
comparable credit and comparable quality,'' Colonel Scott said. ''We're into
education.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLANDERS;
HELPING IN THE CAPTURE OF THE YOUTHFUL DOLLAR

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 2, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 685 words


''YOU take a young man or woman coming out of Harvard with an M.B.A.,'' John J.
(Jay) Conefry Jr. of Manhasset, the director of operations and systems for the
Merrill Lynch Company, said as he surveyed the latest battleground where giant
financial institutions are competing today for the billions of dollars in
business of what he termed ''the early affluents.''

''Since we've all got a gamut of goods and services,'' he said, ''whoever gets
there first has a good shot at keeping the relationship. One of the critical
keys to all these products being delivered satisfactorily to all our customers
is the quality of the technological support - and that's my reason for
existing.''

''If we're going to be in a position where we capture people at the entry level
and let them grow with us,'' he added, ''then we have to be able to provide
products and services in a cost-effective way until the emerging investor or the
small and improving business gets to the point where we're making relatively
higher profit- margin business. That means we've got to be able to deliver it in
a cost-effective way, and the key to that is technology.''

Right now, the 40- year-old Mr. Conefry, who was born in Queens, has some of the
nationwide force of 6,000 Merrill Lynch employees within his jurisdiction
working with computers capable of listing the particulars of every known
investment offered by the company, as well as the names of customers who have
funds available for such an investment.

Ten years ago, he observed, there were perhaps 10 ''products'' that investors
were interested in - among them, equity securities, municipal bonds, corporate
bonds, Government bonds and mutual funds. Today, he said, there are perhaps 100,
including a wide variety of bond funds and investment vehicles like zero coupon
bonds.

In this computer age, he said, ''What you've done is taken a wealth of
information that would have taken perhaps all day for the account executive and
his sales assistant to sift through, and you've permitted the sales executive to
have it at his fingertips in a matter of seconds.''

Mr. Conefry, who has worked for Merrill Lynch since 1981, has been with Merrill
Lynch for far longer. It is a story that really begins even earlier, perhaps
when Mr. Conefry's father, a certified public accountant, urged the eldest of
his nine children to study accounting.

The advice was given in 1962, during his senior year at Brooklyn Prep. The elder
Mr. Conefry's reasoning was, Jay Conefry recalled, that ''no matter what I did
the rest of my life, accounting would always be handy to me. Boy, was he
right!''

At Manhattan College, where he supported himself by working in a bank afternoons
and evenings and digging graves on weekends, Mr. Conefry earned a Bachelor of
Business Administration degree in 1967 and was drafted on graduation day. But
before enter- ing the Army, where he served as a sergeant in Vietnam, he spent
the summer working at Haskins & Sells, a major accounting firm.

When he returned to work after Vietnam, his first assignment was auditing
accounts at a Wall Street brokerage firm. ''Then one fateful day in 1970,'' he
said, ''I got a phone call saying we're short a man at Merrill Lynch.''

Mr. Conefry spent the next 10 years there, rising from Haskins & Sells' junior
representative on the account to the partner in charge of it - and gathering
enormous understanding of the workings of Merrill Lynch.

Along the way, he found time to serve on the boards of a variety of
organizations: the Long Island Savings Bank, St. Francis Hospital in Roslyn,
Catholic Big Brothers, Pace University and the National Multiple Sclerosis
Society.

On Thursday, he will be honored as the ''Volunteer Man of the Year'' at the New
York City MS Dinner at the Waldorf Astoria.

Four years ago, Mr. Conefry, who is married and has four children, was invited
to join Merrill Lynch. His decision to accept, he said, was prompted by his
wife: ''She said, 'Jay, you say you love your job with Haskins & Sells, but
haven't you spent the last 10 years working at Merrill Lynch?' ''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John J. Conefry Jr. (Mater Studio Inc)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESPAC: A DECADE OF EVOLUTION IN ACTIVISIM

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 2; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1425 words


SOUVENIRS of yesterday's protests fill the walls of Wespac, the Westchester
People's Action Coalition, but the placards and other mementos look down on
volunteers like Art Kamell and Richard Evers, preparing for tomorrow's rallies
and demonstrations.

The political action group, based in White Plains, is now a decade old and still
growing, according to its leaders. It will play a major role in a national march
and nonviolent protest on several issues next week in Washington, with Charles
Scheiner, one of Wespac's two chairmen, in charge of civil disobedience.

''The rally runs from Friday to Monday,'' Mr. Scheiner said, ''and on the final
day, people who are willing to risk arrest will be blockading the driveways to
the White House. We're committed to nonviolence,'' he added, ''and have agreed
to rules of conduct, one of which is not to enter the White House grounds.''

A change in emphasis from the occasionally violent rally of the 1960's and 70's
to the civil disobedience of the 80's is only one of many developments that the
protest movement is experiencing, according to Connie Hogarth, Wespac's other
chairman.

She said, for example, that the profile of the participant has changed. ''The
image of the stereotypically clean, ecology-minded, middle-class New Englander
has become more diverse, with working-class people, blacks and Latinos, the
clergy and those who are middle-aged and older now more involved.''

There has also been something of an evolution of issues, she said, although none
of the original issues has disappeared. ''Concern over the dangers of nuclear
power,'' which dominated much of the protest movement a decade ago, ''has been
overtaken, but not replaced entirely, by the dangers of nuclear weapons.''

After the Vietnam War, she said, ''We talked about reducing the military budget
and putting the funds into human needs; we were worried that Nixon was going to
dismantle the Great Society program.'' But there was ''no peace dividend,'' she
said, and the question of funds for human needs ''is worse than ever'' under
President Reagan.

Some protests, such as those against the construction in Groton, Conn., of
nuclear submarines, ''have become a bit of a ritual,'' Miss Hogarth said. ''We
go there to demonstrate at the first stage, then the second stage, and then the
launching.''

Other protests, against apartheid in South Africa, for example, have found new
emphasis, with demonstrators calling now for boycotts of American companies and
institutions doing business with the Pretoria government.

The rally in Washington, D.C., from April 19 to 22, is expected to draw tens of
thousands of protestors, including several hundred from Westchester. Six buses
have been reserved by Wespac and other organizations - Casa Westchester, the
Central America Solidarity Association; the Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign; the
Women's International League for Peace and Freedom; the Gray Panthers; the
Westchester Committee on Africa, and the Westchester Rainbow Coalition.

Mr. Scheiner said the 80 national organizations involved in the capital protest
would be focusing on four issues: United States policy in Central America and
around the world; a nuclear freeze; employment opportunities, and South African
apartheid and ''racism at home.''

The ''April Actions,'' as the organizers call the gathering, begin on Friday
with afternoon picketing and civil disobedience at the South African Embassy and
an evening religious service. Saturday, when participation is expected to peak,
will feature a ''Festival of Resistance'' at the Elipse and a march past the
White House.

''It will be a mostly silent march, a way for people to express their
displeasure with the policies that come out of that building,'' Mr. Scheiner
said. Sunday will be devoted largely to training sessions for the lobbying and
civil disobedience planned for Monday.

''There are a lot more people willing to demonstrate in civil disobedience today
than there were five years ago, perhaps because the authority of the government
seems less legitimate than it used to be,'' Mr. Scheiner said, explaining it
this way:

''When the President says he's going to ignore the World Court, pull out of
various U.N. bodies and use arms-control talks as a cynical way to get weapons
approved, people have less respect for the authority of Government and they
become more willing to demonstrtate that lack of respect.''

Organizers met with police authorities last week ''to tell them what we are
planning,'' Mr. Scheiner said. ''It's a courtesy because we learned from
protests in the 60's that they find out, anyway, and, in any case, it tends to
reduce the chance of violence.'' In the meantime, he added, laws involving
picketing have become more stringent.

''Until a year ago there were virtually continuous demonstrations in front of
the White House; now you need a permit to have any kind of sign or any group of
more than five people. The Secret Service has even proposed closing off traffic
on that block permanently. That prompted an editorial in The Washington Post
suggesting that the entire District of Columbia be closed completely, using it
as a huge parking lot for Federal employees.''

The focus on lobbying efforts, which has also become an increasingly important
part of today's demonstrations, according to Mr. Scheiner, is intended next
weekend to capitalize on appointments that have already been made by
demonstrators from around the nation with their elected officials in Washington.

''If a group is going to see its representative on the Central American issue,
we'd like them also to press for the other issues, such as the nuclear- arms
race,'' he said. Regional demonstrations also are scheduled for San Francisco,
Los Angeles, Houston and Seattle.

Wespac's 11-year history, and its 10 years in White Plains, represents unusual
longevity for protest groups, according to its leaders. It is also rather
well-known outside the metropolitan area. Of the 10 people organizing the
Washington activities, two are from Wespac, Mr. Scheiner, of White Plains, and
Josh Bornstein, a former Bedford resident who recently moved to the capitol.

To walk through Wespac's offices at 255 Grove Street is to experience a decade
of the protest movement. Tables are piled high with literature on subjects
ranging from Vietnam, nuclear power and the protests at Rocky Flats in Colorado,
where nuclear-weapon triggers are manufactured, to Central America, criminal
justice, environmental action and the War Tax Resisters movement.

The office, Wespac's third in White Plains, consists of two spacious rooms, one
with a half dozen desks for the staff and full-time volunteers, and the other
for meetings, research and the casual gatherings that are crucial to the
continuity of such organizations.

''We're getting a VCR,'' or video casette recorder, Miss Hogarth said, ''to set
up an audio-visual library.'' She said that Mercy College, the State University
of New York at Purchase and other schools regularly use Wespac's library.

''The trouble with Wespac,'' she said, ''is that we're into so many things that
we're always in a crisis situation. There's never any time to take inventory.''
She looked around and sighed. ''People who hang around Wespac are initially
appalled, but they find it works.''

The organization, which has a mailing list of 4,000, seems to maintain a
continuity of effort despite frustrations. ''We can't quite achieve
disarmament,'' she said. Sometimes results are quickly apparent. A voter-
registration drive last summer produced 9,000 new names, 4,000 in Westchester
and the rest in the Bronx, according to Richard Evers, who coordinated the
effort.

And there is attention to detail, even when the office is closed. Miss Hogarth
loads the organization's telephone answering machine with a list of activities,
last week's typically reminding callers of two scheduled meetings and a
fund-raising concert with Pete Seeger and Guy Davis. She signed off with, ''If
you want to leave a message, please do so after the beep. Peace, justice and no
nukes.''

Wespac's budgets have grown from $30,000 several years ago to $47,000 last year.
Half of the income comes from contributions, but some gifts are made
independently. Miss Hogarth said that a few weeks ago, for example, ''a
benefactor in Westchester paid $10,000 for our quarter page ad in the Sunday
Times.'' It advocated withholding $10 from income- tax payments to be spent on
human needs as a protest against the military budget.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Wespac leaders Charles Schneider and Susan Pines (NYT/Paul
Hosefros); Photo of Wespac co-chairman Connie Hogarth (NYT/Larry C . Morris)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SLASH-AND-BURN INTELLECT

BYLINE: By Richard A. Shweder; Richard A. Shweder, an anthropologist and an
associate professor of human development at the University of Chicago, has
co-edited ''Culture Theory: Essays on Mind, Self and Emotion.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2305 words


THE VIEW FROM AFAR

By Claude Levi-Strauss.  Translated by Joachim Neugroschel and Phoebe Hoss.  311
pp. New York: Basic Books. $24.95.


I RUN the risk of being accused of sentimentality by beginning this review with
a personal

recollection. Years ago, a professor of mine

gave me a copy of a book by Claude Levi- Strauss called ''Tristes Tropiques''
and said to me, ''If you ever feel like leaving anthropology, read this.'' I
read the book immediately.

Something akin to that scene took place 20 years ago at universities throughout
the United States. ''Tristes Tropiques,'' translated in certain editions as ''A
World on the Wane,'' has been described by one authoritative and thorough
critic, Clifford Geertz, as ''one of the finest books ever written by an
anthropologist.'' It didn't take long for word to get out. A generation of young
anthropologists in the 1960's, some already starting to lose faith over divisive
political conflicts, Vietnam and civil rights, became inoculated against
personal disenchantment by a French Jewish academic, a master at rational
synthesis, who was himself once a refugee from a Europe that Germany had dared
to try to unify through terror instead of reason. In ''Tristes Tropiques,''
Levi-Strauss, the Old World intellectual from a civilization with no innocence
left to lose, transformed an expedition to the virgin interiors of the Amazon
into a vision quest, and turned anthropology into a spiritual mission to defend
mankind against itself.

''A World on the Wane'' - an intellectual autobiography and the most readable of
Levi-Strauss's many books - did much to establish him as a high priest of
cultural affairs and something of a prophet of dark ages yet to come. His more
academic works, especially ''The Savage Mind,'' four volumes on mythology, and
two collections of essays under the banner ''Structural Anthropology,'' revealed
another, more controversial, persona - Levi-Strauss the erudite trickster, both
wonderful and ridiculous, plunging into the depths of the collective
unconscious, dazzling some readers by tracing connections between things that
have never been connected before, dismaying other readers by reckoning a remote
kinship between things that might be considered merely fictive.



''The View From Afar'' is a third collection of essays by Levi-Strauss, and, as
he notes in the preface, it might have been entitled ''Structural Anthropology,
Vol. 3,'' except that he didn't want to seem to be treading water. Whatever the
label, it is vintage Levi-Strauss. It may well be the last collection of essays
from the itinerant intellectual who in 1941 settled in among the French
Surrealists in Greenwich Village, taught at the New School for Social Research
and became the cultural adviser to the French Embassy. He later returned to
Paris to become a professor of social anthropology in the Coll ege de France,
critic of existentialism and, as Parisian intellectual fashion would have it, a
rival to Sartre. Now, in ''The View From Afar,'' he speaks of the end of his
days of teaching and the conclusion of his academic career of 50 years.

Levi-Strauss once described his own rather cultivated, but sometimes savage,
mind as the intellectual equivalent of slash-and-burn agriculture. In ''The View
from Afar'' hardly a field remains untouched - sociobiology, linguistics,
botany, genetics, psychiatry, esthetics, ecology, politics, neuro science,
education, morality, psychology. And little can remain unscathed as the
high-priest-cum- trickster from Paris hops from world mythology to the genetics
of altruism, takes a leap from the concept of liberty to a botanical analysis of
the meaning of ''autumn crocuses'' in a poem by Guillaume Apollinaire (a ''small
mythico-literary puzzle'' he calls it); and then it's on to the origins of
schizophrenia, the role of unconscious mental activity in language production,
and a quick but satisfying devastation of Impressionism and Cubism.

Flirting with various intellectual movements and always on the intellectual
move, he lets drop Delphic riddles, mysterious at first blush, yet pregnant with
deeper significances: why were Egyptian priests prohibited from eating or even
looking at fava beans? With well-timed political and cultural jabs he provokes
and disarms the reader: ''Superstition (is) the surest antidote to despotism'';
and ''It is not at all invidious to place one way of life or thought above all
others.'' Throughout he teases and entertains: think of the Chuckchee of eastern
Siberia who ''do not view as unsuitable a marriage between a girl about twenty
years old and a baby boy of two or three years. The young woman, already often a
mother if she has lovers, raises her child and her little husband together.''

t

THEN, all of a sudden, he pauses to reminisce and it is all augury, much of it
dark.  Thinking back on his times with Andre Breton, Max Ernst and Yves Tanguy
in New York in the 1940's, he comments: ''One changed countries every few
blocks.'' To his foreigner's eyes, the city was a stage on which mass culture
threatened the relics of archaic civilization - play-acting was a way of keeping
one's sanity. ''In New York, as we used to say to one another, women do not
'dress': they disguise themselves. We found all this very funny. But today you
have only to visit any chic boutique in Paris to realize that here, too, New
York has founded a school.'' Ominously his thoughts drift to ''a society
becoming each day ever more oppressive and inhuman,'' where the possibilities of
yesterday ''seem almost mythical today when we no longer dare to dream of doors:
at best, we may wonder about niches to cower in.''

Thinking back on the battle against racism, he defines mutual tolerance as
''relative equality and sufficient physical distance from one another.'' And he
contemplates with skepticism ''the future of a world whose cultures, all
passionately fond of one another, would aspire only to celebrate one another in
such confusion that each would lose any attraction it could have for the others
and its own reasons for existing.'' Thinking back on humanism in the West he
argues that individual liberty is not a natural right, castigates Western
humanism for ''isolating man from the rest of creation'' and holds out as
genuinely humane exactly those preliterate societies we regard as most
superstitious. Thinking back on the history of our planet, he likens humanity to
flour worms that ''with the toxins they secrete, poison one another at a
distance long before their density exceeds the available food supply in their
sack.''

It's all breathtaking and alarming, some of it wonderful, some of it ridiculous.
Not everyone will appreciate the essays in the collection, a few of which are
tedious in their microscopic attention to the details of botany, kinship and
folklore. But those who care to try must first consider why the book is called
''The View From Afar,'' and why Levi- Strauss, the trickster of structuralism,
has been seen close up by some very smart people as a seer into deeper truths,
and by other very smart people as a shaman whose magic is suspect.


FOR 25 years he has been the object of adoration and scorn in the
English-speaking world. Criticisms of his work are well developed, widely known
and even rehearsed in academic circles. There's that tendency to convert
anything ''hot,'' passionate, sexual, anxiety-ridden, ''of the body,'' into its
opposite - the ''cool'' mentation of the aptly labeled ''cerebral savage.'' It
is almost as if desire were an idea for him, ambivalence a difficulty in
classification, anxiety a contradictory argument and lust a premise in search of
a conclusion.

Nowhere is this more evident than in a 1972 lecture to alumnae of Barnard
College in New York. There is Levi-Strauss informing those women that Franz Boas
- the founding father of American anthropology, whose intellectual progeny
include Ruth Benedict and Margaret Mead - loved to lecture to classes of
debutantes at Barnard. Levi- Strauss reminisces: 30 years earlier, his own first
lecture in ''the traditional American academic system'' took place at Barnard,
and he still remembers his panic - none of the students were taking notes;
''instead of writing, they were knitting.''

Now, before this sophisticated audience of highly educated women, he launches
into a structural analysis of various versions of an American Indian story about
an ogress who kidnaps little boys and girls. The ogress, it seems, likes to eat
clams, all except the siphons - ''those soft little trunks by means of which
mollusks take in and expel water, and which are conspicuous in some species of
clams.'' A supernatural helper tells the child how to escape from the ogress.
Collect the discarded siphons, place them on the tips of your fingers and wave
them at the ogress, ''who will become so frightened that she will fall backward
into an abyss and be killed.'' This is done and the wealth of the ogress goes to
the child's father, who shares it with others.

The Northwest Coast Indians, whose story that is, think it is about the origins
of their cultural practice of ceremonial gift-giving. But Levi-Strauss, who
likes very much to figure out what a story or myth is ''really'' about, is on a
search for hidden meanings. ''Why,'' he asks, ''should a powerful ogress be
frightened by something as harmless and insignificant as clam siphons?'' Why
indeed? One almost expects Freud to burst through the walls of the lecture hall.
But no, Levi-Strauss moves on to a related story, a young boy who enjoys his
captivity and refuses to return to his parents. When he reluctantly agrees to
flee, he puts mountain goat horns on his fingers to frighten his captor. In
another version it's the beards of the clam, described as tufts of silky
filament, that are used to make sheaths for the fingers.

So what are the symbols in the story - those clam siphons that get nipped off
and discarded, the goat horns, the beards - really about? Could it have
something to do with ambivalence over sex identity, genital associations,
castration, and so on? No - what the story is about, according to Levi- Strauss,
is the contrast between water and land, marine and terrestrial nature, means and
ends. Freud's logic does not seem to compute in this French structural calculus.

From the title of the book down to its punctilious analyses of discrepancies in
ethnographers' reports about Australian aborigine marriage rules, ''The View
From Afar'' calls attention to a problem of scale. Levi-Strauss seems more
comfortable with life as represented through a microscope or in an aerial
photograph - moving in to blow up a detail, stepping back transcendently in
search of higher- order patterns. In one direction or the other we quickly
recede from the middle-sized world where we live.

At times the experience is exhilarating, as we participate in the high priest's
irrepressible quest to overcome all dualisms, contrasts and oppositions. At
times it feels like a search after unity gone berserk. Just as the Surrealists
sought, to quote Andre Breton, ''a mental vantage point (a view from afar?) from
which life and death, the real and the imaginary, past and future, communicable
and incommunicable, high and low, will no longer be perceived as
contradictories,'' so too for Levi- Strauss everything must be reconciled -
''the physical and the moral, nature and man, the mind and the world.''

At times it reads like a parody. Acknowledging an analogy between his own
research on myths and the art work of Max Ernst, Levi-Strauss presents a
structural analysis of Lautreamont's poetic image, ''Chance Encounter of a
Sewing Machine and an Umbrella on a Dissecting Table.'' Identified are a series
of contrasts and resemblances. ''The machine is made for sewing, the other
device is against rain; the machine acts upon material and transforms it, the
umbrella offers passive resistance to it. Both articles have a point: the point
of the umbrella ensures its protection . . . the point of the sewing machine is
sharp and aggressive.''

Now, while it is certainly true that to understand is to compare, and comparison
is a play on likeness and difference, Levi-Strauss's structural search for
''deeper'' truths seems to some critics like searching for the ''real''
artichoke by divesting it of its leaves. Levi-Strauss, of course, thinks he's
going right to the ''heart'' of the matter. Whatever the reader's taste in
artichokes, do sample the intellectual tidbits in the collection. Levi-Strauss
is to anthropology as the Surrealists are to painting. One can't be certain
whether, fantasylike and fantastic, he is really real or for real, or whether it
really matters if he's wearing the cape of magic or the mantle of science.


IT is high praise of Levi-Strauss, and perhaps a

condemnation of certain fashionable trends in

cultural analysis, that the high priest almost

seems outmoded. With an imperial command of diverse fields, he strives for
generalizations about the entire human condition. While others conclude that if
there's no absolute truth there's no truth, he defends the idea of objectivity.
While others conclude that if the world can't be known literally, innocently and
directly there's nothing to be known, that it's all in the eye of the beholder,
he goes on searching. While others feel secure, ironically, with the current
Continental dogma that there is definitely, absolutely no privileged knowledge,
it is Levi-Strauss who is entitled to, and who inspires, respect. While other
high priests of our culture lose their faith yet hang on to their jobs, it is
Levi-Strauss who retires, still enchanted - and incorrigible. If you ever feel
like leaving anthropology, or learning it, read him.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Claude Levi-Strauss

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Guilt Approach To World Affairs

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 216 words


To the Editor:


In his April 6 column, ''Cambodia Forgotten (1),'' Sydney H. Schanberg denounces
the relative indifference of the West to the human tragedy that took place in
Cambodia. Yet, he may forget that the left in this country and in Europe only
very slowly and reluctantly admitted the existence of that situation. It is
hardly simplifying to say the media were not interested, nor was liberal opinion
mobilized, because denouncing a revolutionary regime in the third world is a
moral problem for many. And why bother with such distractions when there is so
much to blame on the ugly American, U.S. policies and the Vietnam mess?

The idea that the Reagan Administration should condemn China for its support of
the Khmer Rouge movement (incidentally, in the hard world of diplomacy, China
recognized the Pinochet Government after it overthrew President Allende in
Chile) is interesting. However, would that not be criticized as superpower
hypocrisy and remind us of the role of this country in Central America?

In the end, to deal with international affairs in terms of collective guilt and
global moralism may be an American trait (as it appears from my European
standpoint) but it is as misleading as ''ideological dogma'' may be.

ANTHONY MAYER New York, April 7, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WORKING PROFILE: Sam Nunn;
EXPERTISE ON BUDGET OF MILITARY

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 949 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 14


Before Senators Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania and Daniel J. Evans of Washington
cast their votes on the MX missile last month, they both sought advice from
Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia. What made those conversations unusual is that Mr.
Nunn is a Democrat, and the two other legislators are Republicans.

A few days later, Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the Democratic
leader, was asked his reaction to a plan that would cut military manpower. ''I
usually follow Mr. Nunn's position on many things having to do with defense,''
Mr. Byrd answered.

Such incidents reflect the increasing influence Senator Nunn wields these days
on Capitol Hill. As the legislators prepare to debate the Pentagon budget for
the next fiscal year, the Georgia Democrat will be taking his place on center
stage as ''Mr. Defense,'' the leading Congressional expert on military matters.

Jackson Left It Vacant

That title was left vacant in 1983 by the death of Senator Henry M. Jackson of
Washington, the senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee. Today, Mr. Nunn
is the consensus choice among military experts as Mr. Jackson's rightful heir.

''Nunn's influence has grown enormously,'' said James R. Schlesinger, who was
Secretary of Defense in the mid-1970's.

''Sam is very much the key vote on defense matters,'' said Senator Dan Quayle of
Indiana, a Republican member of the armed services panel. ''He brings along a
certain number of Senators willing to follow his advice.''

In amassing this sort of influence, Mr. Nunn has followed the dictum that
knowledge leads to power, particularly in an area as complex as military
affairs. ''I try to be objective,'' Mr. Nunn says of his own role, ''I try to
tell people what the facts are.''

Character Is a Factor

But while a legislator will periodically become influential on a certain issue,
technical expertise alone is seldom sufficient. Fellow members of Congress also
consider the character of their colleagues before following their lead. As
Senator David L. Boren, an Oklahoma Democrat, put it: ''Sam Nunn is not a
wheeler-dealer. He has an excellent reputation for personal integrity.''

In discussing military issues, Mr. Nunn's favorite word is ''reality.'' He says,
for example, that the Pentagon is not being realistic about the level of money
it can expect from Congress this year, and he argues that legislators will have
to start setting priorites among competing needs. That is the main reason he
favors limiting the deployment of MX missiles to 40, and using the money saved
on this 10-warhead intercontinental ballistic missile for other strategic
systems.

''I'm not much on symbolism,'' said the Senator, who sees the MX as a vulnerable
and expendable weapon. ''I try to scratch beneath the surface.''

He Heads a Working Group

Mr. Nunn's reach is now extending beyond legislation to national politics. As a
Southerner with a moderately conservative pro-military record, he provides a
concrete rebuttal to the charge that Democrats are ''soft on defense.'' That is
why Senator Byrd chose the Georgian to a head a special working group that is
drafting a new set of military policies for Senate Democrats.

''The Democrats have awakened to the fact that the public doesn't wholly trust
them in matters of national security,'' said Mr. Schlesinger. ''They're trying
to move back into the center on defense policy, and one thing they can do is
elevate Sam as their prophet.''

The Georgian shares the belief that the Democrats have moved too far to the left
on many issues, not just military spending. As a result, he became a charter
member of the Democratic Leadership Council, a group of younger, more moderate
party officials that is trying to ''move the party back into the mainstream,''
as the Senator put it.

Of course, such a shift would probably make it easier for a moderate candidate,
such as Mr. Nunn, to capture the Democratic nomination, and many political
experts expect the 46- year-old Senator to make a run for the Presidency at some
point.

His Demeanor Is Cited

Some of Mr. Nunn's critics say that he is still too conservative, and too
Southern, to merit a place on the national ticket. Others complain that his
scholarly demeanor is too dense, that he lacks the flair and dash needed to stir
a general audience.

''Sam has to learn to loosen up a bit,'' said one Democratic strategist.

But on military matters, Mr. Nunn's earnest thoroughness bolsters his authority.
''Sam really does his homework,'' said R. James Woolsey, who recently edited a
book on nuclear arms that included an article by the Senator. ''In many
Congressional offices, somebody on the staff usually drafts something and the
Senator makes a few changes. But Sam must have written and rewritten that
article by himself a dozen times.''

Vinson Was a Mentor

To a degree, Mr. Nunn's military expertise and authority can be traced to
circumstance. His great-uncle was Carl Vinson, long-time chairman of the House
Armed Services Committee, and Mr. Nunn spent a year working for that committee.
He came to the Senate in 1973, at a time when the Vietnam War had soured many
members of Congress on the military, and when he showed an aptitude for the
subject, he was quickly thrust ahead.

Describing Mr. Nunn's role and power on Capitol Hill, Mr. Woolsey recalled the
time that Lyndon B. Johnson, then majority leader, predicted that he would lose
a key vote because his side had the ''minnows,'' and the opponents had the
''whales''.

''The whales influence what happens in the pond more than the minnows,'' noted
Mr. Woolsey. ''Sam Nunn is a very much a whale.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sam Nunn (NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY AFTER VIETNAM: STRONGER FORCE EMERGES

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR; The author of this article, who reports on military
affairs from the Washington bureau of The Times, was a correspondent in
Indochina for five years.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3149 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 14


Institutionally, the armed services of the United States were among the
casualties of the Vietnam War, but many of the wounds have healed remarkably,
leaving a military body in some ways healthier than ever.

There is a tendency for some civilians to believe the armed forces learned
little from Vietnam, and forgot most of that. That thesis does not bear scrutiny
as the 10th anniversary of the fall of South Vietnam, April 30, approaches.

Some soldiers think the lessons of the war in Southeast Asia could have been
studied more systematically and embedded in current military doctrine more
formally. But change growing out of the war has not been negligible.



'First Clear Failure'

Unquestionably, Vietnam was a trauma for the armed forces just as it was for the
political community and the public. Gen. Bruce Palmer Jr. of the Army, retired,
recently wrote that it was ''the first clear failure in our history.'' For the
military the scars were not only psychic.

Although the Army arrived in Vietnam in 1965 well-trained, well-motivated and
well-led, the stress and frustration of a peculiar conflict wore down that
admirable mechanism and produced a degradation in capability and elan that
lasted until well after the troops had left Southeast Asia.

But in many measures of capability the services are clearly better today than in
1965. And some problems not fully solved seem relatively close to solution. On
the other hand, it is not clear that the military is able or willing to apply
some of the war's lessons.



Gains From the War

A ledger of the war's legacy shows many positive entries, including the
following:


- The loss of Indochina did not cripple the United States strategically, as some
had predicted. General Palmer has said that in the course of the war the Seventh
Army in Europe became little more than a ''training and replacement depot'' for
Vietnam. The Seventh Army has been restored to an effective fighting force, and
many senior officers have written that the United States is much more able to
meet commitments abroad than it was during the war.


- The Air Force, whose aerial combat ratios were 3 enemy planes shot down to 1
lost in World War II and 10 to 1 in Korea, was shocked by a mere 2-to- 1 ratio
in Vietnam, against poorly trained North Vietnamese MIG pilots. Concluding that
its own training had been poor, the Air Force has instituted one of the most
realistic combat training programs in military history. Against a Soviet Air
Force that does little realistic training, it might prove decisive. A similar
emphasis on realistic training is found in other services.


- In the Vietnam era the ''whiz kid'' civilian systems analysts in Robert S.
McNamara's Pentagon viewed as mere platitudes of little value the ''principles
of war'' formulated by the Prussian army officer Carl von Clausewitz and other
theoreticians of war of the past. In recent years, there has been a burst of
philosophical revivalism in which uniformed officers have returned to a study of
such principles.


- Partly as a result of that, officers conscious of their role as military
advisers to civilian authority have tried to re-emphasize the unbreakable link
between politics and war expounded by Clausewitz and to redefine the conditions
in which the United States should commit itself to war. Greatly simplified,
their message is ''never again'' - not without clear, achievable and vital
objectives and, especially, not without broad public approval. But what is still
unclear is whether officers will insist on being heard or will in a crisis
relapse into what they call the unfortunate ''can do syndrome'' of Vietnam.


- Although improvements in military technology were under way in Vietnam and
fertilized there, they have become increasingly significant. Technology creates
its own problems but has been the main contributor to a leap forward in
lethality. Few people outside the military, and not all those in it, seem to
realize how deadly future conventional combat is likely to be and what that
portends for national security if it becomes understood that the United States
may be able to fight outnumbered and win.

Not all of the legacy or lessons can be encapsulated, and some parts of the
ledger are not as positive.

Special Operations: How They Are Used

There has been at least some effort to use ideas that were never really employed
in Vietnam.

An example can be found in Special Operations. When created, the Army Special
Forces were trained in both ''unconventional warfare'' and
''counterinsurgency.'' The first is special, usually behind-the-lines operations
meant to support the main effort and disrupt the main enemy, perhaps by creating
insurgencies of one's own. The second is countering hostile insurgents, most
often by training, organizing and even leading indigenous units, as was done
with the Montagnard hill tribes of Vietnam.

The Green Berets in Vietnam made no secret of their disappointment that they
were forced to spend most of their efforts on counterinsurgency rather than
unconventional warfare. For instance, trail watching in North Vietnam was almost
all done by ethnic Cambodian or Nung mercenaries.

It was civilian officials in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations who became
enraptured with counterinsurgency and heavily invested military resources in it.
But the mililtary was not blameless.

Col. Harry G. Summers Jr., who is on the staff of the Army War College and is
the author of the much admired critique of the war ''On Strategy,'' is a major
force behind today's military introspection. Calling counterinsurgency an
example of ''the tyranny of fashion,'' Colonel Summers says, ''Twenty years
later it is hard to envision the force with which the concept of
counterinsurgency struck the Army.''

To him the counterinsurgency fad demonstrated a fatal inability to recognize the
true nature of the war. He argues that Vietnam was no longer a pure insurgency
or guerrilla war after regular North Vietnamese Army units infiltrated the south
in 1964-65, a judgment with which few soldiers or civilians with Vietnam War
experience would disagree.

He argues that this failure to recognize the war's nature was the main reason it
was lost because it bled resources from the conventional arena and contributed
to a poverty of strategic thought on how to isolate the South Vietnam
battlefield from infiltration by regular North Vietnamese troops.

The last few years have seen a revival of interest in special operations, but
colored by the Vietnam experience.

A new Special Operations command was recently created to coordinate Special
Forces and Army Rangers. The emphasis now is increasingly on unconventional
warfare. Although the actual performance of small commando units that preceded
the main body in the 1983 invasion of Grenada did not impress all military
critics, the capability has come into being and can presumably be perfected.

Some thinkers have persuasively argued that while a better strategy to block
North Vietnamese infiltration was badly needed, a more deft use of
counterinsurgency concepts was also needed.

John Paul Vann and his friend General Palmer believed that the main American
task was to develop a strong South Vietnam, but that the goal was not reached.
In the end the war was lost when 17 North Vietnamese divisions overran the South
in 51 days. Poor leadership, strategic immobility and flawed planning by the
South Vietnamese contributed to their downfall, say most military students of
the war.

Counterinsurgency itself retains importance because guerrilla war remains a
feature of world politics.

Gen. Wallace H. Nutting, a former commander of the Southern Command in Central
America, repeatedly stressed the political aspects of the conflict in El
Salvador.

Col. Joseph Stringham, a former senior adviser in that country, placed strong
emphasis on avoiding past mistakes such as ''the body count syndrome'' of
Vietnam, or efforts to defeat guerrillas by pure attrition. Army mobile training
teams apply a good deal of Vietnam experience in training forces in several
nations confronted with insurgency.

Scope of the War: Defining the Limit

Any assessment of how well the armed services may have learned the lessons of
Vietnam requires consideration of what the principal lessons were. One major
issue is the question of how United States power can be effectively applied in
the late 20th century.

There is no serious debate that Vietnam was a limited war. In recent years a
number of people, mostly civilians and many of them political conservatives,
have professed to see this as the source of disaster, arguing that timid
civilian authorities handcuffed the military and refused to permit the
application of sufficient firepower. Some go so far as to argue that without
such restraint the war could have been won in a week or even a weekend.

This view does not seem to be widespread among professional soldiers.

As one officer says, most wars in history have been limited. Among the few
exceptions are World War II and the Punic Wars, in which Rome ultimately
destroyed Carthage, killed most of its citizens and even scattered salt in the
furrows of farm fields.

In his book ''The 25-Year War,'' General Palmer seems to suggest that there is
nothing hopeless in limited war, per se, and that such conflicts are likely to
remain more plausible than total war.

But such military intellectuals think it is important to understand what
''limited'' actually meant in the Vietnam context. In practical terms, there has
to be some limit on manpower and firepower, although many officers have strongly
disagreed then and now with the limits set by President Johnson and his
advisers.

What really distinguishes limited war is that the national objective of the war
is limited. Again, many thoughtful professional soldiers see no fatal flaw in
that. In retrospect, the Korean War is now seen as a considerable success,
though not a classical ''victory.''

What is important, say Colonel Summers, General Palmer and former Army Chief of
Staff Fred C. Weyand, who was the third and last Vietnam commander, is that the
limited objective be clear, that it be broad enough to achieve United States
vital goals, and, above all, that the means, even though limited, be sufficient
to reach the objective.

That may seem so simple as to be trite; measured against the yardstick of
Vietnam reality, it appears much more profound.

Gen. Wallace Greene, who was Commandant of the Marine Corps for much of the war,
believed that success might require a million men in the field. The
Administration tried to set an upper limit of 470,000, later modestly expanded
to 550,000.

Many senior officers at the time believed that ''constraints on the total
force'' were leading to disaster, but Gen. William C. Westmoreland, the Vietnam
commander for much of the war, wrote in his book ''A Soldier Reports'': ''I
suffered my problems in Vietnam because I believed that success eventully would
be ours despite them, that they were not to be, as Napoleon put it, instruments
of my army's downfall.''

The ''can do'' syndrome was an unpalatable act of discipline for some officers,
but a personal choice for others.

Preparation vs. Conduct: Striking a Balance

The United States has had persistent problems about how the military
establishment should be led and organized. Vietnam threw these questions into
sharp focus but did not clearly resolve them.

Uniformed and civilian military analysts often draw the distinction between
''blacksmiths and swordsmen,'' by which they mean the difference between
military bureaucrats who procure weapons and fighters capable of wielding them.
Both are needed, but a healthy balance has to be struck.

Colonel Summers describes the problem as knowing the difference between
preparation for war and the conduct of war itself. There is widespread concern
that before, during and after Vietnam the bureaucrats of preparation have been
dominant and sometimes stifle the art of soldiering. R. James Woolsey, former
Under Secretary of the Navy, has said Pentagon analysts tend to develop ''an
instinct for the capillaries'' rather than for the jugular.

Lieut. Gen. James H. Hollingsworth of the Army, retired, who was noted for his
gruff aggressiveness in Vietnam, has said: ''Any damn fool can write a plan.
It's the execution of it that gets you all screwed up.''

To some veterans of Vietnam, General Hollingsworth's remark could serve as a
capsule history of the war

Many good ideas were conceived and adopted as policy in the Vietnam War, but
carrying them out successfully was often not possible. Clausewitz wrote more
than 150 years ago that in war ''everything looks simple,'' but that only those
who have seen combat can understand how difficult the simplest task becomes in
the ''friction'' of war. The use of complex and inflexible plans in quest of
vague goals only exacerbates the problem. Some modern soldiers have used a less
elegant formulation, K.I.S.S. for ''keep it simple, stupid.''

General Palmer wrote that the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Vietnam Commander,
General Westmoreland, not only failed to resist civilian interference in
detailed military planning but, worse, failed to develop a coherent strategy
that would have offered a reasonable chance of success.

Executing a Plan: Who Leads the Men

To execute any plan, simple or not, the armed forces must have gifted,
experienced and innovative leaders and must let them exercise initiative.

Brig. Gen. William R. Etnyre, commander of the 16,500-man Marine Corps force
that is earmarked for possible use in Southwest Asia, said recently that in the
wide-ranging, mechanized desert warfare foreseen there the emphasis would be on
''mission structured orders.'' There is similar emphasis in other services.

This means, in theory at least, that battalion commanders will be given
considerable latitude in achieving their assigned goals. Although this grows in
part out of present military necessity, it is also an outgrowth of Vietnam.

In the Vietnam War, command helicopters packed with radio gear permitted brigade
and division commanders to circle a battlefield and to usurp the role of company
and battalion commanders by issuing detailed tactical orders from on high. Many
officers now see this as a mistake. Such interference may not be repeated, but
it is likely to be limited anyway because of hostile airpower and antiaircraft
rockets in the most likely future scenarios.

Early in the war it was not uncommon to see field-grade officers, majors and
colonels with two stars on their Combat Infantryman's Badge. One of them, Mel
Garten, then a lieutenant colonel in the 101st Airborne Division, remarked that
this meant ''a perfect attendance record,'' winning badge and stars for combat
in World War II, Korea and Vietnam, where Colonel Garten lost both his legs.

The American armed forces, in short, entered Vietnam with more combat experience
than any force in the world and with a high percentage of very experienced unit
commanders and noncommissioned officers.

That percentage is probably lower today, but Vietnam produced a new cadre of
leaders experienced in war. A great many of today's field-grade officers led
small combat units and practically all general officers saw duty. Such
experience is priceless, most military men believe.

There was not much to criticize in small-unit tactics in Vietnam. United States
forces won almost all of their battles; failure grew out of what General Palmer
calls a ''fatally flawed'' strategy and the failure to create in South Vietnam a
durable military protege.

However, some military innovation emerged from the war and has tended to
strengthen today's military forces.

The helicopter as a tool for moving troops and the armed helicopter for
versatile and close support from the air are examples. The Soviet Union, and
other armies, have also used the helicopter in these new ways.

The M-16 rifle caused problems in Vietnam because of avoidable mistakes in the
selection of gunpowder and in a modification of the gun's design. But those
mistakes have been corrected, and General Etnyre calls the M-16 ''the best rifle
we have ever had.'' Military communications have been significantly improved
since the war.

The Public's Support: How Much Knowledge

There are other issues raised by Vietnam that are peripheral to some people and
of great importance to others. One is the question of how reporters should be
permitted to cover a future conflict.

Although many senior officers, retired and active, agree that the press did not
reveal operational secrets in Vietnam, some believe that television coverage of
the war greatly contributed to a loss of public support by graphically depicting
the suffering.

But Colonel Summers cites Clausewitz's observation, ''It would be futile - even
wrong - to try to shut one's eyes to what war really is from sheer distress at
its brutality.''

To at least some military thinkers it would be more useful to involve the public
emotionally in war - the Government tried hard to avoid this in Vietnam - than
to try to suppress public knowledge of the horrors of war.

Colonel Summers censoriously quotes Secretary of Defense McNamara's remark in
the 1960's that ''the greatest contribution Vietnam is making'' was to develop a
capacity to go to war ''without the necessity of arousing the public ire.'' Some
would say the attempt was to go to war imperceptibly, without even arousing
notice. General Palmer said, ''It seems rather obvious that a nation cannot
fight a war in cold blood.''

General Weyand remarked when he was Army Chief of Staff in 1976 that the Army
was a ''people's army'' and that the public has a ''jealous and proprietary
interest in its involvement.''

In a chorus of voices, such officers as Gen. David Jones and Gen. Edward C.
Meyers, both recently retired from the Joint Chiefs, have argued that the
military must advise a President of the risks of any combat commitment. One of
those risks was stated by General Weyand when he said: ''In the final analysis,
the American Army is not so much an arm on the executive branch as it is an arm
of the American people. The Army, therefore, cannot be committed lightly.''

If, as some have argued, the United States seemed a ''pitiful giant'' during
Vietnam, there has been a strong recovery since the war in a military sense. Its
military can be committed in a future crisis, even if more caution is shown,
with a good degree of confidence in the likely performance.

Colonel Summers quotes a remark by Clausewitz that may have relevance on the
10th anniversary of the fall of Vietnam: ''In war the result is never final,
merely a transitory evil, for which a remedy may be found in political
conditions at some future date.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of soldiers (AP) (page B6); photo of war helicopters (UPI) (page
B6)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WHY INTEREST IN THE VIETNAM WAR IS REKINDLED

BYLINE: By Stanley Karnow;Stanley Karnow, author of ''Vietnam: A History,'' was
chief correspondent for the Public Broadcasting Service series ''Vietnam: A
Television History.''

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1105 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The passions that divided the nation during the conflict have cooled, as I can
testify from speaking on the subject around the country to political groups,
civic associations, businessmen, veterans, the military and others, including
college students who were not yet born when the first American combat battalions
landed in Southeast Asia in the spring of 1965. Vietnam has become a metaphor, a
code word, that signifies a futile struggle in a remote corner of the earth. It
evokes the impression of American boys bogged down in an endless venture for
dubious goals that could be neither attained nor abandoned. Thus, the question
that arises again and again is how to avert a repetition of the Vietnam tragedy.
Whatever the answer, this concern seems to contradict the landslide election
victory of Ronald Reagan, whose pledge to restore America's omnipotence struck a
chord with so many voters.

A decade ago, as Communist tanks rolled into Saigon, the United States sustained
its first defeat in the longest war in its history. In the years that followed,
Americans attempted to forget Vietnam, as they might try to erase the memory of
a nightmare. But public interest in the Vietnam experience is now being
rekindled. Americans are not refighting the war, but they are seeking to
understand what went wrong there - and their exploration has a current purpose.
Vietnam appears to have instilled in Americans an ambivalent attitude of pride
and prudence. Humiliated by the setback to the legend of America the invincible,
they want the United States to regain its former prestige as the world's
pre-eminent power. Yet they are reluctant to foot the bill to fulfill that
ambitious dream.

The so-called Vietnam syndrome has not driven most Americans toward
isolationism. On the contrary, they are well aware of the United States' stake
overseas. But, perhaps intuitively, they have come to feel that our foreign
policy should be based on a combination of principle and pragmatism.

They would intervene to save Western Europe, Japan or Israel in the event of
attack, since they deem the fate of these democratic allies to be intimately
linked to America's own security. Besides, they believe that American troops are
equipped to cope with such challenges.  By contrast, the haunting recollection
of Vietnam has soured their taste for similar missions in areas like Central
America, where they envision American soldiers being harassed by guerrillas in
swamps and jungles in a hopeless effort to protect inept, corrupt and unpopular
regimes unable or unwilling to help themselves.  So, the Vietnam drama has made
Americans more selective than they were a generation ago, when they believed it
was the United States' duty to exercise its influence everywhere.  Consider the
present mood in Beallsville, Ohio, a town of 500, which lost six young men in
Vietnam. A community dedicated to the old-fashioned virtues of religion, family
and patriotism, it is proud of its sacrifice. But as the father of one of the
dead told me: ''When you get right down to it, my son died in vain.''

An undergraduate at the University of Kentucky, for whom Vietnam is ancient
history, offered a comment that I have heard in assorted forms on other
campuses: ''We failed because we tried to push our values onto people from a
totally different culture. Some places are just not meant to be run like
America.''

Vietnam has also left Americans skeptical toward institutions that once
commanded their confidence. Many have lost their faith in journalists, often
accused of misreporting the war, while disclosures of official dissimulation
have widely eroded the Government's credibility.

President Reagan's ratings have never been higher. Yet, according to a
Washington Post-ABC poll published in February, four out of five Americans
oppose his campaign to exert pressure aimed at toppling the Sandinista
leadership in Nicaragua.

The reticence has reached into Congress, which in August 1964 gave President
Lyndon B. Johnson a free hand in Southeast Asia by passing the Tonkin Gulf
Resolution with virtually no dissent. Reflecting on that episode, Representative
Stephen J. Solarz of New York said recently: ''Never again will we sign such a
blank check.''

Nowhere is caution more apparent than among the senior officers who fought in
Vietnam. They repeatedly assert in private conversation that they should not be
committed to another conflict unless it has unqualified approval at home, their
objective is plainly articulated and they are allowed to win.

Gen. Edward C. Meyer, who retired last year as Army chief of staff, has also
stressed that force may be the wrong approach in regions like Central America,
where the problems are predominantly political, economic and social. It is worth
recalling in this regard that a majority of the Joint Chiefs of Staff initially
argued against intervention in Vietnam.

Even Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, despite his reputation as
something of a hawk, has warned that the United States can no longer play the
role of global policeman. ''We have learned that there are limits to how much of
our spirit and blood and treasure we can afford to forfeit in meeting our
responsibility to keep peace and freedom,'' he said in a speech last November,
adding that future engagements abroad must be tailored to a careful
interpretation of ''our own national interest.''

A master politician, Mr. Reagan is not oblivious to these sentiments. Despite
his tough rhetoric, therefore, he has studiously avoided the kind of language
uttered by John F. Kennedy, who promised in his inaugural address to ''pay any
price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to
assure the survival and success of liberty.''

Mr. Reagan's conduct has also been circumspect, as evidenced by his prompt
withdrawal of the Marines from Beirut after the devastating terrorist assault
against their barracks in October 1983. Lyndon Johnson, it will be remembered,
sharply escalated the war in Vietnam when the enemy blasted an American
installation in Pleiku in 1965.

Given the debates between Congress and the White House, not to mention
differences within the Reagan Administration itself, the United States seems to
me to be in a period of transition, trying to define a realistic foreign policy
that fits both its capabilities and its vital interests.

But 10 years after the fall of Saigon, the disastrous end of a war that most
Americans still see as a blunder, the American public is unlikely to tolerate a
return to any policy that smells even faintly of ''another Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY HAS A NEW BREED OF OFFICER

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: FORT BENNING, Ga.


After being a college student through four years of turbulent protest against
the war in Vietnam, Thomas A. Racioppi of Newark graduated from Rutgers in 1970
and promptly enlisted in the Army.

''I wasn't content to flow with the tide,'' he said in a recent conversation
here, ''particularly when I saw that tide as destructive. My impression was that
those folks were out to destroy, not to build up.''

Today he is Major Racioppi, a middle-ranking professional soldier of the post-
Vietnam generation of officers who are making a mark on the Army different from
that of the colonels and generals who fought in Vietnam and now command the
Army.

Major Racioppi and his generation were in college in the late 1960's and early
1970's and went into the Army too late to fight in Vietnam. The older officers
of that generation are majors with more than 10 years of service; the younger,
captains with less than 10 years. The Concerns Differ

The Vietnam and post-Vietnam generations seem concerned with different issues.
Those who fought in the war believe they were left to twist in the wind without
support at home and thus resist the use of military power without clear-cut
public backing. The newer generation resists unthinking discipline as it seeks
to preserve individual initiative.

In the period after Vietnam, from which the United States started withdrawing in
1970, a process that was complete by 1973, few Americans wanted to serve in the
armed forces.  Many who made the Army a career are still swimming against the
tide, for reasons that on the surface may seem a paradox.

On the one hand, the post-Vietnam generation of officers rejected the sweeping
antimilitary protests and the free-wheeling way of life of their peers to join
an institution built around a well-defined hierarchy and demanding a large
degree of discipline.

On the other hand, those who became officers in the 1970's had absorbed their
values in the 1960's and brought into the Army a sense of skepticism toward
everyone and everything, including authority.

Two Major Shifts for Personnel

In addition, they have matured as officers in an Army that has seen two major
shifts in the makeup of its personnel: a volunteer force after 33 years of
conscription and the greater presence of women after 200 years in which
masculine values dominated.

Senior officers note the changes. Maj. Gen. John W. Foss, commanding general at
Fort Benning, said that if a subordinate questioned an order, ''No longer can I
say to some major or captain, 'Well, young man, that's the way it is' - they
want to know why.''

General Foss approved of the questioning attitude of younger officers as a
healthy contribution to the Army. ''But I don't expect them to come in here and
call me a dummy,'' he said with a chuckle.

The attitudes of the post-Vietnam officers toward those who fought the war there
is mixed. A group of captains, who were commissioned in the late 1970's, said
they respected the officers who had borne the brunt of the unpopular battle for
Indochina.

Nor did they blame those officers for the defeat in Vietnam. ''The military did
well in Vietnam,'' said one captain as his associates nodded. ''It wasn't the
military who lost the war.''

But the younger officers said they resented the attitude of some Vietnam
veterans who tried to demand unquestioning obedience. One captain recalled a
colonel cutting off an argument by noting that the captain had never served
overseas. And some younger officers expressed skepticism about the ethics of a
few officers of the Vietnam generation for using other people to get ahead. One
major said some of them blamed others for errors, or else covered them up.

Although General Foss said he was receptive to ideas from young officers, some
of them worried that the Army would eventually stifle the initiative of the
post-Vietnam generation. One major said that officers, in the long run, must
conform or leave.

The Emphasis Is on Persuasion

At Fort Benning, which is the Army's infantry center and site of schools to
train junior officers, there is a new emphasis on persuasive leadership to meet
the changes among the young officers and to enable them to cope with volunteer
soldiers.

Maj. Thomas Dyne, a member of the the faculty for an advanced course that gives
officers their first taste of military education as well as training, said:
''Leaders today have to listen to their soldiers. Once you get the trust of
young soldiers, you can get them to do anything.''

''We are getting away from telling soldiers to listen to what I say and getting
more toward saying, 'What do you think?' '' Major Dyne said. ''Today we have to
tell soldiers why we want something done, because we have smart soldiers.''

He also said that his students, who are new captains, are being taught more
military history than before. ''We teach them as much history as we can,'' Major
Dyne said, on the theory that leaders can acquire common sense based on the
experience of the great captains who went before.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 908 words


MONDAY, APRIL 15, 1985 International

A runoff election in Peru seemed likely to follow the presidential election in
which a 35-year-old Social Democrat, Alan Garcia Perez, took first place but was
unlikely to win the clear majority needed to avoid a runoff. In the race for
second place, early returns gave a solid lead to the Marxist Mayor of Lima and
nominee of the United Left alliance, Alfonso Barrantes Lingan, over the
principal conservative candidate, Luis Bedoya Reyes. (Page A1, Column 6.)

The White House campaign for aid to Nicaraguan rebels will focus on the Reagan
Adminstration's assertion that Nicaragua is exporting Marxist revolution
throughout all of Central America, Administration officials say. Interviews with
the officials, members of Congress and others indicate that there is ample
evidence that Nicaragua has aided the leftist rebels in El Salvador who are
trying to change or overthrow the Government, but they acknowledge that they
have little evidence that the Nicaraguan Government is actively supporting
Communist insurgency elsewhere in Central America. (A9:1.)

Israel's Prime Minister was rebuffed by the hard-line wing of the Israeli
national unity Government, which refused to authorize a visit to Cairo by Ezer
Weizman, whose title is Minister in the Prime Minister's office. He is an
advocate of political flexibility toward the Arabs. (A3:4.) National

Attempts in space to salvage the Leasat communications satellite may be made
Tuesday. Controllers made elaborate plans to have space shuttle Discovery's crew
inspect the disabled satellite and perhaps use the shuttle's mechanical arm to
make repairs. Space agency officials said they had ruled out the possibility of
sending astronauts on a space walk in ''close proximity'' to the satellite.
(A1:3.)

Delays in I.R.S. return processing have never been greater than they are now,
even though the agency is using a new $100 million computer processing system.
An official of the Internal Revenue Service says its effort to enter the
sophisticated age of data processing has become a ''colossal computerized
disaster.'' (A1:4.)

U.S. military forces are stronger in some ways than ever despite the battering
they took in the Vietnam War. The impression among some civilians that forces
learned little from Vietnam and forgot most of that does not bear scrutiny as
the 10th anniversary of the fall of South Vietnam approaches. In many measures
of capability the services are clearly better today than in 1965, when the Army
arrived in Vietnam well-trained, well- motivated and well-led. (A1:1.)

A history of American war brides is being recorded at a meeting in Long Beach,
Calif. of 300 women, mostly British, who married American servicemen in World
War II. The gathering is being held on the Queen Mary, the luxury liner that
became a troop ship during the war and later brought many of the brides to the
United States, and is now a tourist attraction. The meeting was the idea of two
daughters of war brides. The reminisences of the women will become part of the
Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library on the History of Women in America in
Cambridge, Mass. (A1:2.)

Congress faces intense lobbying at the end of the Easter recess from the Reagan
Administration on its request for aid to the Nicaraguan rebels and a spending
program aimed at cutting $52 billion from next year's Federal budget. David A.
Stockman, the budget director, called on Congress to pass the program or take
responsibility for huge tax increases. (A1:1.)

Research on a ''safe'' cigarette conducted for the last 10 years by the
Department of Agriculture, which is spending $5.3 million a year in the effort
to develop the tobacco, is criticized as improper by antismoking advocates in
the Administration and Congress, but defended by others, including the farm
agency. (A14:2.)

Another artificial heart implant was made by surgeons at Humana Hospital Audubon
in Louisville, Ky., the third there since November. Jack C. Burcham, a
62-year-old retired railroad engineer received the permanent artificial heart in
an operation that took six hours, longer than expected because surgeons had
difficulty fitting the fist-sized device into his chest. With the operation, his
surgeon, Dr. William C. DeVries, passed the halfway point in a series of
experiments designed to establish whether a mechanical heart can work well in a
human. (B7:1.) Metropolitan

A revised sex education curriculum introduced into 11 selected New York City
school districts last fall has been dropped by two districts because of
objections from constituent groups and school boards. The curriculum was
developed over five years in consultation with civic and religious groups for
kindergarten through the 12th grade and will eventually be offered citywide in
school districts that choose to adopt it. (A1:5.)

A battle for Westway's Federal funds was taken up Mayor Koch and Senator
Alphonse M. D'Amato of New York and Senator Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey. Mr.
Koch and Senator D'Amato attacked New Jersey sponsors of a proposed bill to bar
the Government from paying for 90 percent of the landfill for Westway, talking
of retaliation. Senator Lautenberg criticized the project as an excuse to help
real-estate developers. (B5:2.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 908 words


TENNESSEE: Cry of the Heart. By Dotson Rader. 348 pages. Illustrated. Doubleday.
$16.95.  THE KINDNESS OF STRANGERS: The

Life of Tennessee Williams. By Donald

Spoto. 409 pages. Illustrated. Little,

Brown. $19.95.  THERE'S little question that of these two books about the late
playwright Tennessee Williams, Dotson Rader's intimate memoir, ''Tennessee: Cry
of the Heart'' is the more absorbing and entertaining. Especially after reading
Donald Spoto's somewhat plodding ''Kindness of Strangers: The Life of Tennessee
Williams,'' one comes to Mr. Rader's book as upon an oasis and eagerly laps up
the gossip and the anecdotes that Mr. Rader has supplied.

It is here that we finally learn how Tennessee Williams talked: ''How much do
you get a night?'' said he to the author the first time they met, at a 1969 SoHo
party celebrating the opening of a pornographic film. ''One hundred bucks,''
said Mr. Rader, playing along with the joke. ''Well, baby,'' said Williams,
''what do you charge to escort an older gentleman to dinner?''

It is here that we learn about the playwright's working idiosyncrasies. ''For
some unfathomable reason he was loath to buy paper; instead he wrote on the back
of commercial stationery. That may have been purely because of convenience; more
likely it was due to his tightness with a buck.'' It is here that we get a sense
of his personality - his humor, his pride, his stubbornness, his character
quirks. Mr. Rader became a close friend of Williams's from the time of their
first meeting until the playwright's death in 1983. The two talked often and
intimately, and Mr. Rader has knitted the results into a candid and sometimes
quite touching portrait of a man he clearly loved.

Unfortunately, his accuracy cannot entirely be trusted. He makes an unconvincing
case that Tennessee Williams was a political radical at heart and that he was
drawn by Mr. Rader into a deep commitment to the anti- Vietnam movement. He
reports without question Williams's mocking version of a female friend's
hysterical pregnancy, neglecting to point out that the woman was actually dying
of stomach cancer. He absurdly misidentifies an individual that the playwright
perceived to be persecuting him. The best that can be said about ''Cry of the
Heart'' is that it is a version of reality as Williams and his coterie perceived
it.


Just how distorted this reality was can be seen from Donald Spoto's ''Kindness
of Strangers,'' a more conventional biography by the film historian whose most
recent book was the penetrating ''Dark Side of Genius: The Life of Alfred
Hitchcock.'' For Mr. Spoto anatomizes the nature and degree of Tennessee
Williams's drug dependency, which Mr. Rader presents one-dimensionally. The most
pronounced symptom of Williams's addiction was apparently a ripely developed
persecution complex that eventually colored most of his relationships with the
world.

So from the broader perspective of Mr. Spoto's narrative we perceive that there
are two sides to many of the stories that Mr. Rader presents only one side of.
We learn, for instance, that despite Williams's fury over the incident, his
brother, Dakin, had good and constructive reasons for committing him to a
hospital for drug therapy (an act for which Tennessee wrote Dakin out of his
will). We see how irrational was Williams's decision to dismiss his agent and
benefactor, Audrey Wood, and how fantastic was his claim that she was plotting
to exploit him. We come to understand that the dismissal of the playwright's
late work was fairly widespread and not confined to just a small list of critics
and bogymen that he blamed for the decline of his reputation.

Unhappily, Mr. Spoto's view of his subject is a little too objective. Instead of
anecdote and personal texture, what we mainly get is chronology, itinerary,
inventory, plot summary and an irritating repetition of the word ''great'' that
prompts one to reflect that while Tennessee Williams may well have been the best
playwright that the American theater has produced, surely compared with the
likes of Ibsen, Chekhov and Strindberg, he falls somewhat short of greatness.


Mr. Spoto also goes on at some theoretical length about the Dionysian element in
Williams's pursuit of sex and art. Mr. Rader observes somewhat more practically
that his creativity ''required the constant exercising of his emotions, taking
them to the breaking point and then coming back and writing what he
experienced.'' Mr. Spoto drily observes that from ''his earliest one-act plays
in 1938 to the end of his life, the name and image'' of his sister Rose ''and
her beloved roses pursued him,'' and then in a footnote provides us with ''a few
select examples'' of the rose imagery in his work. Mr. Rader offers us a much
earthier theory of the meaning of roses to Williams - a theory that concludes
with his speculation that among the pressures that drove Tennessee to
homosexuality was guilt over his attraction to his sister and his grandmother,
both of whom were named Rose.

In short, Mr. Spoto supplies us with facts, and Mr. Rader gives us feelings. Mr.
Spoto makes Tennessee Williams's life sound like unrelieved suffering; Mr. Rader
shows us that there was laughter amidst the agony. Each book enriches the other
and saves it from its excesses. Anyone interested in the desperate and
extraordinary life of this American genius will therefore be best off reading
the two books together.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Donald Spoto; photo of Doston Rader

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CHINESE IMMIGRANTS IN 'NIGHTSONGS'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 710 words


MARVA NABILI, an immigrant film maker from Iran, has written and directed
''Nightsongs,'' a fictional portrait of Chinese immigrants in New York. Having
spent several years living near and even working in Chinatown, she has compiled
a haunting biography of ''outsiders'' trying to survive in a new environment.
The slice-of-life details are depicted with the immediacy of a documentary using
a hidden camera. Being presented as part of public television's ''American
Playhouse'' series, ''Nightsongs'' can be seen tonight at 9 on WNET/Channel 13.

The Fung family is seen largely through the eyes of a young Chinese- Vietnamese
woman. She has come to live in the United States while her husband stays in
Malayasia and searches for their two sons, who were lost in the confusion of
their boat flight from Vietnam. The husband is related to the Fungs and, in a
letter, assures them that his wife, well-educated and from an aristocratic
background, wants only a job and will be of no bother. Moving into the cramped
Fung tenement apartment, the young woman rarely utters a word as she writes to
her husband in a personal journal.

With the Chinese-Vietnamese woman moving silently as a witness in the
background, the various members of the Fung family begin defining their assorted
roles. Mr. Fung, a fairly cheerful man, works in a Chinese restaurant in Long
Island. He can get home only once a week but is able to make more money than he
can in Chinatown, and perhaps one day he will be able to afford an apartment for
his family in Queens. Mrs. Fung does piecework for a garment factory, bringing
more work home at night to supplement her meager income. She brings the new
visitor to her boss for a possible job.

The oldest of the three Fung children is 15, and he goes to a high school where
his accent is ridiculed and he is harassed by bullies. Resentful and unhappy, he
makes an ideal target for the young recruiter for one of several gangs that deal
in protection. The boy keeps drifting into the gang scene until he finds himself
being handed a gun for his own protection. Watching from a discreet distance,
only the Chinese-Vietnamese woman realizes what is happening to him when his
problem erupts into a family crisis.

Within a rather slight narrative framework - the language is mostly Chinese with
English subtitles - Miss Nabili's film enters the relatively closed community of
the Chinese-American to gather representative images and vignettes. There is Mr.
Fung living in his ''migrant worker'' quarters in Long Island and making the
lonely train trip into Manhattan every Sunday morning. There are the women in
the factory, pushing to reach production quotas while traveling vendors urge
them to buy everything from floor mops to pantyhose. And there is the
Chinese-Vietnamese visitor, watching everything, rarely saying anything, sensing
that tragedy may be imminent.

Her journal entries to her husband are in the form of poems evoking heroic pasts
and delicate sensibilities. They are clearly meant to provide dramatic contrasts
to the dimness of the present, but unfortunately they tend to get in the way of
the film itself. Although admirably ambitious, the poetry device is less
illuminating than disruptive. The words cannot compete with glimpses of lives
unfolding in cramped apartments, friendly gambling clubs and bustling factories
- where the operating policies are questionable, to say the least.

Produced by Thomas A. Fucci, ''Nightsongs'' has assembled a very talented cast
from a variety of sources. Playing the Chinese-Vietnamese woman, Mabel Kwong is
described by the film makers as one of Hong Kong's leading film and stage
actresses. Mr. Fung is potrayed by Victor Wong, a short-story writer as well as
an actor, and Mrs. Fung by Ida F. O. Chung, who spent several years in the
1970's with the Hong Kong Rediffusion TV. David Lee, new to acting and a senior
at Brooklyn Technical Institute, is the troubled high-school student.

An F. N. Films production, ''Nightsongs'' was completed in 1983 and has been
shown extensively at film festivals. Providing some significant support for the
project amounts to precisely the kind of gesture that makes the ''American
Playhouse'' series distinguished and invaluable.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

O'NEILL PERFORMED FOR MAYO DOCTORS

BYLINE: By ENID NEMY

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: ROCHESTER, Minn., April 14


It wasn't quite the usual production of ''Long Day's Journey Into Night.'' The
actors, Jason Robards, his son, Sam Robards, Teresa Wright and Margaret Hunt,
performed, and read, only specific scenes from the Eugene O'Neill drama - those
dealing with the narcotic addiction of Mary Tyrone, the wife, and the reactions
of her family.

The audience was equally unusual, some 1,600 staff physicians, residents and
personnel of the Mayo Clinic and Mayo Foundation here, members of their
families, and a sprinkling of doctors from other hospitals.

The program Saturday night, held in the auditorium of the John Marshall High
School here, was the fourth in an ''Insight'' series, begun in 1981 under the
auspices of Mayo's Department of Psychiatry and Psychology to study human
behavior through the medium of theater. It will be repeated in Dallas next month
at a meeting of the American Psychiatric Association.

''We call the program 'Insight' because its aim is not to give answers but to
give insight into the common human problems that are a great part of every
physician's practice but a small part of his or her education,'' said Mary Adams
Martin, director of the series and aftercare director in Mayo's chemical
dependency treatment program. ''Physicians don't need any more facts, and the
time they can spend on human problems, their own and others, is very limited.
The theater can move into that gap.''



Robards Inaugurated Program

Mr. Robards's appearance this weekend was his second in the series. He
inaugurated the program four years ago, dramatizing the problems of alcoholism
by reading the monologue from O'Neill's ''Iceman Cometh.'' Since that time, the
doctors here have also seen Helen Hayes, Mildred Natwick and Fritz Weaver in
scenes from Laurence Housman's ''Victoria Regina,'' which was used to illustrate
the issues of aging, and Kathy Bates and Anne Pitoniak in a full production of
Marsha Norman's '' 'night Mother,'' which dramatized the factors that lie behind
the act of suicide. The performers all appear for what a clinic spokesman
described as ''a small honorarium.''

''When I used to do the monologue in 'The Iceman Cometh,' I never thought of it
as a teaching tool, but it is,'' Mr. Robards said. ''When a drama is well
constructed, it won't let up on the audience, it pulls them in, and through
reaching doctors, you reach hundreds and thousands of people.''

For Dr. Rolland Dickson, a professor of medicine, the series provided doctors
with what he called ''an acceptable mode of self-education.''

''We are a group of physicians who are highly sub-specialized,'' said Dr.
Dickson, who is a specialist in liver transplants. ''But even for general
practitioners, there is almost no formal training in subjects like alcoholism,
drug addiction, aging and suicide. Many physicians feel ill-prepared and
incompetent in these areas.''



Combining Theater and Medicine

''This allows physicians to see these problems from a different aspect; we tend
to see them in a more clinical way,'' said Dr. Richard Reitemeier, an internist
and professor of medicine at the Mayo Clinic/ Mayo Medical School. ''One danger
we have is becoming accustomed to our own methodology and not being terribly
flexible in seeing things from the view of other people. It's exciting when we
can combine great literature, theater and medicine for educational purposes.''

The ''Insight'' series was more effective than lectures, he believed, because
''lectures are more intense and therefore fatiguing, and theater isn't.''

''Sitting in an audience and watching a performance, you can relax a little,''
he said. ''You can allow the impact the playwright intended to roll over you,
and you get the message.''

He observed that after the performance of '' 'night Mother'' last year, many of
the doctors had gone off with their colleagues and discussed the subject of
suicide, and the treatment of it in the play.

''We were very moved by it,'' he said.

''The series had impact from the first, when we started out with Jason
Robards,'' Mrs. Martin said. ''The physicians were simply not prepared for that
kind of performance. To watch Jason for an hour is very effective.''



Williams and Chekhov Mentioned

Future programs, she said, might feature such plays as Tennessee Williams's
''Mutilated,'' whose characters include a woman who has had a mastectomy, a
Chekhov play dealing with doctors, and such subjects as AIDS and post-Vietnam
stress.

The performance Saturday night was followed by a panel discussion on drug
addiction, audience questions - directed to both the panel participants and the
performers - and the four actors reading further scenes from the play, including
the ''I hate doctors'' speech.

''I hate doctors!'' Miss Wright read. ''They'll do anything - anything to keep
you coming to them. They'll sell their souls! What's worse, they'll sell yours,
and you never know it till one day you find yourself in hell!''

The speech gave the medical fraternity its second laugh of the evening. The
first came when Dr. M. J. Martin, chairman of the Department of Psychiatry and
Psychology, mentioned that the prevalence of ''pagers'' in the audience might
prove disturbing to the performers, and asked whether they might be turned off,
or muted, during the play. Some of the doctors complied, but not enough to keep
the performance from being one of the few theatrical offerings punctuated by the
sound of ''beep, beep.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jason Robards (NYT/Mitch Kezar)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 16, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING ;
Cambodians to March

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 90 words


Several hundred Cambodians

plan to march from the Capitol

to the Lincoln Memorial tomorrow to commemorate with sadness the fall of Phnom
Penh in April 1975 to Communist forces led by Pol Pot.

Vanna Om Strinko, a secretary at the American Embassy in the Cambodian capital
who was evacuated before the fall, is now head of the Cambodian National
Assistance Association and will lead the march. Each marcher, she said, will
carry a candle symbolizing thousands of Cambodians killed by what she calls the
''Khmer Rouge reign of terror.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 16, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JACKSON PRAISES COLUMBIA PROTESTERS

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 680 words


The Rev. Jesse Jackson added his support yesterday to the students demonstrating
against Columbia University's ties with companies doing business in South
Africa. He praised the protesters for setting a ''moral example'' and said he
hoped it would help ''organize students on every campus in America.''

In a ringing endorsement delivered with the demonstrators huddled at his feet in
the rain, Mr. Jackson commended them for showing ''a willingness to suffer for a
principle, a willingness to put dignity above a degree.'' Their action, he said,
is in ''the greatest and highest tradition'' of the civil rights movement and
opposition to the Vietnam War.

The students, who oppose South Africa's system of apartheid, have been camped
since April 4 on the steps of Hamilton Hall, an administration and classroom
building on the campus. They are demanding that Columbia rid itself of $32.5
million in investments in companies that do business with South Africa.

'Bodies on the Line'

''By protesting,'' Mr. Jackson said later at a news conference, ''the students
are putting their bodies on the line and taking our nation a step forward'' in
the struggle against apartheid.

Despite a constant drizzle, more than 1,000 people gathered to hear Mr. Jackson
speak in front of Hamilton Hall, which the protesters have symbolically renamed
Mandela Hall in honor of a jailed South African resistance leader, Nelson
Mandela.

Afterward spokesmen for the Coalition for a Free South Africa, the campus group
that has organized the protest, said Mr. Jackson's call for support had led to
donations of about $2,300 from those attending the rally.

The demonstrators said they were also heartened by a court ruling yesterday by
Justice Max Bloom of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Court Order Stands

Justice Bloom refused to overturn a previous court order that prohibits Columbia
from ''improperly'' sending in the police against the protesters. He also
ordered that lawyers for the university and the students meet today in State
Supreme Court to discuss ways to resolve the dispute.

In his remarks at Hamilton Hall, Mr. Jackson was critical of Columbia's
unwillingness to end its ties with companies doing business with South Africa.
Voluntary support from American corporations, institutions and governments, he
said, is ''the backbone of apartheid.''

''South Africa cannot stand alone,'' he said. ''It needs the investments of
Western democracies, led by America, and the prestige of and credibility of
American universities.''

After the rally, Mr. Jackson met for half an hour with the president of Columbia
University, Dr. Michael I. Sovern. At a news conference after the meeting, Mr.
Jackson said Dr. Sovern had agreed to ''attempt to convene a meeting of Ivy
League presidents'' to discuss ways to oppose apartheid.

Mr. Jackson said the conference could be convened ''as early as a week from
Friday.'' A Columbia University spokesman, Fred Knubel, said that Dr. Sovern had
not set a specific time for the meeting, but that it would be held ''as soon as
possible.''


Rutgers Protest Continues

NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J., April 15 (UPI) - The president of Rutgers University today
criticized South Africa's apartheid policies but disagreed with students
blocking the school's student center.

About 100 people continued to sit in front of the chained front doors of the
student center, according to Glen Arnold, a spokesman for the Rutgers Coalition
for Total Divestment. He said the number of hunger strikers had risen to eight
over the weekend.

The demonstration began Friday night. Mr. Arnold said the hunger strikers,
including graduate and undergraduate students and a guest lecturer, would
continue their protest until Rutgers dropped its investments in companies doing
business with South Africa.

''I abhor apartheid as strongly as any protesting student,'' the Rutgers
president, Dr. Edward J. Bloustein, said, adding, ''We differ about how the
university can best oppose it.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of protesting students (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 17, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR MANY FROM VIETNAM, LIFE IN U.S. IS STILL HARD

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2897 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif.


When Dr. Pham Van Triet fled Saigon by boat on April 29, 1975, as the city fell
to the Communists, he felt he had lost everything: his home, his medical
practice and the land of his ancestors.

In the United States, where his Vietnamese medical degree was not recognized,
Dr. Triet was so poor at first that his family had to split up, living in
trailers with Americans willing to take them and existing on food stamps.

Eventually, Dr. Triet taught himself English, on an old television set donated
by a church, and he got his American medical license. Now he heads the
anesthesia department of a hospital near here, runs his own clinic in this
Orange County community and drives a Mercedes.

Nguyen Viet Hung fled Vietnam by boat in 1981 when he was 17 years old, after
being conscripted by the Communist government to fight in Cambodia. In the
United States he found himself unable to learn English or get a job.

Troubled by nightmares of the killing he had seen in Cambodia and without
parents to supervise him, he drifted into a Vietnamese youth gang in San Diego.
Last fall he was arrested after a shooting outside a roller rink.

Those two stories represent the widely divergent experiences of the 467,000
Vietnamese refugees who have fled to the United States in the decade since the
collapse of South Vietnam.

Some have emerged successfully from their hegira, like Dr. Triet. But they are
the exceptions, according to leaders in the Vietnamese community and Americans
who have worked most closely with the refugees. For many Vietnamese, life in the
United States has proved much harder than they imagined.  ''To say the
Vietnamese have been successful in America is a myth,'' said Do Yen, editor of a
Vietnamese-language newspaper here in Westminster, which has the heaviest
concentration of Vietnamese in the country.

''It is a fairy tale created by Americans to prove that America is still the
land of opportunity,'' he said. ''In Vietnam we lost everything, then the boat
people drowned or were raped by Thai pirates, and when we got to America many
people couldn't speak English and only got jobs as janitors. So we can't really
enjoy the United States. Even the affluence and the California weather seem so
strange.

''Maybe in time the children will be successful.''

Indeed, several young Vietnamese have founded their own electronics concerns in
the high-technology area south of San Francisco.

Two Vietnamese, including the daughter of a former South Vietnamese Army
colonel, are to graduate this spring from the United States Military Academy at
West Point, the first Indochinese to do so. An uncounted number of Vietnamese
will be high school valedictorians this June.

On the other hand, Ruben G. Rumbaut, a professor of sociology at the University
of California at San Diego who is conducting continuing research on Vietnamese
in that area, found that the average income was $11,550 for a family of four and
that 55 percent of them were living below the Federal Government's poverty line
in 1983. He said that was the largest percentage of any ethnic group.

'Sense of Insecurity'

Pham Cao Duong, once a distinguished professsor of Vietnamese history at the
University of Saigon, who now teaches French at a Huntington Beach high school,
says he thinks the refugees feel ''a constant sense of insecurity.''

In Vietnam they had their families to fall back on, Mr. Duong observed. ''But
here,'' he said, ''everything is work, work, work. Everything depends on your
job, and if you get sick or have a bad relationship with your supervisor you may
lose your job and the bank will take your house.

''In America we gained political freedom but lost economic freedom.''

To some extent, all immigrants to the United States have experienced these
troubles, said Jeanne F. Nidorf, a psychologist who is a professor at the
University of California at San Diego and has specialized in working with
Indochinese.

Strong Family Culture

But the Vietnamese family culture was so strong, she said, that the refugees
seem to suffer more from being cut off from the homeland than do other recent
refugees.

''The ancestors provided the constraints on them, and they can't conceive of a
new life in America away from their ancestors' tombs,'' she said.

Mr. Duong says it is important to note that never before in Vietnam's long,
tortured history, under rule by the Chinese and the French and then the years of
war, did Vietnamese flee their country.

''It is a unique event for us,'' he said. ''In the past we said it was already a
big misfortune if you had to leave your native village.''

Symptoms of Depression

One manifestation of the troubles the Vietnamese refugees face, according to
Miss Nidorf and others who have studied them, is that an unusually large number
suffer from depression. ''So many people come in with the symptoms,'' Miss
Nidorf said, ''that the Vietnamese interpreters now say, 'There's nothing wrong
with her - we've all got that.' ''

In one case, she said, a Vietnamese woman in her early 40's came in complaining
of constant headaches, lack of appetite and insomnia. She was so depressed she
could not remember words in her English class or hold a job.

The woman believed there was something physically wrong with her, as do most
Vietnamese, Miss Nidorf said, since they grew up in a culture where there is no
word for mental health and psychiatry is largely unknown.

But Miss Nidorf learned from the woman that her husband had been killed in the
war and that she had watched as her daughters died of thirst and exposure on the
South China Sea while trying to flee Vietnam. The woman had exhausted her three
years of Federal refugee aid and was out of work, living in a tiny one-room
apartment.

'Fantasies of Omnipotence'

Another of Miss Nidorf's patients felt so guilty about being unable to stop Thai
pirates from raping his sister that he had become psychotic. ''He has fantasies
of omnipotence, saying he talks with the President of the United States,'' Miss
Nidorf said.

Professor Rumbaut, in his San Diego survey, used a test developed by the
National Center for Health Statistics to measure psychological well-being. He
found that while 74 percent of Americans showed good mental health, only 23
percent of the refugees did. Conversely, while only 9.7 percent of Americans
displayed clinically significant distress, 45 percent of the refugees did. And
while 16 percent of Americans showed some minor depression, 32 percent of the
refugees did.

Even more important in analyzing the refugees' situation, Mr. Rumbaut said, is
the little-known fact that more Vietnamese have actually arrived in this country
since 1980 than in the first five years after the war.

Vietnamese Still Arriving

From 1975 through 1979, 185,700 Vietnamese were admitted, according to the
Office of Refugee Resettlement in the Department of Health and Human Services.
From 1980 to January of this year, 281,300 arrived. And they are still coming,
with about 25,000 projected this year.

To Mr. Yen, the journalist, that is a sign that ''the war is not really over.''

All studies of Vietnamese as well as Cambodian and Laotian refugees show that
the longer they live in America the better they do. Robert L. Bach of the State
University of New York at Binghamton, in a report last year for the Office of
Refugee Resettlement, estimated that the number of Indochinese immigrants with
jobs rises by 10 percent for each year they are here.

Mr. Rumbaut's San Diego survey supports that conclusion. He found that 64
percent of the Vietnamese here less than three years had not found jobs and 67
percent still depended on welfare, but that for those here three to five years
the figure dropped to 42 percent without jobs and 46 percent on welfare.

And only 15 percent of those here more than five years had not found jobs and
only 11 percent were still on welfare.

Schooling Improves Prospects

Another critical factor is education. Almost two-thirds of the refugees with
less than six years of schooling have not held jobs in the United States and are
dependent on welfare, according to Professor Rumbaut's research. But less than
half of those with six to 12 years of education lack jobs and are on welfare,
and among those who have been to college less than a quarter do not have jobs.

The importance of education in how refugees fare tends to heighten the contrast
between the earlier and the later refugees because most of those who fled in
1975 were better educated, more urban and already spoke some English. Many of
the more recent refugees have been poorer, less educated people from the
countryside.

Problems of New Immigrants

For new arrivals in America, the immediate problems are those of survival:
finding a job, mastering English and finding housing, which for people without
any savings can be prohibitively expensive, especially in California, where 40
percent of the Vietnamese have settled.

Then, for many, there is a psychological problem, the realization that they must
accept a severe drop in status.

Mr. Duong is relatively well off, having fallen only from the esteemed rank of
professor at South Vietnam's leading university to high school teacher.

But he knows a former army general who is now a waiter in a restaurant. ''To
Americans, such stories are not unusual,'' Mr. Duong said, ''but to Vietnamese,
they are shocking,'' for Vietnamese believe in the Confucian precept that those
who work with the mind govern those who work with their hands and that manual
labor is degrading.

According to the Office of Refugee Resettlement, over half the adult refugees
from Indochina held white-collar jobs at home but less than a third have found
similar occupations here. The proportion holding blue-collar jobs has almost
tripled.

The single largest occupation for the Vietnamese is as assemblers in electronics
factories, the Federal refugee agency reports.  But the electronics jobs they
hold are usually low-paying with little chance of advancement.

Surprises in America

Life in America is full of surprises for the Vietnamese.

''Many Vietnamese say the Americans are like the Communists,'' said Mr. Yen, the
journalist, because ''they work so hard, they have so many taxes and they
organize everything, with Social Security numbers and computers.'

Many Vietnamese, accustomed to fearing the brutal police in their homeland, find
it hard to deal with the American police system. The results can be tragic.

Miss Nidorf related the case of a former peasant and soldier who fled to the
United States after escaping from a Communist re-education camp where he labored
clearing the jungle. He settled in San Diego, worked hard as a baker, went to
school at night and helped pay for an apartment for his wife's sister and young
son.

One day he dropped by his sister-in- law's apartment, found the child alone and
took the boy to his own home. But when the man walked back to tell his
sister-in-law that the boy was taking a nap, he saw police officers outside the
building and panicked. He picked up the boy and drove to Mexico before turning
himself in. He has now been charged with kidnapping.

The Vietnamese who have prospered in the face of these obstacles trace much of
their success to the old Vietnamese values of family solidarity, thrift and
reverance for education.

In Fremont, Calif., Bui Le, a 33- year-old electronics engineer with a Ph.D.
from Stanford, founded his own computer company in 1982 after tinkering in his
parents' garage along with two other refugees. The enhancement board they
invented for the I.B.M. PC computer has enabled the sales of their concern,
Orchid Technology, to grow 200 percent a year, and it now employs 100 people.

Success With a Twist

Mr. Le is proud to be an American citizen and sees his rise as a typical success
story, though with a Vietnamese twist. Because he was a refugee, he could not
get backing from venture capitalists and got all his financing from Vietnamese
friends and relatives. His father and mother still work as technicians in other
electronics plants.

Do Quang Binh, a slight, modest 17- year-old whose father was a police officer
in Nhatrang before the family escaped 10 years ago, has a straight-A average at
Helix High School in San Diego and is a candidate for valedictorian.

Like boys his age in Vietnam, Binh does not date or participate in school
sports, and he lives with his parents and four older brothers and sisters. One
brother, now a computer programmer, recently bought the family a large new
house. An older sister, a mathematician with a naval electronics concern, bought
a new car for the family's use. Like many Vietnamese, the family members share
their income.

'Highest Value on Education'

''I think my good grades in school come from the encouragement my parents have
given me,'' Binh said. ''In Vietnam, we place the highest value on education,
where some Americans think school must be fun.''

''There is a reciprocal arrangement,'' added one of Binh's sisters, a
24-year-old social worker. ''In Vietnam the parents provide everything for the
children. Then when they grow old, they expect the children to support them.''

Mr. Duong, the former history professor, suggested that being young helps in the
adjustment to America, saying: ''The younger you are, the faster you can enter
the new life. For the elderly, being Vietnamese can be too much of an obstacle
to overcome.''

At the same time, Mr. Duong, who has a daughter majoring in biology at U.C.L.A.,
contends it is a fable that all Vietnamese do well academically. Both truancy
and incidents of juvenile crime are increasing among Vietnamese students, he
notes.

Conflict of Americanization

Moreover, young Vietnamese face a cruel paradox, he said. To do well in America
they must become more Americanized; that is, assertive, independent and
questioning in school. Yet their parents, who want them to get high grades, are
afraid that the children will lose their cultural heritage of deference to
authority.

As Vietnamese gradually overcome the initial problems of survival in America,
Mr. Duong voices fear that a new trouble is brewing: conflict between the
generations.

In some ways the greatest hardship is faced by the young people who have come to
the United States by themselves in the past few years, those whom refugee
officials call ''unacompanied minors'' and fellow Vietnamese term ''the dust of
life.'' Often their fathers have been kept in re-education camps and their
mothers have arranged their escape, hoping they will eventually be able to bring
the whole family to America.

The Path to a Youth Gang

Mr. Hung, the gang member in San Diego, is one of these. His father, a former
employee of the Central Intelligence Agency in the Mekong Delta, was arrested
after the Communist takeover and his mother was required to divorce him. The new
Government stopped Mr. Hung's schooling when he was 11 years old, and in 1979 he
was drafted and sent into Cambodia with the first wave of Vietnamese invaders.

A thin, nervous man, Mr. Hung said he was haunted by the sight of heads of the
slain lying in the fields and took to smoking marijuana. Only two of the 12
members of his squad survived the fighting. A sister whom he loved very much and
two nieces disappeared at sea trying to leave Vietnam.

In San Diego, although an older brother was already there, Mr. Hung says he felt
very lonely, and he was frustrated at his inability to learn English or find a
job. Members of the Black Jackets gang, who drove fast cars and occasionally
smuggled drugs from Mexico, provided a new family. The charges stemming from his
arrest last fall were dropped.

The Guilt of Surviving

A more subtle problem that troubles many refugees is the guilt they feel as
survivors, said Mr. Yen, the journalist. ''As Buddhists,'' he said, ''we fear
that if we are comfortable now, we will be punished later.''

It is not just an emotional urge, he said, that ''many Vietnamese are working so
hard, holding two jobs, either to pay back their families for arranging their
escape or help keep them from hunger in Vietnam now.''

Like many Vietnamese, Mr. Yen regularly sends money back to his relatives in
Vietnam, over $1,000 a year, a large sum for him. Because the American embargo
on trade with Vietnam limits what the refugees can send home, Mr. Yen, like
others, uses an underground channel, a friend with the right contacts in
Vietnam.

Last year a report by the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee
estimated that the refugees remitted more than $200 million a year to Vietnam,
an enormous boon in an impoverished country whose official foreign reserves are
only $16 million.

Although the refugees face many problems in the United States, almost all feel
they were right move here.

At St. Anselm's Episcopal Church's refugee center in Garden Grove, Calif., 17
newly arrived Vietnamese were taking an English class. Pham Van Kinh, the oldest
at 56, a former military policeman who escaped from a re-education camp last
year, spoke a common sentiment when he said, in accented but earnest English,
''I lost my country, but I gained my life.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vietnamese tending plants (NYT/David Strick) (page A25); photo
of Dr. Pham Van Triet (NYT/David Strick) (page A25); photo of Tuong Deu Nguyen
chatting with diners (NYT/David Strick) (page A25); photo of Kathleen Cullinane
teaching Vietnamese English (NYT/David Strick) (page A25); photo of refugees
bargaining over price of fish (UPI)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 17, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WORKING PROFILE: SGT. MAJ. GLEN E. MORRELL;
TRAVELS WITH ARMY'S TOP SOLDIER

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 15


In a domain loaded with politicians and generals making policy, the mission of
the Sergeant Major of the Army is to get out of the Pentagon and into operating
units, ''to see if it really makes sense.''

So says the incumbent, Sgt. Maj. Glen E. Morrell, who has been the Army's senior
noncommissioned officer since July 1983.

Sergeant Major Morrell is a veteran of 30 years in the Army and three combat
tours in Vietnam, an infantry soldier who came up through the elite paratroops,
Special Forces, and Rangers.

In his office across the corridor from that of the Army's Chief of Staff, the
sergeant major sits amid the pictures and plaques of a lifetime in the service
and describes his job: ''I am the Chief of Staff's representative to the
soldiers in the field.''

Works With His Counterparts

His counterparts in the other services - the Master Chief Petty Officer of the
Navy, the Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force and the Sergeant Major of the
Marine Corps - play similar roles and the four try to work together on common
issues. But there is no noncommissioned equivalent of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
''We don't need that,'' he said.

Sometimes Sergeant Major Morrell, who is 48 years old, accompanies his Chief of
Staff, Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., to the field to encourage soldiers to speak
freely to him. But he said that usually is not a problem because ''soldiers will
tell you anything.''

At other times, he telephones the post that General Wickham plans to visit and
urges noncommissioned officers to tell the general what's on their minds. ''If
you don't whip it on him,'' he says to them, ''you have no one to blame but
yourselves.''

Much of the time, however, Sergeant Major Morrell moves out on his own. On a
recent trip to Korea, Okinawa and Hawaii, he said he talked with 8,000 soldiers
in groups that he divided into three: younger first-term soldiers,
middle-ranking sergeants who lead fire teams and squads, and senior sergeants in
platoons, companies and battalions.

With the younger soldiers, Sergeant Major Morrell said, ''there was a time when
they thought the Army was an 8-to-4 job. We need to make sure that soldiers
understand that it's 24 hours a day, seven days a week.''

He was particularly keen on listening to the squad leaders, who have 5 to 10
soldiers under their command, depending on the type of unit, because ''they are
in touch with more people than anyone else in the Army.''

In meetings with senior sergeants, Sergeant Major Morrell checked on training,
maintenance, morale, welfare and myriad other details that go into taking care
of soldiers. ''If things get out of kilter,'' he said, ''they have to get it
back right.'' When he returned to Washington, the sergeant major sent several
memorandums to the Army staff about things he had seen and met with several
generals. In a meeting with a general in charge of training, Sergeant Major
Morrell said the Skill Qualification Test needed correcting. That test, which
examines a soldier's basic skills, was not in tune with reality, the sergeant
major said. ''The test should be on things a soldier really does,'' he said,
''not that damned Catch-22 stuff.''

Sergeant Major Morrell says the Army staff is usually responsive to his
suggestions. ''When someone tries to give me a bureaucratic answer,'' he said,
''I'll go across the hall on that,'' meaning to General Wickham's office.

The sergeant major also meets periodically with the Secretary of the Army, John
O. Marsh, to discuss long-range issues. Once every six months, the sergeant
major and his counterparts in the other services meet with Secretary of Defense
Caspar W. Weinberger.

Sergeant Major Morrell comes from Wick, W.Va. His wife, Karen, sometimes travels
with him to check on child care centers, community service projects and other
issues that concern Army families. She also meets occasionally with Mrs. Wickham
to discuss family issues.

Sergeant Major Morrell said that his wife knew, before he became the Army's top
soldier and before their three children were grown, that helping him was
expected. ''But she didn't know it would be as extensive as it's been,'' he
added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sgt. Maj. Glen E. Morrell (NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 17, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

15 ARRESTED ON BERKELEY CAMPUS IN PROTEST ON SOUTH AFRICA POLICY

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 563 words


New York City's Comptroller said 21 companies in which the city's pension system
held stock had new policies toward South Africa. Page B3.


BERKELEY, Calif., April 16 (AP) - Police officers in riot gear moved in at dawn
today and arrested 158 chanting protesters who took part in a weeklong
demonstration against the Universty of California's investments in South Africa.

The arrests were made with only minor scuffles, and no injuries were reported,
according to a university spokesman. The arrests recalled scenes from the days
of the university's Free Speech Movement and the demonstrations against the
Vietnam War in the 1960's.

Many of the students opposing the South African Government's policy of strict
racial separation had been sleeping on the steps of Sproul Hall, the birthplace
of the Free Speech Movement led by Mario Savio.

Savio Speaks at Rally

Mr. Savio, who now teaches two classes at San Francisco State University while
working toward a master's degree in physics, today addressed more than 1,000
people at a midday campus rally in front of the hall after the arrests were
made.

''It's a nationwide demonstration,'' he said, referring to the protests against
South African policy. ''The students at Columbia and Rutgers are watching you.
Don't let them down.''

After the arrests, demonstrators called for a boycott of classes Wednesday by
students and faculty. They also asked for amnesty for the arrested students.

The police escorted the arrested students into the building, where they were
booked on charges of trespassing and illegal lodging, according to a university
spokesman, Ray Colvig.

The demonstrators complained that university regents would not present to their
meeting in May any discussion of divestment of the university's investment of
$1.7 billion in concerns doing business in South Africa. The issue is on the
June agenda.

Ronald W. Brady, senior vice president for administration for the University of
California system, said it was impossible to complete a report on divestiture by
the May meeting.

As for amnesty, Mr. Brady said, the issue was in the hands of the campus police
and local authorities.



Protest Continues at Columbia

As students at Columbia University continued yesterday to barricade a campus
building in protest against the university's investments in companies doing
business with South Africa, legal maneuvers continued.

Acting Judge Burton S. Sherman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan conferred
privately with lawyers representing the university and the students and deferred
any further action on the case until Friday.

The judge ruled that a temporary restraining order prohibiting the student
demonstrators from blocking buildings on the Columbia campus should remain in
force until then. At the same time, he said that a restraining order forbidding
Columbia from ''improperly'' calling in police to remove the demonstrators
should also continue in effect until Friday.

Lawyers for both sides said after the conference that their meeting with the
judge was part of an effort to negotiate a solution to the demonstration.

At Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J., more than 70 demonstrators were
camped out in front of the Student Center yesterday in the fifth day of a
protest against the school's investments in South Africa.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 17, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 882 words


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 17, 1985 International

The President will visit a death camp as well as a German military cemetery next
month, Mr. Reagan announced. However, his decision, reversing an earlier
announcement, did not halt criticism of his plan to lay a wreath in a German war
cemetery that includes graves of Waffen SS members. (Page A1, Column 6.)

Chancellor Helmut Kohl urged a visit by President Reagan to a former Nazi death
camp or to another monument to the ''victims of the fascist terror,'' according
to excepts of a letter delivered in Washington on Monday and made public in
Bonn. (A14:1-3.)

The slaying of an American major by a Soviet guard in East Germany last month
prompted a meeting in Potsdam last Friday between the American and Soviet
military commanders in Germany. As a result, the State Department said, Moscow
has told Washington that Soviet military personnel have been ordered not to use
force or weapons against American patrols in East Germany. (A1:4.)

Expanded Nicaraguan rebel forces to increase pressure on the Sandinista
Government are sought by the Reagan Administration. (A1:5.) National

Two astronauts successfully rigged handmade plastic and wire snares to the tip
of the Discovery's mechanical arm in preparation for an ingenious attempt today
to activate a dormant communications satellite. The task was completed by Dr.
Jeffrey A. Hoffman and S. David Griggs in a three-hour unrehearsed, but smooth
space walk in the space shuttle's open cargo bay. (A1:1.)

James A. Baker 3d is very powerful as a result of a major White House
reorganization announced by President Reagan last week. Deputy Treasury
Secretary Richard G. Darman will also have wide new authority. Mr. Reagan said
that seven Cabinet councils, each managed by a Cabinet officer, would be
consolidated into two, including an Economic Policy Council under Treasury
Secretary Baker. (A1:2-3.)

The chance of a meltdown in a nuclear reactor somewhere in the country in the
next 20 years is nearly 50-50, on the basis of mathematical probability,
according to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The estimate concerns the chance
of a ''severe core melt accident,'' which could be much more serious than the
partial core melting at the Three Mile Island plant in 1979. (A16:1-2.)

The C.I.A. won broad discretion from the Supreme Court to withhold from public
disclosure the identities of its sources of intelligence information. Under the
9-to-0 ruling, information that the agency says it needs is exempt from
disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act. (A18:4-6.)

People convicted of moral turpitude and a variety of petty offenses were
disenfranchised under a 1901 provision of the Alabama Constitution. The Supreme
Court, voting 8 to 0, struck down the provision on the ground of racial
discrimination. (A19:1-2.)

The dollar value of human life should be weighed when considering how to
regulate cancer-causing asbestos. That view represents the policy of the White
House budget office, according to officials of the Environmental Protection
Agency. They told a House panel that the budget office had been pressing them to
accept a policy they considered unethical. (B28:1-3.)

A vaccine for childhood meningitis has been approved by the Food and Drug
Administration. The vaccine - the first for the disease - protects children
against the leading cause of childhood meningitis and serious related diseases
that kill about 1,000 children each year in the United States. (A17:1.)

47 % of American households benefit from one or more Federal Government programs
such as Social Security, Medicare or food stamps, according to the Census
Bureau. Census officials said the figure was higher than they had expected.
(A23:1.)

Great Society programs instituted by Lyndon B. Johnson are being reduced
somewhat by Ronald Reagan, but its bedrocks - Medicare, Medicaid and Federal aid
to education - have become permanent aspects of American life. (A1:4-6.)

The 467,000 Vietnamese refugees who have fled to the United States in the decade
since the collapse of South Vietnam have had widely different experiences. Some
have emerged successfully, but leaders in the Vietnamese exile community and
Americans who have worked most closely with the refugees say that for many, if
not most of them, life in this country has proved to be much harder than they
imagined. (A1:1-3.) Metropolitan

Waste in aid to business schools was cited in a New York State report. It said
the state was squandering millions of dollars a year in assistance to students
in profit-making schools for secretarial and office workers where dropout rates
were high and new students were admitted to replace dropouts as often as
monthly. (B2:5-6.)

The Governor urged aid for the poor in an impassioned plea to fellow Roman
Catholics to remember their ''special obligation to the poor.'' Speaking at St.
Peter's College in Jersey City, Governor Cuomo chastised those who have
criticized the American bishops for proposing sweeping changes in the nation's
economy to help the needy. (B2:1.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U. S. POWER IN ASIA HAS GROWN SINCE VIETNAM

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2236 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 17


Ten years after the defeat of South Vietnam, there is widespread agreement among
policy analysts that the position of the United States in Asia is stronger now
than at any time since the end of World War II. In April 1975, it was in
shambles.

A decade ago, in victory, North Vietnam looked invincible. Now the economy of
united Vietnam is stagnating and Hanoi is mired down in its own ''Vietnam'' in
Cambodia.

In the span of 10 years, policy analysts say, Vietnam, the Soviet Union and most
Communist movements in Asia tumbled from victory or ascendancy to decline, while
the United States moved from defeat to a position of strength.

The turnaround was due largely to a change in the politics of American
policy-making toward Asia. For 40 years, no foreign-policy issue was more
divisive than Asia - from what to do about China right after World War II,
through the Korean War to Vietnam. But in the last 10 years, after the opening
to China and the end of the Vietnam War, few policy issues have garnered more
bipartisan support.

Yet the question of who lost Vietnam is still hotly disputed by the people who
once struggled over policy and fought the war,

Among the issues raised are these:

Why did the defeat not lead Asian countries other than Cambodia and Laos to fall
under Communist control like ''a row of dominoes,'' as President Eisenhower and
his successors predicted? Did America's stand in Vietnam delay or make possible
America's current position of strength in Asia?

Why have Hanoi and Moscow been unable to capitalize on their victory? Has the
war irretrievably turned hawks and doves on Vietnam into policy adversaries? And
what parallels are to be drawn for Central America?

The questions and answers about the Vietnam experience slice deeply into
virtually every central foreign-policy issue in the Reagan Administration, from
Central America to Grenada, Lebanon and terrorism.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has argued for any military intervention
around the world only as ''a last resort,'' with full public backing, and ''with
the clear intention of winning.''

Secretary of State George P. Shultz has maintained that ''there is no such thing
as guaranteed public support in advance,'' and that a great power must be
prepared to use doses of force to buttress diplomacy.


Asia Today


The belief that the United States position in Asia has never been stronger in 40
years is shared by Vietnam doves like Richard C. Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary
of State for East Asia in the Carter Administration, and Vietnam hawks like Paul
D. Wolfowitz.

''It is clear that the whole condition of East Asia is today far better than the
most optimistic would have predicted 10 years ago,'' Mr. Wolfowitz said.

''Even compared to the end of World War II, it is far better because the
countries of Asia are far more self-reliant, don't look to us as much as they
did before; but when they do, we are there.''

These two men and other Asian experts - Robert A. Scalapino of the University of
California at Berkeley, Donald S. Zagoria of Hunter College, and Winston Lord,
president of the Council on Foreign Relations - produce an almost identical
litany of examples to back up this optimistic picture.

China as U.S. Ally

China, instead of being the principal adversary, has become a strategic ally in
many ways. It restrains North Korea, aids guerrillas in checking Vietnam in
Cambodia, has called off support for Communist insurgents in Thailand and
elsewhere, and ties down a third of the Soviet armed forces on its border.

With the notable exception of the Philippines, most Asian countries are enjoying
political stability almost unprecedented for this century. The stability rests
on a blend of authoritarianism, democracy and substantial economic growth.

According to State Department figures, the economies of the members of the
Association of Southeast Asia Nations, or Asean - which include Thailand,
Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines and Brunei - have each grown on
the average of 7 percent a year over the last 10 years. This is about twice the
global average growth after discounting for inflation. American trade with the
Pacific Basin area now exceeds its trade with Europe.

Relations with Japan are generally deemed to be good, though marred by
continuing friction over America's lopsided trade deficit with its most
important Asian ally.

'A Pacific Destiny'

Soviet military power in the region has grown considerably over the decade. This
includes substantial use by Russian ships, including submarines, and
reconaissance aircraft of the former major American base at Cam Ranh Bay in
Vietnam.

Nonetheless, Pentagon experts generally subscribe to the assessment of Robert
O'Neill, an Asian scholar and director of the London-based International
Institute for Strategic Studies. Given American military and naval power in the
region and deployments under way, he said in a recent article, ''there is little
prospect that the United States will be outclassed in power projection and other
strategic capabilities in the Pacific'' provided there are no major crises
elsewhere.

''Americans do have a Pacific destiny,'' said Michael H. Armacost, the Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs. ''All these factors tended to
guarantee that the fatigue and frustration with Southeast Asia bred by the
bitter outcome of the war was a transitory phenomenon.''


Vietnam's Troubles


Alone among those interviewed, former Secretary of State Dean Rusk sounded a
note of caution. ''I don't think we know yet the full consequences of the war,''
he said. ''North Vietnam still has a lot of digesting to do in South Vietnam,
Laos and Cambodia.''

Vietnam is now a country of 60 million people with an army of 1.2 million - the
fourth largest in the world after China, the Soviet Union and the United States.
Per capita income is estimated by the State Department to be about $125 a year,
only about one-fourth that of its Asean neighbors.

The State Department also estimates that the Soviet Union supplies Vietnam with
about $2 billion annually. This constitutes about one-seventh of Vietnam's gross
national product. While the economies of every Asean country have more than
doubled in the last decade, Vietnam's shows almost no growth.

Vietnam's real drain and quagmire is Cambodia. An estimated 160,000 Vietnamese
troops are trying to hold the cities against and searching the jungles for
several different guerrilla forces numbering, according to various estimates,
anywhere from 40,000 to 80,000. ''There is no end of this war in sight,'' noted
Mr. Holbrooke and others.



'Clumsy' Soviet Diplomacy

Spurred by Congress, the Reagan Administration last week made known its
willingness to aid the guerrillas as well.

The Soviet Union has tied its fortunes in Southeast Asia to Vietnam and
Vietnam's war in Cambodia. This has set Moscow against the Asean countries, and
left both Vietnam and the Soviet Union almost totally isolated on Cambodia, even
in the United Nations.

In addition, as Mr. Lord pointed out, ''Soviet diplomacy in the area has been
particularly clumsy, especially with Japan,'' thus further strengthening
American standing. This includes Soviet threats to Japan about closer relations
with Washington and the absence of any important diplomatic role on the Korean
Peninsula.


The Domino Theory


In 1954, President Eisenhower evoked an image of American stakes in Vietnam that
was in one form or another used by all of his successors through Richard M.
Nixon.

''You have a row of dominoes set up,'' Mr. Eisenhower said. ''You knock over the
first one, and what will happen to the last one is the certainty that it will go
over very quickly.'' To Eisenhower, this meant Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Burma,
the Malay peninsula, Indonesia and perhaps the rest of Asia as well.

Mr. Nixon globalized this domino theory during his Presidency, saying that the
loss of Vietnam would reduce the United States to ''a pitiful, helpless giant''
and destroy United States credibility worldwide. Few dispute that credibility
was lost, if not because of the loss of Vietnam then because the United States
seemed deeply divided and turning inward.

'The Opening to China'

However, while Laos and Cambodia fell, as almost all predicted, the other Asian
dominoes stood.

Mr. Lord argued that in this result ''the most crucial factor was the opening to
China'' in 1971, two years before the Paris cease-fire agreement ending American
participation in the Vietnam War and four years before the final debacle in
Saigon. ''This helped to put Indochina in perspective and ease the pain of our
exit, and restrain Hanoi,'' he said.

Professor Scalapino stressed that the loss of Vietnam ''raised questions about
American credibility, but it also raised the quotient of Asian self-reliance.''

That element of self-reliance is central to Professor Zagoria's analysis.
''Revolutions,'' he said, ''though influenced by external factors, are largely
determined by indigenous factors.'' Thailand and Indonesia, he argued, were able
to get themselves together politically, economically and militarily to beat down
Communist insurgencies.

A Crucial Question

''The Philippines proves the point,'' he continued. ''Unlike the rest of
Southeast Asia, they didn't have the economic dynamism, commitment to equity and
leadership,'' and so their insurgency has gotten out of hand ''with no
noticeable external support.''

But, and here is the nub of the debate, did American involvement in Vietnam
delay the flowering of American-Chinese ties and Asian self-reliance and growth,
or did it make those developments possible?

Did, for example, the war blind American leaders to the historical tensions and
conflicts between China and the Soviet Union and China and Vietnam?

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs in the
Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, said in an interview: ''No, I was aware of
the splits.'' But the record shows that few other officials were.

Asian Nations Strengthened

In any event, Mr. Bundy maintained that the Asian countries ''were much stronger
by the time the war ended, and all of that had some relationship to our being in
Vietnam.'' They were ''not as jittery as they were in 1964.'' In other words,
the war gave them time to get their houses in order.

Mr. Holbrooke countered that ''2,000 years of Chinese-Vietnamese enmity and
hundreds of years of Chinese and Russian mutual suspicions were suspended when
they united against us in Vietnam.''

''We could not improve relations with Japan, develop our relations with China or
give impetus to Asean self- reliance until we ended our involvement in Vietnam,
'' he added.

Those who made American policy, he said, ''put American prestige on the line in
that place in the world where we had the least chance of success and in the name
of strengthening America, they weakened it - the Vietnam boil had to be lanced
before the rest was possible.''


Who Lost Vietnam?


All of this ties into the matter of responsibility for the defeat of South
Vietnam and to the lessons learned, lessons that are applied variously to the
current situation in Central America and elsewhere.

Most pronounced today are the accusations by Mr. Nixon and his former chief
adviser, Henry A. Kissinger. They put the blame on Congress for
''irresponsibility,'' the press for ''misreporting'' and liberals,
intellectuals, and antiwar activists for being virtually anti-American.

In his recent book, ''No More Vietnams,'' Mr. Nixon asserts that the war was won
in 1974, until these groups pulled the rug out from under the victory by
limiting American aid to Saigon and forbidding American military retaliation
against Hanoi for breaches of the 1973 Paris accords.

Mr. Rusk, too, said he believed that the war was lost here, but not because of
conspiracies of the left. ''A lot of people at the grass roots came to the
conclusion that we couldn't tell them when the war would end. So they said chuck
it. War weariness was the cause of defeat. Just plain impatience, not
misinformation. We could not honestly tell them when it was going to be over,''
said the former Secretary, who is now teaching at the University of Georgia.

'Ultimate Responsibility'

Other thoughts came through the Rusk retrospective. ''After all, we did go half
way around the world to meet our treaty commitments,'' he said. He added, ''I
told President Kennedy he had to think about what there was in South Vietnam to
support.''

Mr. Holbrooke placed ''the ultimate responsibility'' with the South Vietnamese.

''We aided them for 20 years, fought alongside them for 10, lost almost 60,000
Americans in combat, mortgaged our economy for the war,'' he said. ''It is a
travesty to say that after all this, we and not they lost the war.''

Was the American effort worth it? William Bundy, one of the main architects of
the war, offered this conclusion: ''When I say the war bought time for Asia to
become stronger, I'm not saying in retrospect that this proves the war was wise.
The price was too high even for that. Taking all the elements into account - the
internal divisions, the human loss of life - it was a national tragedy.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of rickshaw in Hanoi (UPI) (page A8)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING ;
Remembering Ernie Pyle

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 134 words


Forty years ago today the war

correspondent Ernie Pyle, perhaps the most famous of American World War II
correspondents, was riding in a jeep on the Pacific island of Ie Shima,
northwest of Okinawa, reporting on the battle for the island between the
Japanese and the 77th Infantry Division. When a Japanese machine gunner fired on
the jeep, Pyle jumped into a ditch, then was shot through the temple and killed
as he raised his head to see if another man was safe.

To commemorate Pyle's death, and to honor American war correspondents, the Army
is planning a ceremony Tuesday in the central courtyard of the Pentagon. The
Army Band will play and the Secretary of the Army, John O. Marsh, is to attend;
he has also invited 200 correspondents who covered World War II and the Korean
and Vietnam wars.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING ;
Want a Job?

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 235 words


The National Park Service, to its

surprise, had trouble filling

temporary ranger jobs at the Washington, Lincoln and Jefferson Monuments for the
new tourist season. So a plan to keep the Washington Monument open from 8 A.M.
until midnight, instead of 8 A.M. to 5 P.M., has been delayed. The new hours
were to have begun last Sunday, but will not take effect until April 28.

A spokesman, Earle Kittleman, said the service advertised 16 jobs at college
campuses and elsewhere but got only ''a limited response.'' After an increased
recruiting effort, he said, 16 applicants were selected and are now being
trained for the jobs, which pay about $245 a week. Qualifications include two
years of college or nine months' experience working in a national park.

Usually, Mr. Kittleman said, applicants are college students majoring in
history, psychology or sociology. The job requires them to ''interpret the
monument,'' which in the case of the Washington includes explaining its two-tone
exterior: when construction stopped in 1854 for lack of money, an appeal went
out to banks, fraternal clubs and schools and, when the new money came in, the
construction started again, with lighter stones. In 1984, 3.8 million people
visited the Lincoln Monument; 2.3 million, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial; 1.8
million, the Jefferson Monument; 1.3 million, the Washington Monument, and 1.1
million, the White House.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Times and Daily News Writers Win the Meyer Berger Award



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 150 words


Sheila Rule of The New York Times and Neal Hirschfeld of The Daily News
yesterday received the 1985 Meyer Berger Award for their stories about New York
City and its people. They were honored at a ceremony at the Columbia University
Graduate School of Journalism.

Miss Rule, The Times's correspondent in Nairobi, Kenya, and a former reporter on
the metropolitan staff, was cited for her series ''Pulling Together,'' which
told of the struggles and aspirations of a Brooklyn family. Mr. Hirschfeld, an
editor and writer for The News's Sunday magazine, was selected for two stories,
one about Vietnam veterans adjusting to postwar life and the other about
immigrants' memories of Ellis Island. Miss Rule and Mr. Hirschfeld shared the
$2,000 prize.

The award has been given since 1960 in memory of Meyer Berger, a Pulitzer
Prize-winning Times reporter who specialized in stories about New York.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


THURSDAY, APRIL 18, 1985 International

Lebanon's unity Cabinet resigned after a night of savage fighting among Moslems
that left Shiite militiamen and their allies in full control of West Beirut. The
fighting in the predominantly Moslem sector of the capital, the worst such
violence there in more than a year, resulted in the defeat of the Sunni militia
known as the Mourabutoun. (Page A1, Col. 6.)

The President acted on impulse in acceding to a request by Chancellor Helmut
Kohl to visit a West German military cemetery next month. A review of what
happened since their meeting on Nov. 30 reveals an almost total lack of
involvement by the State Department and the West German Embassy in the
arrangements, which call for Mr. Reagan to lay a wreath in a cemetery containing
the graves of SS soldiers. (A1:3-4.)

Protests against the planned visit by President Reagan to a German military
cemetery spread as 53 members of the Senate sent Mr. Reagan a letter ''strongly
urging'' him to cancel the visit. (A11:1-3.)

Possible compromises on Nicaragua to avoid a defeat on President Reagan's $14
million aid package for the insurgents are being sought by Mr. Reagan, according
to White House officials. (A1:5.)

The F.B.I. questioned 100 Americans who had traveled to Nicaragua, according to
House testimony by William H. Webster, the bureau's director. He denied that the
interviews were designed to intimidate critics of the Reagan Administration's
Central America policy. (A3:4-6.)

The U.S. position in Asia is stronger now than at any time since the end of
World War II, in the consensus of policy analysts. The economy of united Vietnam
is stagnating and Hanoi is mired down in its own ''Vietnam'' in Cambodia. In the
span of 10 years, policy analysts say, Vietnam and most Communist movements in
Asia tumbled from victory or ascendancy to decline. (A1:3-5.) National

Astronauts tried bravely but futilely to revive a disabled communications
satellite. The astroanuts of the space shuttle Discovery flew close in and
snared a suspect power lever, everything they hoped to do, but the satellite
remained powerless to proceed to a higher operational orbit. (A1:1.)

Lower long-distance phone charges are sought by the American Telephone and
Telegraph Company. It said it wants to reduce the price by 5.6 percent on June
1, saving residents and businesses about $1.1 billion a year. The cut, if
approved by the Federal Communications Commission as expected, would be across
the board for domestic calls. (A1:1-2.)

An immigration bill with key changes designed to increase its chances of passage
will soon be reintroduced by Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming.
(A23:1.)

A limit on the lawyers' fees that successful civil rights plaintiffs may recover
from the losing side was set by the Supreme Court. The Justices ruled, 8 to 0,
that fees may generally not be received for time a lawyer spent in
administrative proceedings before a dispute took the form of an actual lawsuit.
(A20:1.)

Cathy Crowell Webb was raped in 1977 despite her protestations to the contrary,
in the view of Cook County (Ill.) prosecutors. In recent weeks, Mrs. Webb has
repeatedly said she devised an elaborate story of a rape, ripped her clothing
and inflicted several wounds with her fingernails and a broken bottle because
she feared her parents' reaction if she became pregnant. (A14:1-5.) Metropolitan


The Holocaust was recalled by thousands of mournful Jews who gathered at the
Felt Forum in Madison Square Garden for an event transformed by furor over
President Reagan's plan to visit a West German military cemetery that contains
the graves of members of the Waffen SS. (A1:2.)

With water levels at a 50-year low for springtime, Governor Kean declared a
drought emergency, imposing water-use restrictions in 93 northeastern New Jersey
municipalities. The Governor warned that more severe curbs could be imposed
within two weeks if the shortage was not eased through conservation efforts and
increased rainfall. (A1:6.)

A lack of police cooperation was cited by Brooklyn District Attorney Elizabeth
Holtzman in an investigation of an officer who purportedly ''went on a rampage''
in a restaurant. The off- duty officer, Perry Novello, is charged with
assaulting two men, stomping on one while he lay handcuffed, and with menacing
two other men with his gun. (B1:4.)

Lower tax revenue increases than expected in New York City could signal a
slowing in the growth of the city's economy for the first time in nearly two
years, according to officials. A report by Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin showed
that from July to March, tax revenues were nearly 1 percent below the increase
that the city had projected, in large part because Christmastime retail sales
did not meet expectations. (B3:5-6.)

Franz S. Leichter is a candidate for New York City Comptroller. Mr. Leichter, a
State Senator from Manhattan, said he would make the integrity of the three-term
incumbent, Harrison J. Goldin, the major issue in the race. (B5:1-3.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CBS Defends Independence



BYLINE:
By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 580 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, April 17


Amid continuing rumors about a possible takeover attempt, Thomas H. Wyman, the
chairman and chief executive of CBS Inc., today reasserted his company's
intention to remain independent.

''Over the past several months, we have faced challenges from several parties
who would either oversee or overturn the organization which has provided news
and information for 58 years,'' Mr. Wyman said, speaking at the company's highly
charged annual meeting, where many of the broadcaster's critics spoke out.

''The integrity of CBS News and the independence of CBS News are inextricably
linked,'' he continued. ''Those who seek to gain control of CBS in order to gain
control of CBS News threaten that independence and that integrity - and this
country.''



Approaches to Company

In recent months, Fairness in Media, a North Carolina-based advocacy group, has
urged conservatives to buy CBS stock to help pressure the company to end what
Fairness in Media has called CBS News's ''liberal bias.'' Fairness in Media had
agreed, however, not to mount a proxy fight at CBS's annual meeting this year.

In addition, in recent weeks investment sources have said that Ted Turner, the
Atlanta broadcast and cable executive, was preparing a bid to take over CBS.

One shareholder asked Mr. Wyman whether Mr. Turner was ''moral enough'' to run
the network. Mr. Wyman began his response by sayng he had ''less than total
enthusiasm about his managing the enterprise,'' and concluded, ''I guess the
answer is I don't think so.''



Liberal Bias Is Charged

At the CBS annual meeting, which was held in the studios of its WBBM television
affiliate in Chicago, many longstanding critics repeated their charges that the
network is too liberal.

Reed Irvine, chairman of Accuracy in Media, a conservative group that often
criticizes newspapers and broadcasters, charged that CBS News reports on the
Vietnam War ''sapped the will of the American people to persevere in the
struggle to keep those countries free.''

Shareholders also questioned how truthful the network's docudramas are, how CBS
covers the nation's blacks and women and the amount of legal fees CBS incurred
in defending itself against Gen. William Westmoreland's libel suit.

Many investment analysts have said in recent months that CBS stock is
undervalued by more than 20 percent. Mr. Wyman said today that, ''for you as
shareholders, it is important that any determination of the value and merit of
this company includes assets which are not on the balance sheet. One of these is
the tradition of CBS quality standards and the enormous importance the American
public attaches to the CBS capacity to fulfill this public trust conscientiously
and faithfully.''

He continued, ''We are dedicated to resisting efforts which threaten our ability
to live up to this responsibility.''

Mr. Wyman said CBS Records did well last year, spurred by the popularity of
music videos. He said, however, that the company's toy group performed worse
than the company's most pessimistic expectations. Mr. Wyman promised a ''sharp
year-to- year change'' this year.

CBS's net income fell 57.1 percent in the first quarter, to $16.7 million, or 56
cents a share. After a shareholder criticized that decline, Mr. Wyman attributed
the poorer results to accounting provisions from the purchase of the Ziff-Davis
consumer magazines and the boom in record sales in the quarter a year earlier
caused by Michael Jackson's ''Thriller'' album.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUA WEEK IN THE CAPITAL

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


He was a wiry young man with smooth, olive skin wearing an open-neck shirt, a
rebel commander come out of the mountains of northern Nicaragua to do public
relations battle in the United States capital. Yes, ''Commander Invincible''
said in answer to the first question at a news conference downtown, he was a
former member of the Somoza-era National Guard. He had never thought it was ''a
crime to be a career soldier.''

A few blocks away, four American veterans of the Spanish Civil War, all pushing
70 years of age or beyond, gave the keys to seven new ambulances to Carlos
T"unnermann Bernheim, the Ambassador in Washington of the Government that the
rebels oppose. The Ambassador, a former university rector in pin stripes, a man
who has often tried to moderate the internal policies of the Sandinista
Government, sat with folded hands as one of the veterans equated the Sandinista
cause to that of the Spanish Republic and accused the rebels of beheading and
raping.

The Nicaraguan conflict has dominated the public debate in the capital this
week, a swirling political storm set off by President Reagan's request for
Congress to approve $14 million in new aid to the anti-Sandinista rebels.

American lawmakers and policy makers have invoked bitter memories of Vietnam,
the McCarthy era and Munich to defend their positions on the request or to
attack those of others as the Administration seeks to win a vote that even
Republican Congressional leaders say cannot be won unless the President
compromises, probably by restricting the aid to humanitarian needs.

Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, until recently the chief United States delegate to the
United Nations, has led the charge in support of continued backing for the
''contras,'' the Spanish slang term widely used to refer to all of the armed
insurgent groups. Though contending that she does not speak for the
Administration, Dr. Kirkpatrick has seemed to have been everywhere, on morning
television talk shows, before Capitol Hill hearings, at dinners and receptions.

Adolfo Calero Portocarrero, a former businessman and political figure in
Nicaragua who is now overall leader of the largest rebel group, the Nicaraguan
Democratic Force, explained her importance when he spoke at a dinner in her
honor Tuesday night. He said there are ''two great ladies that Nicaraguan
freedom fighters hold in great esteem, whom we do not even refer to by name. In
the case of the Virgin Mary we call her 'our lady,' in the case of Mrs.
Kirkpatrick it is 'the lady.' ''

''When we regain our country,'' he said, this gratitude to Dr. Kirkpatrick will
be ''eternalized in marble.''

Dr. Kirkpatrick asserted that members of Congress who oppose the President's
request are engaged in ''self-defeating appeasement.''

''It's not Vietnam that's the appropriate analogy; it's Munich,'' she said in a
television appearance.

Senator Tom Harkin, an Iowa Democrat, complained that Dr. Kirkpatrick was using
McCarthyite tactics to stifle open and free debate. Senator John Kerry, a
Massachusetts Democrat and decorated Vietnam veteran who appeared with Senator
Harkin at a news conference, said Dr. Kirkpatrick was really saying that the
Administration wants a Gulf of Tonkin resolution for Central America (a
reference to the Congressional resolution that opened the way to sending United
States troops to Vietnam).

Senators Harkin and Kerry released a study by the Institute for Policy Studies
that lists 77 instances in which the Administration has purportedly misled
Congress on its policies in Central America and 15 others ''where the
Administration has violated the law in their activities in Nicaragua.''

Then the two Senators left for Nicaragua in hopes that President Daniel Ortega
Saavedra would say something positive about Sandinista commitments to democracy
that they could bring back to Capitol Hill and use against the Reagan proposal.

Many other members of Congress wondered why the United States was trying to
overthrow a sitting government. They said that the contras were committing more
human rights abuses than the Sandinistas and that most of the rebel military
leaders were former National Guardsmen.

Commander Invincible, the former National Guardsman who appeared at his news
conference with three other rebel commanders, said that was not true. He said
only 12 former Guardsmen were among the 55 regional and task force commanders
and that 27 of the commanders were former Sandinista soldiers. Another rebel
spokesman said he had information that Sandinistas in contra uniforms were
committing atrocities so as to discredit the insurgents.

Zingers, Please

Robert C. McFarlane, President Reagan's national security adviser, appearing at
a Capitol Hill forum organized by Lewis E. Lehrman, the New York Republican
activist, was asked by Augusta Petrone of Marshalltown, Iowa, to give her a
''zinger'' to take home to answer the assertion that the United States is trying
to overthrow a government.

''How legitimate is a sitting government when its own people protest violently
against it?'' he responded.

William Susman of Great Neck, L.I., the Spanish Civil War veteran who led the
successful campaign for $100,000 to buy ambulances for the Nicaraguan
Government, had his own zinger. He said that if fascism had been defeated in
Spain there would have been no Munich and, possibly, no World War II.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION ;
Yale to Receive Weapons Of Kent State Shooting

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 104 words

DATELINE: CLEVELAND, April 18


Some weapons from the shooting of antiwar protesters at Kent State University on
May 4, 1970, should be turned over to Yale University and the Ohio Historical
Society, a Federal district judge has ruled.

Judge William K. Thomas ruled Wednesday after a plea by a California lawyer,
Sanford Jay Rosen, that one rifle, one pistol and one gas mask each be given to
Yale and to the historical society.

Mr. Rosen, who represented nine wounded students and the families of four
students killed when the Ohio National Guard opened fire on protesters, said
Yale had become a repository for information on the shootings.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Reagan Says a Pledge To Saigon Was Broken

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 166 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


President Reagan said today that the United States did not lose the Vietnam War
on the battlefield, but lost it by breaking its ''pledge as a government'' to
support South Vietnam against North Vietnamese violations of agreements.

Addressing regional editors and broadcasters at a luncheon at the White House,
Mr. Reagan was asked for his thoughts on the 10th anniversary of the end of the
war in Vietnam.

''Well, the truth of the matter is that we did have victory,'' he said. ''We
continue to talk about losing that war. We didn't lose that war. We won
virtually every engagement.''

Mr. Reagan also said that when agreements were reached with North Vietnam on a
cease-fire, the United States made a pledge to the South Vietnamese to supply
weapons and other military supplies if North Vietnam violated the truce.

''When the North Vietnamese did violate the treaty and the then Administration
asked Congress for an appropriation to keep our word, Congress refused,'' he
said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
DIPLOMAT FROM WALL STREET

BYLINE: By MICHAEL BLUMSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 801 words


John C. Whitehead, who was named yesterday to the No. 2 post in the State
Department, will step into a major foreign policy post with much more experience
in the business world than international affairs. But his background is
consistent with the prior business orientation of Secretary of State George P.
Shultz.  Mr. Whitehead, who is 63 years old, is to succeed Kenneth W. Dam as
Deputy Secretary of State. If confirmed by the Senate, he would move to
Washington after spending his entire working life at Goldman, Sachs & Company, a
leading Wall Street investment bank that sells securities and arranges mergers
for some of the country's biggest corporations.

Mr. Shultz, before taking his current job in 1982, served as a business school
dean, Treasury Secretary and president of the Bechtel Group, an international
engineering and construction company.

Wide Travels

Mr. Whitehead ''should do well as Deputy Secretary of State, although there'll
necessarily be certain on-the-job training,'' said George W. Ball, who held the
No. 2 post at the State Department for six years in the Kennedy and Johnson
Adminstrations.

In dealing with international business matters, and in pursuit of his outside
interests, Mr. Whitehead has traveled around the world. He is a member of the
Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission. He is also president
of the International Rescue Committee, a major organization to promote the
welfare of refugees, for which he has traveled to Hungary, Pakistan, the Sudan,
Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam. On Monday, he returned from visiting Vietnamese
refugees in Hong Kong.

'I've Got a Lot to Learn'

Nevertheless, Mr. Whitehead acknowledged in an interview yesterday that much
studying lies ahead for him. He declined to discuss foreign policy issues,
saying: ''I have a huge amount of reading to do, and I'll be spending as much
time as I can in the next few weeks being briefed. I've got a lot to learn.''

In the financial world, Mr. Whitehead has been among the most respected leaders.
Until he stepped down in November, he had been co- chairman of Goldman, Sachs
with John L. Weinberg. The two guided the firm to enormous profitability.

While hardly a maverick, Mr. Whitehead has been one of Wall Street's most
outspoken leaders.

When he announced his retirement plans last August, he denied that he would take
an Administration post if Mr. Reagan were re-elected. Yesterday, Mr. Whitehead
said that Mr. Shultz called two weeks ago, and ''when they came and twisted my
arm, I guess I couldn't say no.'' He said he and the Secretary of State have
''been acquainted with each other for quite a long time but never been close
friends.''

An Approachable Executive

Mr. Whitehead, who has thick white hair, blue eyes and a trim build, has been
among the most easygoing and approachable of Wall Street's executives, and in
1972 and 1973 he served as chairman of the Securities Industry Association. The
post involves acting as the industry's spokesman before Congress and various
Washington agencies.

Mr. Whitehead has been an avid supporter and fundraiser for President Reagan. In
an article written for The New York Times last October, he gave a glimpse of his
feelings for foreign affairs.

''It begins to appear,'' he wrote, ''that the tide of Soviet power, the
principal threat to stability in the world for many years, has begun to ebb.
Beset by aging, unstable leadership, serious internal economic problems, an
embarrassingly unsuccessful war in Afghanistan, and recurring rebellion within
its own orbit, Russia has lost its appeal to third world nations and may now be
slipping backward. Over time, these developments may permit some moderation in
the increase of defense expenditures and lead to a more easily balanced
budget.''

Began as Statistician

John Cunningham Whitehead was born on April 2, 1922, in Evanston, Ill., and grew
up in Montclair, N.J., the son of an electrical engineer for the Bell System.

After graduating from Haverford College in 1943 he entered the Navy, and after
World War II he earned a master's degree from Harvard Business School. Scrapping
plans to become an economics professor, he joined Goldman, Sachs as a
statistician in 1947. He became a partner in 1956 and co-chairman in 1976.

The father of three children, ages 14, 30 and 32, he and his second wife, the
former Jaan W. Chartener, live in Manhattan and Essex Fells, N.J.

Mr. Whitehead, widely believed to be a multimillionaire, said he was not sure
what financial arrangements he would have to make to take his new post, although
he said he would resign from the numerous corporate boards on which he serves.

''That's mostly for legal reasons,'' he said, ''but I expect there won't be time
for outside activities.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John C. Whitehead

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1248 words


THIS hasn't been much of a season for new musicals, but it's cheering to know
that in November, Broadway will get the Royal Shakespeare Company's production
of ''Poppy.'' It's described by the company as not quite a musical, but a
''panto.'' And if you're wondering what a panto might be, that's described as a
British tradition combining vaudeville, satire and music.

In any case, ''Poppy'' is a tale about the drug trade, and will be directed by
Terry Hands, the troupe's artistic director, who is now in New York for casting.
The author is Peter Nichols, who wrote ''A Day in the Death of Joe Egg,'' now on
Broadway, and the music was composed by Monty Norman of ''Expresso Bongo.''
Louise Westergaard, who co-produced ''Sophisticated Ladies,'' is apparently
going it alone this time.


Looking to the fall of 1986, there's more good news - the likelihood that a big
one will be with us. The name of that big one is ''Chess,'' a satirical look at
the romantic and political goings-on at a world chess championship, conceived
and written by Tim Rice, who collaborated with Andrew Lloyd Webber on ''Evita''
and ''Jesus Christ Superstar.'' The music for ''Chess'' is by Benny Andersson
and Bjorn Ulvaeus, who wrote the songs for the Swedish group Abba, and the word
is that Mr. Rice is thrilled with the ideas presented by the man who is very
likely going to be the director and choreographer - Michael Bennett.

Current plans call for a London production toward the end of this year, with a
budget of about $1.5 million. Elaine Paige will play the role of Florence, the
adviser to the American contender, who falls in love with the Russian player.
Murray Head, who was in the original cast of ''Jesus Christ Superstar,'' is the
name being bandied about as one of the male leads. The Three Knights, the
production company formed by Mr. Rice, Mr. Andersson and Mr. Ulvaeus, will
produce the London version. And although Bernard Jacobs, the president of the
Shubert Organization, is noncommittal, there seems little doubt that
you-know-who will be involved in the show.


Move over Mayor Koch - another Mayor will be back in the spotlight this summer.
''Fiorello!,'' the Pulitzer Prize-winning musical about Mayor La Guardia, is
being revived in June at the Westbury and Valley Forge Music Fairs. From there,
it's to go into summer stock around the country and then - maybe - New York. Tom
Bosley, who won a Tony when he created the role in 1959, will again play the man
who was known as ''The Little Flower.'' Lee Guber and Shelly Gross are
producing.


Anyone yearning to see Shaw's ''Arms and the Man'' will have a double
opportunity within the next few weeks. The Pearl Theater Company production
opens Thursday (the Circle in the Square production begins May 9). On May 1, the
Pearl will add Shakespeare's ''Taming of the Shrew'' to its schedule and the
plays will run in repertory through May 31. They'll be at Nameless Theater, 125
West 22d Street (246-6538).


Double Image Theater will spend this summer at Vassar College experimenting,
reworking and polishing new productions to be presented in New York in the fall,
when it begins its first season of resident repertory. On the college side,
Vassar will have a summer training program for theater students, with Double
Image giving workshops and classes in the morning and students working as
theater apprentices at other times. The students will have extra incentives -
they'll get college credits and Equity points, and there will be one production
in which they'll work with the professionals.


Over the years, Elizabeth Wilson has played a number of spinsters and what she
calls ''ladies with chips on their shoulders,'' and she thinks it has to do with
her height.

''I'm 5 feet 9 3/4 inches, which is a midget today, but in the 1950's, I
couldn't get some jobs because of my height,'' she said. ''One famous agent said
to me, 'You know, Elizabeth, God made you too tall to be an actress.' ''

Miss Wilson, who is in her early 60's, plays the spinster daughter of Jessica
Tandy in ''Salonika'' at the Public Theater, and Enid, the spinster of the
moment, has provided her with several departures from the norm.

''When I read the play, I thought that I couldn't sit on the stage and have a
young man brush my teeth - that's the pits - but it's turned into almost an act
of love,'' she said. ''And taking off my blouse, even when I was younger, is
something I never thought I'd do on stage.''

Miss Wilson, a graduate of the Neighborhood Playhouse, does not, however, play
the type of roles in which she is usually cast solely because of her height.
''I've always been interested in characters who had a problem,'' she said. ''I
once played an ambassador's wife who wore beautiful clothes and was very content
and I had a terrible time. I hated the part. I asked Dustin Hoffman, a pal of
mine, what he thought, and he said, 'Elizabeth, you were playing the dress.' ''

Her current idea of heaven, she said, would be to be booked two years in
advance. ''I'd like to know what I'm going to do when 'Salonika' closes,'' she
said. ''It's not so much financial as it is psychological. I'd like a sense of
continuity. I'd be very happy to throw in my lot with a repertory company.''


Glynis Johns has been signed to co-star with Milo O'Shea in ''The Return of
Herbert Bracewell,'' by Andrew Johns (no relation). The production, which opens
next month, will be directed by Geraldine Fitzgerald at the Chelsea Playhouse,
519 West 23d Street (243- 0992).


There may be weeks without a benefit for one cause or another, but not in New
York. On Monday, the eve of Shakespeare's birthday, Andre Gregory will act as
host for an evening of Hungarian food and Shakepearean readings, sponsored by
the Riverside Shakepeare Company, 165 West 86th Street. The event, open to the
public - call 877-6810 - will take place at a private apartment in Gramercy
Park, the price is $100 and it's for the benefit of the Free Shakespeare in the
Park program. And on Thursday, there will be a performance of ''Tracers'' with a
champagne reception at the Public Theater. Tickets are $50, of which $32 will go
to the New York Vietnam Veterans Memorial Commission's Jobs Program for
Veterans. Information: 598-7150.


It's probably not a record, but anyone who has sung the same song more than
2,000 times over a period of 40 years deserves some recognition. In this case,
it's Martha Schlamme and the song is Kurt Weill's ''Pirate Jenny.'' Miss
Schlamme and Alvin Epstein are marking their 18th anniversary year in ''A Kurt
Weill Cabaret,'' with their current engagement at the Harold Clurman Theater,
412 West 42d Street (594-2370).


Also not a record but worthy of note - Harvey Fierstein's ''Torch Song Trilogy''
will celebrate its 1,200th performance Tuesday.


While Cliff Gorman, Scott Glenn and William Hickey are opening here in
''Angelo's Wedding'' on May 23, other members of the Circle Repertory Company
will be preparing for a tour of Japan that begins a week later. The two plays
heading to the Far East portray anything but a romanticized version of life in
America. They're Sam Shepard's ''Fool for Love'' and Edward Albee's ''Who's
Afraid of Virginia Woolf?'' The five-city tour is co- sponsored by the
Japan-United States Friendship Commission in Washington and Japan's Institute of
Dramatic Arts in Tokyo. Incidentally, the company hopes to present the recently
postponed ''Beach House'' this fall.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY SURVEY FINDS OFFICERS CRITICAL

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 20


The Army's officers, in a remarkably candid self-evaluation, have expressed
severe criticism of themselves, the Army and its senior leaders.

In a confidential Army survey of its officer corps, taken last fall and analyzed
over the winter, half the officers who answered a long questionnaire agreed that
''the bold, original, creative officer cannot survive in today's Army.''

A report compiled from the survey said an even larger portion of the officers,
68 percent, agreed that ''the officer corps is focused on personal gain rather
than selflessness'' - a virtue that military leaders cite as essential to good
leadership.



'Not Enough Like Warriors'

In addition, nearly half the generals, who were questioned in a separate survey
but whose answers were incorporated into the report, concluded that ''senior
Army leaders behave too much like corporate executives and not enough like
warriors.''

And one-third of all the officers, including the generals, thought that ''most
officers are promoted before becoming competent at their existing grade
levels,'' the report said.

Despite these negative views, large majorities of the officers said that they
were satisfied with their duty positions, that they intended to stay in the Army
for a career and that fellow officers exemplified the ''warrior spirit'' and the
''Army ethic.''

Large majorities also said ''the Army is more than a job'' and ''individual
needs are secondary to Army needs.'' Although the officers had complaints about
particular elements of the Army's educational and training system, they
generally gave it good marks.

The survey was ordered by the Army Chief of Staff, Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., who
said in a letter to those being queried, ''Because this study will shape the
future development of our officer corps, we need your candid opinions.''

The state of the officer corps has been a contentious issue within and outside
the Army since American forces withdrew from Vietnam more than 10 years ago.
Military and civilian critics have asserted that officers emphasized management
over leadership and corporate values over traditional military values.

The survey report was compiled from answers to two long questionnaires. The
first was sent to all 436 serving officers in the four grades of general, of
whom 333 replied; the second was sent to 23,000 randomly selected officers, from
colonel down to lieutenant, of whom 14,046 replied. In those six grades are
92,000 officers. No estimate of the range of sampling error was provided in the
report.

The results were tabulated into a report stamped ''For Official Use Only'' and
''Close Hold,'' meaning that the information in the survey was not to be
disseminated widely.

Demands on Officers Cited

The Armed Forces Journal, a monthly magazine specializing in military matters
that is published here, obtained a copy of the survey and has prepared an
article for publication in its May issue. An advance copy of the article and the
report were made available to The New York Times.

Evidently anticipating renewed criticism, the Army prepared a discussion paper
to accompany the report.

''We place a tremendous burden on our senior Army leaders,'' the paper said.
''We charge them to perform as statesmen, as spokesmen for their organizations,
as stewards of tremendous resources, as role models, as standard setters, as
long-range planners and decision makers. In short, we demand they perform as
though they were effective corporate executives.

''In time of peace, there is a blurring of the distinction between pure
'warrior' and 'pure corporate executive.' In both peace and across the spectrum
of conflict, we expect our senior Army leaders to be both.''

Lieut. Gen. Charles W. Bagnal, who organized the survey, said it was part of a
larger effort to improve the professional development of the officer corps. ''We
asked some real tough questions about strengths and weaknesses,'' he said in a
telephone interview, ''to see where we should be going in the future.''

Work on Recommendations

Lieut. Gen. Arthur E. Brown Jr., director of the Army Staff, which is preparing
recommendations for General Wickham based on the survey, said changes in the
Army's system of educating officers in their careers were under serious
consideration.

In each of the junior, middle and senior service schools, more emphasis would
probably be put on teaching officers to be better mentors and coaches of their
subordinates, General Brown said.

The findings of the survey suggested that the Army officer corps had not
entirely recovered from the dark days of Vietnam, when morale was down, ethics
were slighted and many officers put promotion ahead of duty, according to
historians of the Vietnam War.

The survey responses also appeared to reflect the questioning attitude discerned
in many younger officers, the majors and captains who were commissioned in the
post-Vietnam period of the late 1970's. They brought into the Army the
skepticism of their youth in the turbulent 1960's.

Differing Views of Generals

Several marked differences between the generals and the lower-ranking officers
showed up in the survey. The generals, the report said, thought the officer
corps was less focused on personal gain than on ''selflessness''; lower- ranking
officers disagreed.

The generals said they felt that about two-thirds of the captains and
lieutenants would make good wartime leaders, while the captains and lieutenants
themselves rated only half of their peers as potentially good battlefield
commanders.

The generals also thought that the Army was preparing officers to keep pace with
weapons of advanced technology, while large numbers of the other officers
disagreed, the report said. The lower-ranking officers also wanted more of their
peers to receive advanced military education than the generals thought was
necessary.

On the other hand, the report said generals and the other officers agreed that
''the weakest areas of officer preparation tend to be warfighting, leadership
and critical thinking.'' They also agreed that two-thirds of the colonels and
majors would be good combat commanders.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CUTS IN ARMY SEEN AS A DENG VICTORY

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 975 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 20


The announcement that China is to cut its armed forces by one million men by the
end of next year is a sign that allies of Deng Xiaoping have regained momentum
after a period of political uncertainty, Western diplomats here say.

The reduction in military personnel, amounting to nearly a quarter of the army's
strength, is seen as one of the boldest steps in Mr. Deng's drive to modernize
the country. The 80-year-old leader has long maintained that the vast military
establishment must be pared to relieve the burden on the civilian economy.

The political sensitivities involved were suggested by the way in which the
announcement was made. Hu Yaobang, a close associate of Mr. Deng who is General
Secretary of the Communist Party, revealed the cutback when answering reporters'
questions Friday in New Zealand, where Mr. Hu was on the second leg of a
five-nation South Pacific tour.

There has been no report of Mr. Hu's remarks in the main party publications
here. But the accuracy of the reports from New Zealand appeared to be confirmed
when the English-language service of the official New China News Agency carried
an item from Wellington, the New Zealand capital, quoting Mr. Hu as saying that
''China is to cut one million troops from the army this year and next.''

Deng Appears Confident

To cut that deeply into the force's total strength of 4.2 million, diplomats
here say, Mr. Deng must have broad confidence in his political position.

Doubts had been raised over the last three months by the corruption and bungling
that enveloped the economic changes promoted by Mr. Deng. Prime Minister Zhao
Ziyang has acknowledged that serious mistakes were made in carrying out the
changes, and hard-liners in the party have questioned the advisability of
allowing too free a rein to ''bourgeois'' influences, such as foreign investment
and free enterprise.

Mr. Deng himself appeared to be on the defensive. But by pressing forward with
radical manpower cuts in the armed forces, he and his associates appear to have
given a clear signal of their primacy. From its inception as a revolutionary
force in 1927 until recently, the People's Liberation Army was regarded as a
bulwark of the views associated with Mao Zedong. Overcoming military resistance
to change has been a major concern for Mr. Deng since gaining control of the
party in 1978.

The army - a three-service force, with ground, air and naval wings - has already
had to accept cutbacks. With the exception of 1979, when the brief border war
with Vietnam swelled costs by about $2 billion, there has been continual
restraint on its budget. In addition, Mr. Deng has cast aside Maoist precepts of
''people's war,'' emphasizing vast manpower and guerrilla tactics, and has
stressed modern techniques of conventional warfare, professionalization of the
officer corps and more sophisticated weapons.

Officers Being Retired

To achieve this, China has already made deep cuts in the officer corps. It was
announced this year that 47,000 officers with careers going back to the
revolutionary days would be retired this year and next. Late last year, 40
officers with the equivalent rank of lieutenant general and above were similarly
retired from the general staff headquarters in Peking, the biggest purge of the
high command since 1949.

Overall manpower levels had also been sharply cut before Mr. Hu's announcement
of the new reductions. This was achieved in part by transferring some units to
civilian status. Several hundred thousand men performing security tasks were
moved into a new force known as the People's Armed Militia, and the Railway
Corps, long regarded as one of China's strongest Maoist bastions, was turned
over to the civilian rail network. Thousands of factories engaged full time in
military work were turned over to the production of civilian goods such as
motorcy cles and electronic appliances.

The implications of the army cutbacks go further. Like many armies, China's
devotes the largest single part of its budget to personnel costs, and the
reduction of these will ease strains on the Government budget that have
developed in the broader economic transition initiated by Mr. Deng.

At the same time, large numbers of young men, mainly from peasant backgrounds,
will be transferred back into the civilian economy, where many of them are
likely to have to find jobs in the new free-enterprise sector.

Support Units May Be Cut

Where the cuts will be made has not been announced, but Western military
attaches said they were almost certain to come in the heavily staffed support
echelons, rather than in combat units. With at least 60 Soviet divisions to the
north and about 36 Vietnamese divisions to the south, China's combat arms are
already stretched. Combined Chinese strength on the two frontiers is said to be
about 1.2 million.

One Western diplomat said the cutbacks appeared to confirm the determination of
the Peking leaders to limit hostilities with Vietnam to the limited pattern of
cross-border shelling and infantry skirmishes that has prevailed in in the dry
season now ending.

The diplomat said the move also underlined indications that Chinese leaders
might be preparing for a mutual reduction of forces with the Soviet Union, an
issue on which there has been no progress in negotiations so far.

But the most important consequence could be in domestic politics. For six years,
Mr. Deng has been maneuvering to reduce the political influence gained by the
forces under Mao. If the personnel cuts lead to sharp reductions in the military
garrisons in cities like Peking and Shanghai, as seems likely, there could be a
further downgrading in the army's political power and a parallel enhancement of
civilian authority, a development that would broaden Mr. Deng's political
leeway.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD ;
Hanoi to Let U.S. TeamInspect B-52 Crash Site

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 106 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 20


Vietnam will allow a team of American experts to visit a B-52 crash site in June
to examine the feasibility of recovering remains of missing Americans, Foreign
Minister Nguyen Co Thach said today.

At a press conference for foreign journalists, he described the move as a
special case and said it would only involve a preliminary survey.

He appeared to rule out similar visits in the future unless the United States
moved toward normal relations.

The agreement to allow the American experts to visit the crash site at Gia Lam,
60 miles northeast of Hanoi, was reached after three days of talks here with
United States officials.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
TV'S LEGACY FROM THE VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1360 words


Once again, television is descending on Vietnam, this time marking the 10th
anniversary of the fall of Saigon. Old adversaries will be interviewed, history
examined, consequences weighed. What was the war about? How did things go wrong?
It is proper that television should ask. Television was in Vietnam almost from
the beginning of the American involvement; it stayed until the end. The evening
news defined the war's perimeters. What we saw was not the whole war, but it was
the only one we knew. Buddhist priests immolated themselves on the screens in
our living rooms in 1963. Helicopters evacuated the last Americans from the roof
of the Embassy in Saigon on April 30, 1975. Vietnam was not only the first war
fought on television; it was also television's first great long-running news
story. Television and Vietnam had an impact on one another in ways we still
scarcely know.



Starting tomorrow, the CBS ''Morning News'' will do a series of reports on
Vietnam. On Thursday night at 10, CBS will present ''Honor, Duty and a War
Called Vietnam,'' with Walter Cronkite; Mr. Cronkite recently visited Hanoi and
Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon. On Friday morning, Bryant Gumbel will begin a
series of live reports from Vietnam for NBC's ''Today.'' On Saturday night at
10, NBC will present ''The Unwinnable War,'' a ''White Paper,'' with Marvin
Kalb.

On April 29, ABC will broadcast Ted Koppel's ''Nightline'' from Ho Chi Minh
City. Steve Bell will do reports from there for ''Good Morning, America.'' All
the evening news programs will also have segments on Vietnam. Television, once
more, will shape our thoughts about Southeast Asia.

It is unlikely, however, that there will be much thinking about television
itself. There should be. Did television change the conduct of the war, or the
way we came to regard it? It is ingenuous to pretend (which the networks do)
that television only reports the news, and does not effect it, or that the
effect, whether real or imagined, does not linger. It is doubtful, for example,
that the Reagan Administration was worried about print reporters when it
wrongheadedly barred the press from the Grenada invasion in 1983. Vietnam had
left among military men and some conservatives a distrust of television cameras.
Gen. William C. Westmore-land made part of the case in ''A Soldier Reports,''
his 1976 memoirs:

''Television brought (the Vietnam) war into the American home, but in the
process television's unique requirements contributed to a distorted view of the
war. The news had to be compressed and visually dramatic. Thus the war that
Americans saw was almost exclusively violent, miserable or controversial: guns
firing, men falling, helicopters crashing, buildings toppling, huts burning,
refugees fleeing, women wailing. . . . Only scant attention was paid to
pacification, civic action, medical assistance, the way life went on in a
generally normal way for most of the people much of the time.''

General Westmoreland is onto something here. Television will always favor
toppling or burning buildings. At the same time, the general wildly
overestimates the amount of violence we actually saw. We likely overestimate it,
too. The most-seen image of the Vietnam War on the evening news was probably a
distant puff of smoke. The Tet Offensive brought automatic weapons and falling
bodies into our living rooms, but that lasted only a few weeks. The television
coverage of the war did not make us more aware of violence; it desensitized us
to violence. We saw the same images over and over again. After a while, they had
no meaning.



There is a corollary to this: As the images of violence on the news programs
lost the power to grip us, the images of violence in films and television
entertainment programs grew more graphic, explicit and gory. They had to. Who
would pay to see ''The Deer Hunter,'' say, or ''Apocalypse Now'' if they looked
like the NBC ''Nightly News''? Violence was passed this way into the popular
culture.

Conservative critics may insist that television images unfairly turned Americans
against the war, but television, despite its huge effort, furnished little that
was lasting. The two most enduring anti-war images of Vietnam were conventional
still photographs. One showed a group of screaming children fleeing a misplaced
napalm strike by South Vietnamese planes. The 9-year-old girl in the middle of
the group has torn off her clothes. The other, by Eddie Adams, an Associated
Press photographer, showed the chief of the South Vietnamese national police
shooting a Vietcong lieutenant in the head with a pistol. Television couldn't
match anything like that; its technology worked against it. Images on television
move too fast to be digested.

Nonetheless, television did exercise some authority over the conduct of the war,
if only because it was there. In retrospect, it seems to have been inevitable.
Consider a famous report by Morley Safer of CBS. Mr. Safer accompanied a group
of Marines ordered to raze a village called Cam Ne, supposedly a Vietcong
sanctuary. One Marine, filmed by Mr. Safer's cameraman, used a cigarette lighter
to ignite a thatched hut. Mr. Morley concluded his television report this way:

''This is what the war in Vietnam is all about. The Vietcong were long gone. . .
. The action wounded three women, killed one baby, wounded one Marine, and
netted four old men as prisoners. . . . Today's operation is the frustration of
Vietnam in miniature. There is little doubt that American fire power can win a
military victory here. But to a Vietnamese peasant whose home means a lifetime
of backbreaking labor, it will take more than Presidential promises to convince
him that we are on his side.''



The report infuriated President Johnson, who imprudently ordered an
investigation of Mr. Safer. The Pentagon, meanwhile, said the hut the Marine had
burned was a ''tactical installation,'' covering a tunnel complex. Charge and
counter- charge flew. What was most significant, however, was that Mr. Safer
made the report in 1965. The war was young, and so was television coverage, but
a signal had been sent. Years later in ''The Powers That Be,'' David Halberstam
wrote admiringly that Mr. Safer had ''helped legitimatize pessimistic reporting
by all other television correspondents.'' More significantly: ''Overnight one
correspondent with one cameraman could become as important as 10 or 15 or 20
Senators.''

In fact, this didn't legitimatize pessimism; it sanctified it. The rewards could
be terrific - not dinner and drinks with a single elected official, but
suzerainty over a whole bunch of officials. The correspondent didn't have to
listen to them; they had to listen to him. This was a turning point for both
journalism and the Great Republic. Pessimism isn't reporting; it's a political
position. What's important isn't the correspondent's story; it's how the
correspondent feels about the story. The correspondent must be on the right
side. It's the moral thing to do. Some fine television reporting came out of
Vietnam, but some was blighted. Political position and journalism wrestled, and
political position won.

An irony of Mr. Safer's 1965 story was that, 20 years later, CBS would argue in
court that people just like the four old men that Mr. Safer's Marines captured
could inflict grave damage. Therefore, CBS said, General Westmoreland should
have included old men on his official list of enemy combatants. General
Westmoreland said that was nonsense. The general, of course, had brought a libel
suit against CBS, saying that one of its documentaries had defamed him. It is
wonderful to think that Mr. Safer's 1965 CBS report suggested the general was
right. Obviously, old men were noncombatants.

So, as television returns to reexamine an old war and what it meant and what it
means, it is well to remember that sometimes television is smug, even
self-righteous, and sometimes it's simply wrong. Will it feel today about
Vietnam what it felt 10 and 15 years ago? Which of the two participants in the
story will have changed most? Actually, they're pretty good questions.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Walter Cronkite in ''Honor, Duty, and a War Called Vietnam''

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
China Cuts Armed Forces

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim and Henry Giniger

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 284 words


China moved ahead on its long march to military modernization last week,
announcing that it would pare its vast armed forces by nearly a quarter by 1986.
Hu Yaobang, the Communist Party leader, said that ''starting from this year till
next year there will be a decrease of one million conventional forces in
China.''

According to Western estimates, China's forces total more than four million.
(The Soviet Union has about 5.1 million, including 1.5 million listed by the
International Institute of Strategic Studies as command and support troops; the
United States has 2.1 million and Vietnam, 1.2 million.) Deng Xiaoping, China's
paramount leader and an old army hand, believes that mere numbers can be a
hindrance on today's technologically advanced battlefields. When Vietnam managed
to hold off the Chinese troops sent to ''punish'' Hanoi for the invasion of
Cambodia in 1979, Mr. Deng's doubts about his forces reportedly increased.

China said last month it was retiring 47,000 officers, who had been kept on
beyond the normal retirement age of 60 as a reward for service with Mao Zedung
before the Communists' victory in 1949. Mr. Deng, a top army commissar in those
days, has no illusions about the lack of military sophistication of most of the
old- timers. They are also believed to have made themselves expendable by
criticising the economic and social changes he has ordered.

Mr. Hu announced the military cut while visiting New Zealand. He praised that
country's refusal to accept a visit from United States Navy ships because
Washington declines to provide assurances that no nuclear weapons would be
aboard. A Navy visit to China this summer is also in doubt for the same reason.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AT COLUMBIA, THE STAGE IS FAMILIAR BUT THE DRAMA IS DIFFERENT

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words


Columbia University administrators spent another week negotiating with students
protesting the school's investment policies, then ended the week in what both
sides reluctantly accepted as the only possible position - face to face in more
negotiations in the chambers of a State Supreme Court judge.

The issue involves the university's ownership of $32.5 million worth of
investments in companies that do business in South Africa. And, the students are
quick to add, that is the only issue. But with folksinger Pete Seeger and former
Yippie leader Abbie Hoffman appearing before the 400 students camped on the
steps of Hamilton Hall, it is perhaps inevitable that outsiders are tempted to
draw parallels to the demonstrations that rocked the Columbia campus in the late
1960's and early 1970's.

To veterans of those earlier confrontations, though, the differences are far
more striking than the similarities. In large part, that is due to the lessons
learned from the crisis that split the university into many pieces in the spring
of 1968. Columbia president Michael I. Sovern, who, as a law professor in 1968
helped re-establish peace on the Morningside Heights campus, has made it clear
that he shares the demonstrators' revulsion at ''South Africa's cruel and
barbarous system.'' He said that while he hopes to see apartheid abolished, he
also wanted the students to moderate their tactics.

Prof. Eric Holtzman, chairman of the biology department now and a faculty member
then, said the university had learned how to respond better to political issues
raised by students: ''Michael Sovern has expressed himself quite strongly with
regard to apartheid in a way that Grayson Kirk never did on earlier issues, and
that puts him in quite a different camp.'' (Dr. Kirk, who resigned as president
after the strike in 1968, still sits on Columbia's board as a trustee emeritus.)

For one thing, there is virtually unanimous agreement among students, faculty
and administrators that Dr. Sovern is not going to call in the police and risk a
repetition of the violence that occurred on April 30, 1968. That night, hundreds
of students were arrested and dozens injured when 1,000 police officers in riot
gear charged onto campus at the invitation of the university to remove
demonstrators from Hamilton Hall and four other buildings. The police had stood
outside the campus gates for days with student demonstrators tormenting them as
everyone waited to see if faculty and student negotiating committees could end
the strike. In contrast, Dr. Sovern seems content to wait out the students. One
senior administrator described his strategy as, ''Don't just do something, stand
there.''

''I can't read President Sovern's mind, but he and the administration have
learned that to bring police on campus would be a devastating error,'' said
Prof. Dennis Dalton, who has been teaching political science at Barnard College
since the Nixon years. ''They have used maximum restraint that way and by
working through the courts. It is not the same as with Grayson Kirk.''

That choice has been made easier by the students' decision to rely on symbols of
confrontation and to limit their defiance of the university's authority. With
the exception of the protest in front of Hamilton, they have not attempted to
interrupt academic life for the rest of the university's 18,500 students. Even
though they chained shut the front doors of Hamilton Hall when the demonstration
started April 4, they posted notices that the basement entrance would remain
open.

''This is an 80's protest,'' said James Carbone, a sophomore who joined in after
being persuaded by the arguments of his fellow students. ''It is very well
organized and was nonviolent from the start.''

Leaders of the demonstration said last week that it was no accident that their
civil disobedience action began on the anniversary of the death of Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. ''This is a nonviolent, nonconfrontational, disciplined
demonstration,'' said Wally Hayes, a spokesman for the Coalition for a Free
South Africa, the campus group that has organized the protests.

Studious Protesters

The demonstrators are quick to say that they differ from their predecessors not
only in behavior but also in values. ''Even the most vehement of them don't hate
Columbia,'' said Professor Dalton. ''Their demands are limited, and they want to
work from within the system, not attack it.'' Most of the protesters have more
in common with today's Yuppies than yesterday's Yippies and do not shy away from
the idea of a successful career or good grades. Many of them have continued to
attend classes and prepare for upcoming final exams. Student organizers have set
aside ''quiet periods'' for the demonstrators to hit the books. Even at midnight
the protestors have been studying by flashlight.

Nor has Columbia found itself embroiled in a conflict with the surrounding
community. In 1968, the university's plan to build a new gymnasium in
Morningside Park, its relationship with cafeteria and library workers and its
ownership of rundown tenements in the area came under attack from student
radicals and community residents. Investments in South Africa were an issue
then, too, as were the draft, the university's involvement in military research
and the expanding war in Vietnam. Once the strike began, black students
separated their protest from whites and occupied one building alone.

''This time, black-white relations have been phenomenal,'' said Dr. Dalton.
''The way the outside community has become involved is really extraordinary.''
Black community groups have stopped by to offer support and donate food and
money to the demonstrators, most of whom are white. A New York local of the
International Brotherhood of Teamsters has donated $1,000, a sharp contrast to
the tensions that marked relations between students and labor unions during the
Vietnam era.

As in 1968, though, the events at Columbia are being closely watched on other
campuses, both by concerned administrators and admiring students. Teach-ins on
apartheid have been organized at campuses across the nation, and demonstrations
demanding South African divestment have erupted at Rutgers and Cornell. At the
University of California at Berkeley last week, campus police arrested 158
protesters camped out on the steps of a classroom building and charged them with
trespassing and illegal lodging. Mark Lilly, a spokesman for the demonstrators
at Berkeley, said the students at Columbia had inspired them. ''We've been
talking to them a couple of times a day and have gotten a very strong impetus
from them,'' he said. ''They've set the example for the rest of us to try to
follow.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Columbia students protesting against their university (Special
Features/Sipa Press/Donna Binder)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA'S CHOICES IN NICARAGUA;
LEAVE IT ALONE

BYLINE: By Theodore C. Sorensen; Theodore C. Sorensen, a New York lawyer, was
special counsel to President John F. Kennedy.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 610 words


President Reagan's embrace of Algeria's President this week should remind him
that not all governments born in revolution are forever hostile.
Marxist-Leninist incantations do not collect garbage or repair roads. The list
of countries whose fiery founding parties ultimately settled into cautious
pragmatism stretches (alphabetically) from Angola to Zimbabwe. Even our
revolution was followed by a turbulent era in which critics were imprisoned and
defiance was suppressed by brute force.

Why then write off as permanently lost the Sandinista revolution? A recent visit
to Nicaragua provided no crystal ball or panacea but did suggest which previous
revolutions are inapposite.

Nicaragua today is not Venezuela 1958 where the overthrow of Marcos Perez
Jimenez produced genuine democracy. Sandinista pledges to restore freedom of
expression, religion and political opposition remain unfulfilled. Cuban, East
German and kindred military advisers further darken the atmosphere.

Nevertheless, Nicaragua is not yet Cuba 1960. The opposition press, parties,
church and business sector are unhappy but their very existence belies the
Reagan-Shultz description of Nicaragua as a ''Communist totalitarian state
behind the Iron Curtain.'' The Sandinistas severely limit opposition activities.
But so do many governments, from China to Chile, which the Administration
blesses.

Nor is Nicaragua a Vietnam 1975, ready to dominate its neighbors. With I an
economy bled by the Somozas, mismanaged by the Sandinistas and disrupted by
''contras,'' an army based on unpopular conscription and an unsettled Government
unlikely to get large-scale military and economic assistance from a wary Moscow,
Nicaragua is in no shape to significantly assist the subversion of its
well-armed neighbors backed by the United States, which has legitimate security
interests in Central America and sufficient means to protect them.  But neither
is Nicaragua another Grenada. The size, dispersal and determination of the
population that overthrew Anastasio Somoza Debayle make unlikely another
lightning conquest costing little in American lives and prestige.  The Mexican
revolution that began in 1910 may offer the Sandinistas the most helpful model.
Resentful of United States economic and military might, the Mexicans seized
power and property on our border, with anti- American slogans similar to
Managua's, but posing no real threat to anyone. Mexico today, practicing its own
brand of democracy and mixed economy, maintains warm relations with Havana and
Washington.

Unfortunately, President Reagan has steadily facilitated the Sandinista's march
toward the Cuban model instead of the Mexican. He has focused more on their
regressive actions and passionate rhetoric at home than their prudent conduct
abroad. Perhaps that march toward Havana can still be reversed. Why would
Sandinista leaders survive General Somoza's prisons merely to become proxies of
Moscow?

The decision is theirs, not ours. But the surest way to permanently antagonize,
radicalize, Vietnamize and ultimately Communize Nicaragua and all of Central
America is for this country to continue applying nothing but military muscle,
including Central Intelligence Agency financing for contra guerrillas seeking to
overthrow Nicaragua's Government.

In northern Nicaragua, I listened to refugees whose farms had been attacked and
sons kidnapped by contras. No doubt some of their answers were coached. Yet none
of them supported the Sandinistas or contras. None of them knew or cared about
either Ronald Reagan or Karl Marx. They simply wanted to be left alone. The
United States should heed their request.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OPED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HALF BLANCHE AND HALF STANLEY

BYLINE: By Frank Rich; Frank Rich is the chief drama critic of The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1795 words


THE KINDNESS OF STRANGERS The Life of Tennessee Williams.  By Donald Spoto.
Illustrated. 409 pp. Boston: Little, Brown & Company. $19.95.

TENNESSEE: CRY OF THE HEART By Dotson Rader.  Illustrated. 348 pp. New York:
Doubleday & Company. $16.95.

AS the plays of Tennessee Williams are likely to live for as long as there is an
American theater, so may the fabled drama of the man himself.  Donald Spoto, the
author of the first serious Williams biography since the playwright's death, is
only a shade hyperbolic when he characterizes his subject as ''a man more
disturbing, more dramatic, richer and more wonderful than any character he ever
created.'' Williams's life was lived almost entirely at the extremes embodied by
Blanche DuBois and Stanley Kowalski. He was at once a man of frail sensitivities
and brutal hungers - a moth dancing in his own flame. And, as surely as Stanley
must smash Blanche, so Williams was inevitably driven to self-destruction.

It is not a pretty story that Mr. Spoto tells in ''The Kindness of Strangers.''
The son of a Mississippi rector's puritanical daughter and a shoe salesman who
fell in love with long distances, Thomas Lanier Williams endured a sickly,
rootless childhood (more than 16 family residences in his first 15 years) that
he would re-enact for the rest of his life. Hating his callous father (who
dubbed him ''Miss Nancy'') and wary of his volatile, genteel mother, he rarely
trusted the affection of others: throughout his adulthood, he drove away most of
the people who cared about him, from his most devoted lover, Frank Merlo, to
Audrey Wood, the agent who nurtured his career from the days of his
apprenticeship to boom times and creative drought. Even when Williams made
millions, he continued to live the itinerant existence of his youth.
Compulsively restless, he would always rather be on an airplane or in a hotel
room than in his nominal, ill-maintained ''permanent'' residences of Key West,
Fla., and New York City. Nor did he ever exorcise the guilt he felt over his
inability as a young man to prevent his hysterical mother from subjecting his
beloved sister, Rose, to a prefrontal lobotomy. Williams became a chronic
hypochondriac who always saw himself, like Rose, at either the asylum's or
death's door.



That hypochondria, as Mr. Spoto explains, eventually found its outlet in drug
dependence. ''The Kindness of Strangers'' leaves little doubt that it was
Williams's chemical addictions, rather than literary burnout, that effectively
destroyed his career during the two decades between ''The Night of the Iguana''
in 1962 and his accidental death in a New York hotel room in 1983. In that
grotesque final period, Williams indiscriminately swallowed or injected nearly
every pharmaceutical he could find. Not only were the dosages of staggering
proportions, but the various amphetamines and barbiturates mixed explosively
with each other - as well as with the large quantities of alcohol that Williams
consumed.

Amazingly enough, he kept writing. No matter how much he had abused his body or
spirit the night before, he would somehow get up each morning to peck away at
his typewriter for several hours, often working on several projects at once,
frequently rewriting plays again and again after their increasingly brief New
York runs. The output never slackened - only its quality. One is left with the
poignant image of an artist whose creative reflexes kept functioning well after
most of his organs, his brain included, had deteriorated. It is not
inconceivable that a detoxified Williams might have produced as many lasting
plays in the second half of his career as he did in the first.

Mr. Spoto lays out this chronicle dutifully and, as best one can tell,
accurately. Readers familiar with the existing public record - the
Williams-Donald Windham letters (1977), the memoirs and biographies of Williams
associates and relatives, Williams's own somewhat scurrilous ''Memoirs'' (1975),
the voluminous journalistic profiles of the playwright - will not find many
major surprises here. But the author does reconcile conflicting versions of
events, add footnotes and flesh out familiar anecdotes with fresh, if mostly
unexamined, observations from surviving Williams friends.

Yet enemies rarely speak up, and neither, in a way, does Williams himself. ''The
Kindness of Strangers'' is an unauthorized biography, as was Mr. Spoto's 1983
life of Alfred Hitchcock, ''The Dark Side of Genius.'' But in this book, unlike
the last, the subject's presence is elusive. Although the author had access to
the many Williams papers at the University of Texas at Austin, as well as other
collections, we rarely hear the playwright's distinctive, often humorous voice
in these pages. Mr. Spoto's flat journalistic prose and routine analysis cannot
fill the vacuum. The reportage, more facile and seemingly more hurried than that
of the Hitchcock book, is only rarely its own reward.

Mr. Spoto does have his theories and conceits, but they do not answer the
central questions raised by his narrative. He leans too heavily on
generalizations about ''the Dionysian or Bacchic impulse'' to explain his
subject's artistic personality. Nor does he convincingly unravel what he calls
the ''brutal paradox'' of a shy, sensitive man who, for all his identification
with the vulnerable and dispossessed, tirelessly pursued sex ''for its own sake,
as a quick, anonymous diversion.'' And what are we to make of the book's
last-minute speculation - suggested by others and left uninvestigated by the
author - that Williams's unquenchable thirst for male bodies masked a
deep-seated hatred of homosexuality?

The discussion of the plays is, if anything, less illuminating. As the book's
all-too-predictable title might indicate, Mr. Spoto often assumes an
unsophisticated reader; at this late date, he mounts a strenuous defense against
now-forgotten critics and public bluenoses who attacked Williams's work for its
''sensationalism.'' Moreover, the plays are laboriously dissected for what
autobiographical nuggets they might contain, and they are schematically
contrasted with the works of Williams's favorite writers. (''A Streetcar Named
Desire,'' we are told, has ''a certain nostalgia that testifies to its author's
veneration of Chekhov and his tragic seagull.'') Mr. Spoto's critical vocabulary
is meager. ''Iguana'' is commended for its ''human warmth'' and ''tragic
serenity,'' and ''Streetcar'' for ''its tragic grandeur and its sharply etched
portraits of men and women in conflict.'' In general, the best Williams plays
are called ''great'' and the best film adaptations of them ''brilliant.''
Similarly, Williams's various lovers are characterized as either ''strikingly
handsome'' or ''dazzlingly handsome'' or, in the autumnal years, merely ''tall,
handsome and alert.''

What ''The Kindness of Strangers'' most lacks, however, is passion - for
Williams, for the theater, and for the language and telling scenes a literary
biography requires. The only time Mr. Spoto gets worked up is when he is fuming
about the paid and unpaid ''personal assistants'' who attached themselves to
Williams at the end. The author describes this ''coterie of young men'' with
ever-angrier invective - from ''social carnivores'' to ''glamor-hungry jackals
who used sex like a fly-swatter'' - but without revealing exactly who these
people were or how and why the playwright needed them. Grateful as we can be
that Mr. Spoto has done the spadework, someone else will have to dig far deeper
to produce the biography that matches the size and drama of Williams's life and
art.



The writer Dotson Rader, who is nowhere to be found in Mr. Spoto's book,
presents himself as one of the playwright's closest confidants in ''Tennessee:
Cry of the Heart.'' The two men met in 1969, shortly after Williams emerged from
an enforced stay at a St. Louis, Mo., mental hospital, and Mr. Rader soon
accompanied his new friend on his recidivist descent into New York's demimonde
of hustlers and drug dealers.

Mr. Rader's slapdash but entertaining memoir is a jumble of gossip, self-pitying
confessionals (''I, too, had been an involuntary guest at an insane asylum'')
and strident self-promotion - now and then punctuated by arbitrarily inserted,
perfunctory accounts of Williams's past. When he is not describing his wardrobe
or limousine rides, the author is particularly eager to portray himself as a
bard and avatar of 1960's political and social radicalism. Mr. Rader reminds us
that he knew both Jim Morrison and David Dellinger, that he hung out at Max's
Kansas City (including ''the night Jean Genet was there'') and was tear-gassed
while protesting the Vietnam War. He takes credit for raising Williams's radical
consciousness and, to prove the playwright's ideological bent, even asserts that
Clifford Odets was a major influence on his plays.


MR. RADER does not seem to know what book he wanted to write. Some of
''Tennessee: Cry of the Heart'' reads like a wan sequel to ''Edie'' (Edie
Sedgwick and other Andy Warhol acolytes are much in evidence); some of it,
especially the gratuitous asides about the sexual proclivities of the famous,
suggests an East Coast answer to Kenneth Anger's ''Hollywood Babylon.'' The
single-sentence transitional paragraphs - ''An incident comes to mind'' or ''The
sixties were about death'' - are embarrassing. At times the author cannot seem
to decide which departed writer he would most like to exploit: Truman Capote,
who died while Mr. Rader's manuscript was still in the typewriter, is the
subject of several lengthy, snide and largely irrelevant anecdotes.

Along the way, the author also tries to settle scores with Williams's presumed
nemeses - an ecumenical group including, among many others, Yevgeny Yevtushenko,
Richard Gere, The New York Times and the University of Pennsylvania. The
playwright was nothing if not paranoid, even to the point of believing that
Audrey Wood was secretly licensing his plays' characters for television soap
operas and Disneyland-like theme parks. Although Mr. Rader's favorite subject is
himself, the pathos of Williams's decline does seep through. The playwright's
self-esteem eventually fell so low that he crudely forged an inscription from
Eugene O'Neill on a photograph - ''To Tennessee, with love'' - and displayed it
as a prized possession. Many of his other possessions were stolen by the
prostitutes and camp followers who overran his homes in the final decade. In
more damning ways than its author might imagine, this telltale ''cry of the
heart'' graphically illustrates that both the friends and strangers surrounding
the dying Tennessee Williams were anything but kind.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tennessee Williams, Frank Merlo, Elia Kazan and Charles
Feldman (University of Texas at Austin)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW & NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1036 words


STREET WITHOUT JOY, by Bernard B. Fall. (Schocken, $7.95.) Beginning in 1953,
the political scientist Bernard B. Fall visited Indochina at various times. On
Feb. 21, 1967, he was killed in South Vietnam by a Vietcong mine. Tillman Durdin
wrote here in 1961 that the book's special importance was its ''portrayal of the
Indochina conflict as a major example of the new kind of warfare waged by
revolutionary forces that enjoy the advantages of what he calls an 'active
sanctuary.' '' Fall's

LAST REFLECTIONS ON A WAR (Schocken, $8.95), published posthumously, is a
collection of 19 pieces. In 1967 our reviewer, Paul Mus, observed that the first
part of the book constitutes ''the best outline of Vietnamese history and the
main issues of the Vietnamese War available in English.''

THE LOVER and

 A LATE DIVORCE, by A. B. Yehoshua. (Obelisk/Dutton, $9.95 each.) ''The Lover''
was the Israeli writer A. B. Yehoshua's first novel. In 1978 Robert Alter said
in The Book Review that, superficially, the book (which was translated by Philip
Simpson) is a story of the Yom Kippur War and its aftermath. But ''the delicate
shifting tensions between political surface and what I would call elemental
depths are a principal source of his fiction's piquancy, its elusive, haunting
appeal. . . .  Mr. Yehoshua's novel manages to touch most of the raw nerves of
Israel's troubled national condition.'' Our reviewer, Harold Bloom, wrote that
in ''A Late Divorce,'' translated by Hillel Halkin and published last year, the
hidden subject is the author's ''obsessive theme of the great debate between
Israel and the Golah (Exile).'' This story concerns a man who leaves Israel for
Minnesota and returns to get his wife's consent to a divorce.

AT THE BOTTOM OF THE RIVER, by Jamaica Kincaid. (Aventura/Vintage, $5.95.) In
1983 the pieces in Jamaica Kincaid's first collection of short fiction were
called by our reviewer, Edith Milton, ''eccentric and visionary.'' She said,
''Many of the stories owe their structure to the folk tales of the Caribbean
islands where most of them are set. (Miss Kincaid) gives us sudden glimpses of a
place seldom seen and makes us look at it in a way previously unthought of.''

THE USES OF THE PAST: Profiles of Former Soci

eties, by Herbert J. Muller. (Schocken, $11.95.) In this 1952 book, Herbert J.
Muller sets out to show how past societies can shed light on the future of our
own. He examines aspects of the major cultures that contributed to the Western
tradition - Israel, Greece, Europe during the Enlightenment - and glances at
''Holy Russia,'' Byzantine and Marxist, India and China. Our reviewer, John
Herman Randall Jr., termed the studies of societies ''informed and judicious but
also outspoken and lively appraisals.''

THE KENNEDYS: Dynasty and Disaster: 1848-1984, by John H. Davis. (McGraw-Hill,
$5.95.) Our reviewer, Richard Nalley, described this 1984 work as ''an
unflattering portrait of four generations of the Kennedy family'' and wrote that
''Mr. Davis has clearly done much research, and at his most convincing he dogs
his facts like a courtroom lawyer.''

A QUESTION OF UPBRINGING, by Anthony Powell. (Popular Library/Warner, $3.95.)
This is the first volume of the 12-volume comic roman-fleuve ''A Dance to the
Music of Time.'' The complete work ranges from 1914 to the late 1970's, tracking
social changes in upper- middle-class England and its bohemian and academic
edges. This first volume, published in 1951, follows Nicholas Jenkins, the
hero-narrator, and three classmates through Eton and Oxford. Elizabeth Janeway
wrote here that Mr. Powell's ''eye and ear are extremely sensitive to places, to
atmosphere, to words and tones of speaking. . . . This is an enormously solid
and real book.''

THE HOMEFRONT: America During World War II, by Mark Jonathan Harris, Franklin D.
Mitchell and Steven J. Schecter. (Putnam, $8.95.) Last year William Serrin
remarked here that ''The Homefront'' provides ''a vivid portrait'' of the
nation's war effort. ''To the recollections of 37 Americans, the authors have
added many fine photographs; together, text and pictures recall victory gardens,
scrap drives, wartime romances, work in war industries, victory and
homecoming.''

ALWAYS A BODY TO TRADE, by K. C. Constantine. (Penguin, $3.50.) Rocksburg is a
small Pennsylvania town whose police chief is Mario Balzic, the hero of several
mysteries by the pseudonymous K. C. Constantine. Balzic is experienced, knows
how things work, makes a deal when he has to and hates dishonesty, pomposity,
hypocrisy and politicians. The story begins when a new mayor interferes with the
Chief's operation. In 1983 Newgate Callendar wrote here that ''The book is a
short course in how the law really works. . . . The great thing about 'Always a
Body to Trade' is its earthy dialogue.'' THE ANTI-FEDERALIST: An Abridgment, by
Murray

Dry, of The Complete Anti-Federalist, edited by Herbert J. Storing. (University
of Chicago, $9.95.) ''The Complete Anti-Federalist'' consisted of seven volumes
of writings and speeches by those who opposed ratification of the United States
Constitution. In 1982 our reviewer, Leonard W. Levy, explained that the Anti-
Federalists based their opposition partly on doubts that the United States, with
so many governments, local traditions, religions, races, national stocks, social
problems and economic interests, could survive. He called the work ''magnificent
scholarship.''

TIME AFTER TIME, by Molly Keane. (Obelisk/Dutton, $8.95.) This is Molly Keane's
second novel published under her name. (She previously wrote as M. J. Farrell.)
The main characters here are down-at-the- heels Irish gentry, the aged Swifts -
Jasper and his sisters, April, May and Baby June - who live together on a
decrepit country estate. Last year our reviewer, Jean Strouse, commented on
''the tale's perversity and lovelessness'' and ''its humor and deft detail.''
She found the writing over all ''not Mrs. Keane's best'' but admired the
''evocative prose'' the author applies to nature.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of A. B. Yehoshua

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOLDIERS AND DOCTORS

BYLINE: By Joe Klein; Joe Klein is the author of ''Payback:Five Marines After
Vietnam.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words


ON DISTANT GROUND

By Robert Olen Butler.  245 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $14.95.  ANOTHER WAR,
ANOTHER PEACE By Ronald J. Glasser.  247 pp. New York: Summit Books. $14.95.

THESE are two solid, thoughtful novels set in Vietnam by writers who have
covered the territory before and, like so many of us, can't seem to let it go.
Vietnam remains a generational disease, a low-grade fever that won't go away, a
too-easy metaphor - and yet, exotic, compelling, haunting all the same.  Neither
Robert Olen Butler nor Ronald J. Glasser romanticizes the war - as has lately
become the unfortunate trend,

 especially in movies - but there is nostalgia here, nostalgia of an unlikely
sort: not for innocence or youth, but for the complexity and absurdity, the
emotional turbulence and the fractured, almost delirious self-importance of that
time.

Home from the war, Capt. David Fleming, the central character in ''On Distant
Ground,'' is about to be court-martialed for an act he can't explain. As an
intelligence officer in Vietnam, he commandeered a helicopter and freed a
high-ranking Vietcong official from a barbaric prison at Con Son Island. His
only conscious reason for having done this was a graffito on the wall of the
prisoner's squalid cell: ''Hygiene is healthful.'' He went to great lengths to
free the man because he could not bear ''the destruction . . . of that pure,
ironic, detached mind,'' a difficult concept to explain to a military tribunal.
During the course of the trial, Fleming's wife gives birth to a son and Saigon
begins to fall. To make matters much, much worse, Fleming comes to the startling
realization that he has another son, in Saigon, the result of a brief affair
with an aristocratic Vietnamese woman. He becomes obsessed by the idea of
finding and saving the child. He realizes this is madness but is too
self-absorbed to stop himself. He returns to Vietnam.

It is a tribute to Mr. Butler's skill as a writer that his story's pyramiding
absurdities seem not merely plausible but inevitable. He achieves his effects
the old-fashioned way, by building tension through small details and emotional
nuances, by building the story moment by moment. Captain Fleming is a familiar
American type - quiet, controlled, honorable, a fanatic rationalist, a stranger
to introspection - the sort of man usually seen from the outside, in action. Mr.
Butler takes us inside him, though. Fleming is tortured by his numbness; he sees
the world through a scrim of anxiety he mistakes for detachment. If it is a bit
too clear from the start that ''the sense of control that his detachment gave
him was a lie,'' Fleming's halting progress toward that realization is deftly
handled. The ''pure, ironic, detached mind'' of the Vietcong prisoner is, of
course, his own. Fleming is desperate to free himself. His prison is
self-absorption.

As he demonstrated in ''The Alleys of Eden'' (1981), a novel that was set in the
same time and place (and in which David Fleming made a brief appearance), there
is an admirable precision to Mr. Butler's work. He has a wry, subdued, almost
dour sensibility that enables him to write melodrama without becoming
hysterical. He is reclusive, prickly, the sort who notices ''the multitude of
low-grade torments that are patched together to make parties.'' He is also
something of a closet romantic. From the air, the South China Sea is ''scaled in
dull jade like the flank of a dragon,'' which is just how one would hope it
might look. Finally, he knows Saigon cold - having served for a time as an aide
to its mayor - and his description of what the city must have been like in the
days after its fall is subtle and eerie and entirely memorable.



If David Fleming is a hard man coming to terms with his selfishness, the main
character in ''Another War, Another Peace'' (unfortunate title) - who is also
named David (but has no last name, again unfortunately) - is a sensitive man
coming to terms with his naivete. David is a doctor, assigned to perfunctory
pill-pushing among the Vietnamese in the months before the 1968 Tet offensive.
He is accompanied on these trips by Cpl. Tom Griffen, a former reconnaissance
ranger, an expertise junkie who never takes off his sunglasses. Gradually, they
educate each other.

Dr. Glasser's first book, ''365 Days'' (1971), was a nonfiction account of a
year he spent treating casualties from Vietnam at a United States Army hospital
in Japan. It was remarkable for its clarity, compassion and intelligence, and it
is rightfully considered one of the early classics of Vietnam literature. The
same compassion and intelligence are present in ''Another War, Another Peace,''
but the story is too contrived and preachy to be entirely convincing. Dr.
Glasser is at his best when David and Corporal Griffen are out in the
countryside treating the Vietnamese, who ''seemed to have no weight to them, no
substance; they were like creatures from a lighter planet.'' His ability to
explain medical procedures is evident here, but he also creates a living,
breathing, recognizable and quirky character in Griffen. The other characters -
doctors, back at the base - tend to be cardboard blowhards who say things about
the war, pro and con, that have already been said far too many times. Even
David, apparently Dr. Glasser's alter ego, is too naive at the novel's beginning
and too knowing at the end to be very affecting.

Still, Dr. Glasser has a wonderful eye for detail. His descriptions of heat,
pain and the confusion of an ambush - the staples of any war novel - are often
perceptive. I especially like his description of a company of American
helicopter-assault troops, who arrive suddenly at a field hospital: ''They were
all young. None of the troopers or even the chopper pilots looked older than
eighteen or nineteen. Most, too, appeared gaunt. . . . Many must have been
twenty to thirty pounds underweight, but it didn't seem to affect them. Indeed,
they reminded David more of a group of grim stevedores than adolescents, men
whose lifetime of hard work had led to a kind of fitness that had nothing to do
with health.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POSTBELLUM BATTLES

BYLINE: By Jack Sullivan: Jack Sullivan is the editor of ''Lost Souls: A
Collection of English Ghost Stories.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 681 words


THE SPOILS OF WAR By Thomas Fleming.  524 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons.
$18.95.

IN America, says the central character in Thomas Fleming's new historical novel,
''politics has become a continuation of war by other means.'' Karl von
Clausewitz, the 19th-century Prussian general and writer, said ''War is nothing
but the continuation of politics with the admixture of other means.'' One of Mr.
Fleming's major themes is that, when reversed, Clausewitz' aphorism applies to
the politics of personal relations as much as to those of government.

In ''The Officers' Wives,'' Mr. Fleming's 1981 best seller, Vietnam was the war
that would not end. Now, in ''The Spoils of War,'' the latest in a series of
novels that includes ''Rulers of the City'' and ''Dreams of Glory,'' Mr. Fleming
examines the impact of the Civil War - from 1866, the year after it ended, to
the turn of the century - on the lives of individuals.

This tale includes references to such disparate subjects as the lynching of
blacks who attempted to vote just after the Civil War, the escalation of poverty
and prostitution in late-19th- century New York, the troubled Presidencies of
Ulysses S. Grant and Rutherford B. Hayes, and the Battle of San Juan Hill. Mr.
Fleming also weaves in the careers of such historical figures as William
Randolph Hearst, Herman Melville, Susan B. Anthony, Stephen Crane and Theodore
Roosevelt.



The patriarch of this family saga is Jonathan Stapleton, a pedantic former Union
general who discovers he must sully himself with corrupt Republican politics to
preserve the ideals he fought for in the Civil War. All the characters in this
novel are like Jonathan in that they must confront a dilemma involving some
version of the struggle between idealism and ''corrupt realism.''

Jonathan's wife, Cynthia, the daughter of a bankrupt but formerly grand Lousiana
family, is torn between the defeated traditions of the South and those of the
victorious North. Indeed, she feels she is one of Jonathan's spoils of war.

Genevieve, the daughter of Ben Dall, a fanatical Abolitionist, is a passionate
feminist who must compromise herself to two domineering and cynical men - her
husband, Rawdon, and, later, her formidable boss William Randolph Hearst. The
only character who remains consistently true to a vision is Clay Pendleton, a
naive journalist from South Carolina - and even he spends much of the time
anesthetized by bourbon.

Thomas Fleming has often demonstrated his skill at depicting moral dilemmas and
the historical events that bring them into focus. Here he deftly integrates the
main story with detailed accounts of dramatic historical events. However, he
introduces a thoroughly artificial device at the end. On the very last page he
says that the book that the reader has just finished was taken from among Clay
Pendleton's papers, which were found some time after Pendleton died in the
sinking of the Lusitania in 1915. This postcript, however, is the only reference
to the origin of the story.

UNFORTUNATELY, the novel loses shape and authority whenever it fails to follow
the sweep of history and becomes subject to the more concrete demands of
character development. For example: ''But Genevieve Dall did not care about
Pendleton's shining message. She did not share his detestation of that leprous
American newspaper tradition of faking it.'' Or, ''There was a barrier between
them now that friendship - no, call it by its right name, love - could not
surmount.''

And, as if to compensate for lack of music or imagery, sentences often are
embellished with all manner of odd adjectives and alliterations. Rawdon is angry
at Genevieve for choosing ''virginal Vassar over erotic elopement''; Jonathan
has a bad time in Paris, then is ''almost as unenthused by the blatant decadence
of the Second Empire.''

The characters are described as ''spinning, writhing, whirling in history's
grip, like the dancers in the tarantella.'' They're writhing all right, proving
that Mr. Fleming is far more convincing as a historian than as a novelist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE OF MISSING IN VIETNAM HAS NOT FADED AFTER DECADE

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2750 words

DATELINE: LINTHICUM, Md.


Donald Shay's father is retired now. Donald's little sister has two young
children of her own. His fiancee finally married someone else. And Donald's
mother doesn't bake his favorite apple pie much anymore; the good smell brings
back too many bad memories.

Mr. Shay doesn't know any of this. And he may never know. In fact, his family
may never know where he is, or where he was when he died, if he died. For Mr.
Shay is one of 2,477 Americans still missing in action from the Vietnam War.

Ten years after the fall of Saigon and 15 years after that smiling, 24-year-old
lacrosse player flew off a radar screen into his family's memory somewhere over
Indochina, no one knows for sure what happened to any of the missing Americans.



More Than Mere Statistics

But in one of the more mysterious legacies of that painful era in American
history, these men who went off to war as individuals have now become, as a
group, much more than simply a sad statistic. They are the subject of movies,
books and songs, the object of angry demonstrations, earnest petitions and
solemn vigils, the focus of intense Presidential interest, microscopic analysis
and secret satellite photography and the heart of some delicate diplomatic
exchanges trying to bridge broad cultural chasms.

The alleged remains of some missing men, reduced to bones and fragments after
years in the jungle, have even become the currency of a ghoulish, clandestine
commerce that preys on the hopes and fears of families and refugees.

''Somehow,'' said one United States Government official, ''the mystery of their
disappearance and their deaths have taken on a peculiar life of their own.''

For military records, all but one of the missing are officially presumed dead,
ending the pay, automatic promotion and service benefits accruing for years.
Only the case of a single missing flier remains active for symbolic reasons. But
for diplomatic records, the missing remain a live issue, a major obstacle to the
normalization of relations between Vietnam and the United States and a lever for
some Southeast Asian lands to keep the United States in the region as a
political counterbalance.

For some family members, the missing relative is dead, a sad part of a slowly
fading past that might somehow still miraculously reappear and complicate a
brand new life. Other relatives still wait, in hope that their loved one might
walk back through the door some day, perhaps tomorrow.

For the children of the missing, many of them not so childish anymore, the
absent father is often but a dim memory, kept alive on den walls or treasured
tape cassettes by sisters, brothers, mothers, fathers or wives, some of them
remarried, some of them happy now, some of them troubled, all of them scarred.

''It's been such a long time to be uncertain,'' said Ann Mills Griffiths, whose
brother vanished in Vietnam nearly two decades ago. ''You want to be realistic.
But you're afraid to give up hope.''

By the standards of war, America's 2,477 Vietnam missing are few, thanks to
modern recovery methods, the nature of land fighting and new forensic technology
that enables investigators to identify even partial remains by, for instance,
electronically reconstructing a skull from a fragment.



Tallies of the Missing

The Center for Military History still lists 3,350 missing in action from World
War I, 8,177 in Korea, where M.I.A. teams still mount occasional search
excavations, and 78,777 from World War II, when many were lost at sea.

Of the Vietnam missing, 706 were in the Army, 937 in the Air Force, 500 in the
Navy, 291 in the Marine Corps and 1 in the Coast Guard. The other 42 were
civilians. Of the missing, 1,101 disappeared in or over South Vietnam, 719 in
North Vietnam, 569 in Laos, 82 in Cambodia and 6 over China.

Privately, American officials and relatives admit there is little hope of
accounting for many of the missing, perhaps even a majority, and most likely for
all those who disappeared in Cambodia, the scene of almost continuous fighting
since.

In addition, 1,186 of the total missing are really listed as Killed in Action-
Body Not Recovered. These are, for instance, pilots whose planes were seen to
crash with no parachutes or soldiers who were killed on patrol under
circumstances in which comrades could not retrieve the body.

An unknown number will never be found because there are no remains to find. Last
year when members of Congress pressured Lieut. Gen. James A. Williams, director
of the Defense Intelligence Agency, to tell them how many realistically might be
found, he testified: ''Some of these people have disappeared by being completely
obliterated. If you have ever watched an explosion disintegrate somebody, you
would understand that that happens.''

A Lower Priority

A full accounting of both prisoners of war and missing was part of the 1973
Paris accords that arranged United States disengagement from the Vietnam
conflict, where 58,022 Americans died. North Vietnam returned 591 prisoners in
1973, and another 134 returned or escaped at other times. But with the American
withdrawal and the fall of Saigon 10 years ago this month, the missing got a
lower priority by a Government and public eager to put the divisive war behind.
Few remains were returned; 102 since 1973, including two non-Americans.

Two commissions reported to President Carter that there were no live American
prisoners remaining in Indochina. And each military service moved
administratively to declare all the missing dead.

What happened in 1980 was the election as President of Ronald Reagan, who as
Governor of California spoke out often and emotionally for the need of a full
accounting. He was photographed wearing one of the M.I.A. bracelets engraved
with the name of a missing man and sold in the war to show symbolic support. The
President still keeps five M.I.A. bracelets hanging in his study next to the
Oval Office.

''The way our system of government works,'' said one aide, ''if the President is
personally interested in something, then the Government is interested in it. And
Mr. and Mrs. Reagan are personally very interested in M.I.A.'s.''

New Place on Agenda

In the past four years this interest, displayed through numerous speeches and
public references, through many private telephone calls and letters to M.I.A.
families and through countless Reagan Administration meetings and a still-secret
10-point National Security Council strategy, has raised the subject to what the
President calls ''the highest national priority.''

It has also left few Government officials willing to question the campaign or to
be quoted by name. ''Few people in the Vatican,'' said one, ''would tell the
Pope they question the faith.''

The broad public and private strategy has involved efforts to mobilize the
Government's bureaucracy, the intelligence community and bipartisan political
support to transmit a convincing signal to Hanoi that an accounting is necessary
before any aid or normalizing of relations.

The President got an unusual security clearance for Mrs. Griffiths, the
executive director of the National League of M.I.A.-P.O.W. Families. She now
routinely attends relevant meetings of the National Security Council as well as
diplomatic negotiations in New York and Hanoi.  One result has been to dissipate
the harsh criticism the league has aimed at previous ''do-nothing''
Administrations. ''For a while,'' said Mrs. Griffiths, a Californian whose
organization says it has 3,000 M.I.A. family members and 15,000 concerned people
as supporters, ''our families felt they were fighting their own Government as
well as the Vietnamese.''

But another result, tied in with a growing public willingness to address the
emotional legacies of the war, has been the eager involvement of a variety of
groups and individuals who profess patriotism but have at times complicated
diplomatic efforts. ''It's a very thin line,'' said one Administration
strategist.

Veterans Groups' Actions

Veterans groups have helped gather millions of petition signatures demanding
accountings of the missing from the Vietnamese, and they recently provided the
Hanoi Government with details on some unmarked burial sites of its missing. One
small group has staged a round-the-clock vigil at the Vietnam Memorial since
Dec. 24, 1982.

Others, however, have burned Vietnamese flags before that country's mission to
the United Nations, while some groups raise money from Americans to mount
''rescue raids,'' which produced no verifiable results and complicated official
talks.

What seems to capture the public imagination on the missing is the lingering
uncertainty about their fate and, in the view of some, a wishful willingness to
believe any scrap of information and to distrust any Vietnamese denials about
remaining prisoners of war.

''We have returned everyone,'' Le Kim Chung, Vietnam's deputy permanent
representative to the United Nations, said in an interview. ''Also, why would we
want to keep them? We have enough troubles without keeping Americans.''

Mr. Le also denounced as fabrications refugee reports of caches of American
remains. One Vietnamese undertaker who fled to the United States told Congress
he saw 400 such remains in a Hanoi warehouse, which many in Washington believe.

Sightings of Whites

What has proven most tantalizing to M.I.A. families and the 18 Defense
Intelligence Agency analysts assigned full time to sifting data about the
missing are reports of ''live sightings,'' usually from refugees, of a white in
Indochina in a particular place on a particular date. According to Col. Gerald
S. Venanzi, a former prisoner of war who is the Pentagon's senior authority on
the missing, there have been more than 750 reported sightings since 1973, some
of prisoners and some of men free of visible restraints.

All refugee camps have multilingual posters seeking information about the
missing. Those responding are interviewed by special teams, sometimes using
polygraphs, or lie detectors. ''We have him describe his village, his house,
where he saw the Caucasian,'' said one intelligence official who sought
anonymity. ''With computers we can cross-check his identity with other refugees
from the same village. And with satellites we can photograph the place right
down to the fence in his yard.''

Analysts believe some stories are fabrications planted by Vietnamese to
discredit refugee reports and consume valuable tracking resources. Other reports
turn out to be Europeans or stem from refugees seeking favorable immigration
treatment. There is no pattern to the sightings, but 175 such reports remain
unresolved, prompting officials to say they cannot rule out the possibility some
prisoners remain.

Should live Americans be found, officials said, the President has authorized any
means necessary to extricate them. ''This could range from diplomacy to black
helicopters in the night,'' said one official.

'Maybe He's Better Dead'

Edna Hicks clings to such reports as proof that her son Terrin, a 31-year-old
pilot when his plane was downed over North Vietnam in 1968, could be alive.
''It'd be a miracle, a long shot, I know,'' said Mrs. Hicks, now 70 years old,
who sometimes still speaks of her son in the present tense. ''Some days you feel
he's alive. Some days not. And then you think, what would he be like after 17
years of imprisonment and torture? Maybe he's better dead.''

To some, the inability of such vast intelligence capabilities to confirm the
existence of a live American prisoner is proof that none exist and suggests the
Administration is using rhetoric to fuel false hopes.

The Administration's known interest is also fueling a brisk border business in
bones, as refugees, resistance forces and others appear, usually in Thailand,
with plastic bags purportedly containing American remains, some of which are
really animal bones. Various forms of military identification have also been
offered, some belonging to American soldiers long since safely home.

That is how Nicholas Brooks of Newburgh, N.Y., finally came home 12 years after
parachuting from his stricken plane over Laos. His remains were delivered to
Bangkok by a Lao resistance member and identified at a special military
laboratory in a concrete-block warehouse in Honolulu. Technicians there can
determine age, sex, race, blood type and basic stature even from partial
remains. Physical characteristics such as height, weight, broken bones and
dental records for all the missing have been computerized.

Using other Asian governments and the United Nations for pressure, the Reagan
Administration continues negotiations for the return of M.I.A.'s from Laos,
where a joint excavation team recovered remains from an American crash site in
February, and from Vietnam, which turned over the remains of six others in
March.

Outlook Seems to Improve

Detailed files for each man, concentrating on cases believed most physically
accessible, are turned over to Vietnamese at meetings in a sparsely furnished
Foreign Ministry room in Hanoi. The Vietnamese, citing humanitarian reasons and
saying families of the missing are victims of the war like themselves, recently
agreed to increase these sessions to a minimum of six a year. Both sides say
they detect increasing cooperation. One United Nations official called it ''a
definite defrosting'' of the M.I.A. issue with a ''mounting momentum'' that also
affords Vietnam a window from its diplomatic isolation.

In regular visits to Hanoi and quiet dinners in New York, American officials
seek to quicken the pace of returns, calling it ''good-will money in the bank''
for future Vietnamese- American relations.

Mr. Le says the process will take time, that Vietnam has 300,000 missing of its
own, that it lacks recovery resources and that a proper American attitude would
speed things. He cites as ''unhelpful'' and Reagan aides describe as
''unnecessary'' a recent House rider to provide $5 million in arms for Cambodian
rebels fighting Vietnamese forces. Mr. Le said diplomatic relations, as the
United States has with Laos, would be necessary for joint excavations.

The United States is known to have suggested instead that American experts
survey crash and burial sites for an excavation estimate, which the
Administration will pay.

''The war is over,'' said Mr. Le. ''We want to look straight ahead to the future
and a new chapter in relations between our two countries.''

Donald Shay's mother here, Sara Frances, does not like to talk about the
Vietnamese authorities. For a while she wrote many foreign governments, even
Laotian royalty, about her missing son, and she went to Thailand. She also
immersed herself in M.I.A. league work.

Donald was home on leave in the summer of 1970 when he proposed to Jane Morris,
a stewardess. They had met in college. They agreed to marry in December at the
end of his photo- reconnaissance tour in Thailand.

In a conversation the next day in the Shay family's backyard on Hilltop Road
under the big maple tree that had grown up with the Shay youngsters, Donald
Shay's sister, now Mary Louisa Rutledge, suggested that the couple marry
immediately during the leave.

Prospects of Widowhood

''As if he could see into the future,'' Lieutenant Shay's sister recalled the
other day, ''he said: 'No, we'll wait till I get back. I'd never want to make
her a widow.' ''

Four months later, one month before his combat tour was to end, Donald Shay
disappeared. The engagement ring arrived in the mail a few days later. Eighteen
months ago Janet Morris married someone else. ''I have my own son now,'' she
said, ''and I know how a mother feels.''

For several years Dr. and Mrs. Shay held out strong hopes for their only son's
return. The optimism has faded. ''I no longer think I'm going to hear from him
tomorrow,'' said Mrs. Shay, who still wears her son's M.I.A. bracelet. ''But I
won't accept that he's dead until I hear something definitive.''

Mrs. Shay's daughter, an opponent of the war, gave up hope for her brother
sooner. ''The uncertainty was like ripping off a big bandage every day,'' she
said. And so the other day when her 6-year-old son, Donald, pointed at his
uncle's photo in the den and asked who it was, Mrs. Rutledge didn't say anything
about M.I.A.'s or P.O.W.'s or Government negotiations or radar screens. ''That's
Mommy's brother,'' she said. ''He's not living anymore.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dr. Donald Shay with his wife and daughter (NYT/Marty Katz)
(page B8); photo of Ann Mills Griffiths (NYT/Paul Hosefros) (page B8); photo of
Donald Shay Jr. (page B8)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
SAIGON AND MANAGUA

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 746 words


WASHINGTON The remarkable thing about the

10th anniversary of the fall of

Saigon is this: We celebrate the occasion by deciding whether or not to heed its
lesson in Central America. The basic difference between the President and the
Congress is about what that lesson was.

If you believe that Vietnam was an exercise in American imperialism, doomed from
the start and needlessly prolonged, then you come down on the side of the
Democratic leadership in Congress: You equate the contras with the ''corrupt
dictatorship in Saigon'' and refuse them the guns they need to defeat their
Communist enemies.

Contrariwise, if you believe that our attempt to save South Vietnam from
Communist takeover was nobly motivated, and failed only because a defeatist
media and Watergate-emboldened doves in Congress were able to strip South
Vietnam of our protection, then you stand with President Reagan: You see the
Managua Communists as the puppets of Havana and Moscow, and you are eager to
supply the contras with the ammunition needed to help the anti-Communist
Nicaraguans bring down the Moscow- backed regime.

That is looking at the issue in its starkest terms. Let us grant that there are
shades of gray that doves and hawks do not like to think about.

For example, there must be plenty of doves who derided talk 10 years ago of
incipient ''blood baths,'' and who sincerely believed that life would be better
for the people of Southeast Asia after our involvement was ended, who now feel a
personal guilt for the genocide that followed. Not for them the easy out of the
Shawcross Theory, which turns truth on its head and blames the Americans for
somehow transforming the gentle Khmer Rouge into murderers of defenseless
millions.  For an example on the other side, I know there are hawks who cannot
go along with Mr. Nixon's judgment that Congress alone was the cause of Saigon's
downfall; we think that Congress did not help, but that the South Vietnamese
Government did not have the stamina to withstand for long the continual pressure
from the North.  But mind-sets on which great decisions turn do not lend
themselves to shades of gray. Therefore, doves do not concern themselves with
the fact that this Communist threat is near our borders, within our sphere of
influence, and not half a world away; nor do hawks trouble themselves that our
vigorous response to the export of revolution is surely an attempt to help
overthrow a Government in place, and not, as in Vietnam a decade ago, to prevent
its overthrow. Those are debating points, and such points do not decide great
debates.  What does determine whether American foreign policy leans toward
isolation or leans toward intervention? Where is the handle on whose version of
the lesson of Vietnam shall prevail in Central America?

1. Stridency is a loser. Shrillness in advocacy turns the general public off.
The dove's attacks on the contras as fascist thugs, or their mean-spirited
charge that Mr. Reagan is spoiling to use U.S. troops in a good little war, will
present the hawks with a target of extremist America-haters. In the same way,
the President's elevation of the anti-Communists to the ''moral equivalent of
our Founding Fathers'' invites mockery; more important, the misuse of the F.B.I.
by the C.I.A. to harass U.S. citizens returning from Nicaragua will turn public
opinion against the hawks.

2. Presidential priority is a winner. A recently elected President who considers
this issue to be of utmost importance can bring even an opposition Congress
along. In November 1969 Richard Nixon mobilized the ''silent majority'' in a
television speech that knocked the doves back for years; later he let the Soviet
leader know that Vietnam had priority over summit chances.  Mr. Reagan is
unwilling to expend political capital on what is said to be a losing vote. That
means he does not consider this sufficiently important, or it means he is
fearful of legislative defeat. A radio spot on the eve of a great decision is a
joke; better to lose than to run from a fight. Instead, the President will come
before us to plead for a cut in domestic spending, and triumphant isolationists
will send a few bandages to the contras through the U.N.  Let the vote be
recorded, and let the President consider recovering by recognizing a Nicaraguan
government-in-exile. This vote goes far beyond a rebuff to the contras: It is
each Congressman's expression of his understanding of the lesson of Vietnam.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AIR FORCE GEN. JEROME O'MALLEY; HEADED FIGHTER COMMAND IN U. S.

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 718 words


Gen. Jerome F. O'Malley, commander of the United States Air Force Tactical Air
Command, died Saturday in the crash of a military aircraft at
Wilkes-Barre/Scranton International Airport. He was 53 years old.

Witnesses said the aircraft, a twin- engine CT-39 Sabreliner, overshot a runway
at the airport, dropped from a 175-foot cliff and burst into flames. The crash
also killed General O'Malley's wife, Diane, and the three Air Force crew members
aboard.

General O'Malley had been considered a likely candidate to become Air Force
Chief of Staff. He had broad contacts on Capitol Hill, had testified frequently
at Congressional hearings and had given private briefings to several leading
members of Congress.

Since September General O'Malley had headed the Tactical Air Command,
responsible for fighter aircraft in the United States. He commanded 113,000
employees at 18 locations and was based at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia.

Immediately preceding that assignment, General O'Malley was commander in chief
of the Pacific Air Forces, based at Hickam Air Force Base in Hawaii. He also
served at the Pentagon as vice chief of staff, the No. 2 position in the Air
Force, in 1982 and 1983, and as a deputy chief of staff before that.

Graduate of West Point

A native of Carbondale, Pa., 20 miles northeast of Scranton, General O'Malley
was a 1953 graduate of the United States Military Academy. His first assignment
after he was graduated and commissioned a second lieutenant was as an air
training officer at Lowry, Colo., temporary site of the United States Air Force
Academy, then being organized.

General O'Malley held other trainer's and pilot's posts until his transfer in
1962 to the headquarters of the Strategic Air Command in Omaha. He returned
there in the mid-1970's as the Air Force's Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations
and Plans, at which time he was also a member of the Joint Strategic Targeting
Planning Staff.

After his first Strategic Air Command assignment, General O'Malley earned a
master's degree in business administration at George Washington University in
1965. He also attended the Air Command Staff College in 1964 and the Naval War
College in 1969.

An Experienced Pilot

General O'Malley, an experienced pilot with more than 5,000 hours of flying
time, also served in Vietnam, where he commanded Tan Son Nhut Air Force Base,
outside Saigon, in 1971. Shortly thereafter, he was assigned a tour of duty as
vice commander of the Air Force's 432nd Tactical Reconnaissance Wing, based at
Udorn Air Force Base, Thailand.

While in Vietnam, he flew 116 combat missions. He held the Distinguished Service
Medal, the Legion of Merit and the Distinguished Flying Cross, among other
decorations.

Maj. John Kirkwood, an Air Force spokesman in Washington, said that an Air Force
investigating team had been sent to the crash site and a report would be ready
in 30 to 60 days.

Another Air Force spokesman, Maj. John Moscatelli, said investigators had not
determined who was at the plane's controls when it crashed.

The Lackawanna County Coroner, William Sweeny, said Air Force officials had told
him General O'Malley had been listed as co-pilot for the flight. He said there
was a ''strong possibility'' that the general was in the cockpit at the time of
the landing.

The Air Force crew members were identified as Lieut. Col. Lester F. Newton,
Capt. Harry L. Haugh and Tech. Sgt. Robert A. Eberflus.

Plane Used in Training

A Defense Department spokesman in Washington said that the Air Force acquired
numerous CT-39s in the 1950's and 1960's for use as a basic utility and training
aircraft. The plane seats up to seven people. He said there was no flight
recorder on the plane, which had flown from Langley Air Force Base.

General O'Malley, a four star general, had been scheduled to speak yesterday at
a Boy Scouts of America banquet in Scranton in honor of Representative Joseph M.
McDade of Pennsylvania, a longtime friend who is the ranking Republican on the
House Appropriations military subcommittee.

General and Mrs. O'Malley, the former Diane Muennink of Hondo, Tex., are
survived by four children; James Francis; John Thomas; Sharon Kay, and Margaret
Anne O'Malley Neal.

Funeral plans are incomplete.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Jerome F. O'Malley

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 870 words


MONDAY, APRIL 22, 1985 International

Arab leaders were criticized by Secretary of State George P. Shultz, who said
they were prolonging the suffering of Palestinians by not supporting direct
negotiations between Israel and King Hussein of Jordan. His remarks, made in
Washington, seemed to reflect the Reagan Administration's annoyance with the
failure of most Arab leaders to encourage King Hussein to negotiate with Israel.
(Page A1, Column 6.)

Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon will be completed by early June, Defense
Minister Yitzhak Rabin announced. Israel will temporarily keep a military force
for the defense of its border region, he said. (A1:6.)

The Bergen-Belsen camp's liberation 40 years ago was observed in Belsen, West
Germany, in ceremonies attended by Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who said that he
accepted Germany's ''historical responsibility for the crimes of the Nazi
tyranny.'' Mr. Kohl gave one of the most forthright and unflinching statements a
West German leader has made about the Hitler era. He was surrounded by senior
political figures, ambassadors, local people and survivors of the camp, where
more than 50,000 people died. (A1:5.)

Brazil's President-elect died after undergoing seven operations in four weeks,
the Government said. President-elect Tancredo Neves, who was 75 years old, had
been prevented by his illness from taking office as the country's first civilian
President in 21 years. (A1:1.)

Nicaragua's offer to call a cease-fire if the United States halted aid to the
rebels was rejected by the Reagan Administration. The offer was made public by
two Democratic Senators, John F. Kerry of Massachusetts, and Tom Harkin of Iowa,
who met Friday in Managua with President Daniel Ortega Saavedra. (A3:3.)

China's new Ambassador to the U.S.  will be Han Xu, a Deputy Foreign Minister
who was a close aide to Prime Minister Zhou Enlai. The announcement confirmed an
appointment that had been expected for several months. Mr. Han will succeed
Zhang Wenjin, who has been in Washington since December 1982 and who will
retire. (A6:3.) National

A leader of Holocaust survivors called for an intensified campaign to keep
President Reagan from visiting a Germany military cemetery in which members of
the Nazi SS are buried. At a meeting of Holocaust survivors in Philadelphia,
Menachem Z. Rosensaft of New York, chairman of the International Network of
Children of Jewish Holocaust Survivors, said that ''for the sake of history,''
Mr. Reagan must be prevented from making the visit. His audience responded with
cheers. (A1:3.)

Donald Shay who was from Maryland is one of 2,477 Americans still listed as
missing in action from the Vietnam War. Ten years after the fall of Saigon and
15 years after he enlisted, no one knows for sure what happened to him or any of
the other missing Americans. For military records, all but one of the missing
are officially presumed dead. Only the case of a missing flier remains open for
symbolic reasons. But on the diplomatic and other levels, the issue of the
missing Americans remains very much alive. (A1:4.)

Nebraska farmers lost $6 million with the collapse of two farm-credit
institutions they had believed to be safe. About 500 people in north-central
Nebraska lost the money when two Production Credit Associations went under.
Their collapse brings to 11 the number of such credit cooperatives that have
failed since Sept. 1, 1983, according to the Farm Credit Administration. In the
previous 50 years only such institution had failed. (A1:1.)

Parts of a survivalists' camp on the Arkansas-Missouri border were secured by
heavily armed state and Federal officers trying to arrest the camp's leader, Jim
Ellison, on a Federal weapons charge. Some camp members were said to have links
with a neo-Nazi group. (A12:2.)

Gen. Jerome F. O'Malley, Commander of the United States Air Force Tactical Air
Command, was killed in a military airplane crash near Scranton, Pa. His wife
Diane and three Air Force crew members were also killed. The general was 53
years old. (B12:5.) Metropolitan

New York State court officials are planning a new approach to the way judges are
assigned criminal and civil cases. In a reorganization planned this year, cases
that now come under the jurisdiction of several judges generally will be under
by one judge from start to finish within each level of the court system. (A1:2.)
Charges that a police officer tortured and beat a youth who was arrested on
charges of selling marijuana are being investigated by the Queens District
Attorney. Mark Davidson, 18 years old, said he was beaten and tortured with
electric shocks by an officer at the 106th Precinct in Queens after his arrest
Wednesday. (B3:5.)

A tentative contract agreement between the union representing 30,000 New York
City apartment-house employees and owners of buildings in four boroughs was
announced, averting a strike. The contract would give the employees raises
totaling $61 over three years, amounting to increases of as much as 18 percent.
(B5:1.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
'MEMORY IS THE ANSWER'

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 733 words


My father was poor growing up and when his hard work brought him in middle age
to a place where he was no longer poor, his memory of those difficult years
informed his life in a manner that made him very good at helping others who were
down on their luck. He took care of his family first, but he didn't forget the
others.

These thoughts have rushed upon me because he died a little over a week ago and
when a parent dies, we grope for meaning. Moreover, in the jumbled, private days
following his death, the outside world - murmuring for attention - was also
discussing memory and morality.

Elie Wiesel, our teacher of the Holocaust, a child of the concentration camps,
was telling the President: ''This is why survivors, of whom you spoke, Mr.
President, have tried to teach their contemporaries how to build on ruins, how
to invent hope in a world that offers none, how to proclaim faith to a
generation that has seen it shamed and mutilated. And I believe, we believe,
that memory is the answer, perhaps the only answer.''

Speaking of the concentration camps, Mr. Wiesel said: ''Mr. President, I was
there. I was there when American liberators arrived. And they gave us back our
lives. And what I felt for them then nourishes me to the end of my days. . . .
We are grateful to this country, the greatest democracy in the world, the freest
nation in the world, the moral nation.''

Sometimes Presidents and policy makers, caught and distracted by their
geopolitical balancing acts, seem to lose the memory of the great strength that
is derived from being a ''moral nation.'' Even as Elie Wiesel was trying to
persuade this President that to visit a German military cemetery where SS
soldiers, members of the Nazi elite guard, are buried is to forsake memory,
another debate - over a more recent memory, the war in Indochina - was sharing
the headlines.  In this debate too, many participants have failed to include the
strength and authority that we can possess as a ''moral nation.'' They choose
instead to frame the lesson of Vietnam narrowly. They see hawks versus doves,
they see the press and Congress in combat against the White House, they squint
so close at these perceived combatants that our larger history is blurred and
overlooked.  Because I reported from Indochina, I have heard often the complaint
that the American press was more critical of Washington than we were of the
Communist superpowers, that we ''tore down'' our own Government. Some say this
means we lack patriotism.  It is true that, by and large, the press in Indochina
wrote stories critical of the American policy there. But it was not because
reporters were unpatriotic. It was, rather, because reporters saw America
slipping toward the habits of the totalitarian powers whose activities we deem
as less than moral.


What we did was to hold this country to a greater standard. Since our Government
says that it stands on higher moral ground than the Communist powers, that it is
different, it must behave differently, not just say so. That is the standard by
which the press measured its country.

The humanitarian tradition in the United States is not a myth, not the result of
an advertising campaign. So when we leave the humanitarian factor out of our
foreign policy, when we use a small country, such as Cambodia, for an imagined
larger geopolitical purpose without stopping to consider the potential
consequences to the Cambodian people, we debase that tradition. It does no
patriotic service to overlook such failures; on the contrary, it robs us of the
strength of a moral nation.

We are right to expect more of our Government than we expect of dictatorships.
Thus, we are not terribly surprised when Moscow rolls its tanks into the capital
of a small neighbor; but we are rightly anguished when our policies falter and
we begin to imitate our totalitarian adversaries.

It is not logical to justify a misguided policy by saying that the Russians are
immoral. A democracy, by its nature, must bear the burden of being judged
differently. In a literal sense it is not fair, it is a liability, it makes us
less efficient than totalitarian states - but in the end it is a fundamental
strength.

This is not to suggest that we must be militarily weaker or in any way
defenseless, just that we must try, as Elie Wiesel implored the President, ''to
do something else, to find another way.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 24, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE BARS NICARAGUA AID AFTER REAGAN CONCESSIONS WIN THE SENATE'S APPROVAL;
Byrd Complains of a 'Loophole'

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1424 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


The House of Representatives tonight rejected a request by President Reagan for
$14 million in aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, even though the President pledged
to use the funds only for nonmilitary purposes.

The action, on a vote of 248 to 180, came a few hours after the Senate endorsed
the request by a vote of 53 to 46.

The wording of the resolution voted on in both houses would provide funds for
''military or paramilitary purposes.'' But Mr. Reagan bowed to Congressional
opposition and promised to restrict the aid to items such as food and clothing
and to exclude arms or ammunition.

'A Letter Is Not Law'

In his closing remarks tonight, Representative Joseph P. Addabbo, a Queens
Democrat, warned the lawmakers that ''a letter from the President, a press
release from the President, is not law.'' The law, he said, would still permit
the use of the funds for military purposes.

Republicans said that the action in the House had been a foregone conclusion and
that the Democrats had sought the vote merely to embarrass the President.

The House is to vote Wednesday on two alternative packages that provide
nonmilitary aid for Central America, one sponsored mainly by Democrats, the
other by Republicans. If either is approved, the differences between the two
houses' bills would be resolved by a conference committee.

The President's pledge on nonmilitary use of the aid came in a three- page
letter delivered tonight to Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Majority Leader. The
letter was intended to answer many of the criticisms raised by moderate
Democrats who tried, and failed, to reach an agreement on the issue with the
White House on Monday.

Mr. Reagan promised to spend only the $14 million allotted by Congress and to
set up ''thorough procedures'' for monitoring its use. But he failed to satisfy
Democrats' demands that the money not be channeled through the Central
Intelligence Agency.

In addition, Mr. Reagan vowed to resume discussions with the Nicaraguan
Government and to instruct his representatives in those talks to ''press for a
cease-fire'' and church-mediated negotiations between the rebels and the
Nicaraguan Government.

He also promised to ''favorably consider'' the use of economic sanctions as a
way of pressuring the Nicaraguan Government to enter talks with the rebels in
good faith.

Senator Dole hailed the letter on the Senate floor just before the vote and
said, ''I believe we're on the verge of making policy here that could be very
important in the months ahead.''


Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the Democratic leader, said the letter
''goes a long way'' toward satisfying the demands of many Democrats. But he
voted against the aid request.

Mr. Byrd said one provision, allowing the aid to be used for the ''survival and
well-being'' of the rebels, was a loophole large enough ''to drive an Amtrak
train through.'' He also objected to what he called the ''eleventh hour,
fifty-ninth minute'' nature of the letter and said, ''That is no way to
legislate.''

Statement by President

President Reagan, in a statement after the Senate vote, described the action as
''a historic vote for freedom and democracy in Central America.'' He said
support for Nicaraguan ''democratic resistance'' was a crucial component of the
measure approved by the Senate, and said the vote would help bring peace and
democracy to the people of Nicaragua.

''Our hemisphere will not be a safe place if the United States ceases to stand
by its friends,'' he said, adding that passage of the aid proposal demonstrated
that bipartisan consensus on the issue was possible.

In his letter to Mr. Dole, the President said that ''the United States now
stands at a moment of judgment'' on Central America, and in the debate today
both sides echoed that assessment.

Critics maintained that the President's request for aid to the rebels amounted
to a Gulf of Tonkin resolution for his military aspirations in Central America.
They were referring to the 1964 Congressional resolution that gave President
Johnson authority to pursue a military buildup in Vietnam.

Supporters of the President compared the Congressional decision to the vote in
1947 in which the United States decided to aid the Greek Government against a
Communist-led uprising.

Reagan Condemns Atrocities

In his letter, the President responded to concerns about the rebels' behavior by
saying that ''the U.S. condemns atrocities by either side in the strongest
possible terms.'' He also promised to report to Congress no later than next
September on the progress of peace talks in Nicaragua and on how the aid was
being spent.

Mr. Reagan originally requested $14 million in military aid but was forced to
abandon that plan in the face of widespread Congressional opposition. His second
proposal would have earmarked the money for nonmilitary purposes while peace
talks were sought, but the funds would have been made available for military aid
if the talks produced no agreement.

When that plan also failed to attract support, Mr. Reagan opened negotiations
with Senate Democrats seeking a bipartisan compromise. That attempt faltered on
Monday, but today's letter from the President reflected many of the concerns
voiced by Democrats.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz met at length today on Capitol Hill with
moderate Democrats who sought an accommodation with the White House.

In the Senate, lawmakers discussed an effort to find a bipartisan compromise,
but the conflicts that blocked agreement on Monday continued to thwart an
accord.

Republicans continued to support the White House demand that aid be linked to
direct talks between the Nicaraguan Government and the rebel forces. Democrats
generally argued that the main discussions should be between Nicaragua and the
United States.

On the other key issue, the Administration insisted that any aid be channeled
through the C.I.A.  The Democrats opposed using the agency, which has been
managing the armed campaign against the Nicaraguan Government.

'It's Just Too Difficult'

As the day wore on, anger mounted. Senator Dave Durenberger, a Minnesota
Republican who is chairman of the Select Committee on Intelligence, said the
compromise had collapsed because ''we're getting tired of listening to the
Democrats.'' He added, ''It's just too difficult to accommodate that part of the
Democrats who want to write every part of Nicaraguan policy on the Senate
floor.''

Republicans also expressed outrage over a trip to Nicaragua last week by two
first-term Senators, Tom Harkin of Iowa and John F. Kerry of Massachusetts. The
Democrats returned bearing a peace proposal from the Nicaraguan Government, and
Senator Richard G. Lugar, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, said,
''That was absolutely the last straw.''

''I think what we're saying is that the President is still in charge of foreign
policy,'' asserted Mr. Lugar, an Indiana Republican.

Mr. Lugar also alluded to possible political retaliation against Democrats who
oppose the President on Nicaragua. ''We're going to ask people to take
responsibility on Central America,'' he said.

Political Risks Acknowledged

Democrats have acknowledged that they are sensitive to the political risks of
completely opposing the President on Nicaragua, and they said that was one
reason they sought a compromise.

''We were eager not just to say no to the President of the United States,'' said
Senator Alan Cranston of California, the Democratic whip.

In the floor debate in both chambers, lawmakers on each side of the issue raised
the prospect of deepening American military involvement in Central America.

Speaking in the House in favor of continued aid to the rebels, Representative
Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the Republican leader, declared: ''If we abandon
the Democratic force in Nicaragua, we will guarantee a clash of arms between
Americans and totalitarians in this hemisphere. It may not come next week, or
next month, or next year. But it will come.''

But opponents of the aid said that supporting the rebels was the surest route
toward a military quagmire.

''This issue is simply this,'' Senator Harkin said in a floor speech. ''Does the
Senate of the United States give its approval to the active and open
encouragement and support of the overthrow of the Government of Nicaragua -
support which will indisputably result in an escalation of military conflict, in
further destabilization in Central America and in taking the United States
closer to war?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sen. Bob Dole (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 24, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD ;
Sihanouk Said to Plan To Quit Rebel Coalition

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 137 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 23


Western diplomats said today that Prince Norodom Sihanouk had written a letter
indicating his intention to resign as nominal head of the coalition of guerrilla
groups contesting the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

The diplomats said they had learned that Prince Sihanouk had sent the letter to
Khieu Samphan, one of the leaders of the Khmer Rouge, a Communist member of the
coalition.

The diplomats said the Prince, in his letter, cited ill health as the grounds
for his resignation. But the diplomats said the Prince was disillusioned with
the Khmer Rouge, which ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1979 and is said to be
responsible for the widespread killings of Cambodians and other excesses.

The Prince could not be reached for comments at his residences in Peking and in
Pyongyang, the North Korean capital.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 24, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

EX-SENATOR SAM ERVIN, WHO LED SENATE WATERGATE INQUIRY, IS DEAD

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words


Sam J. Ervin Jr. always described himself as ''just an ol' country lawyer.'' But
to millions of Americans he was the hero of the unfolding drama of the Watergate
affair that led, eventually, to the resignation of President Nixon in 1974.

He was the man with constantly bobbing eyebrows and a vast repertory of homespun
tales whose every move was recorded by the television cameras as he presided
over the Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities, popularly
known as the Watergate committee, in 1973.

Although the committee's formal function was to submit a report on its findings
concerning the 1972 Presidential campaign, its televised hearings exposed most
of the details of the Nixon Administration's actions after the 1972 burglary of
the Democratic National Committee's headquarters in the Watergate apartment
complex.

Years later, after retiring to his hometown of Morganton in the foothills of the
Blue Ridge Mountains, Mr. Ervin wrote his own account of the Watergate days,
''The Whole Truth.'' In typical fashion he concluded by quoting Shakespeare:
''Watergate,'' he wrote, ''has taught us the truth embodied in these words of
Shakespeare: Sweet are the uses of adversity, Which, like the toad, ugly and

venomous, Wears yet a precious jewel in its

head.''


Long before the Watergate hearings, Sam Ervin, known to friends and colleagues
as ''Mr. Sam'' and ''the Judge,'' had been regaling colleagues in the Senate
with bits of poetry, Bible verses and the wisdom of Uncle Ephraim Swink, whom he
described as an arthritic mountaineer.

Role in McCarthy Censure

In 1954, his first year in the Senate, he served on a special Senate committee
that recommended the censure of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, the Wisconsin
Republican. In a floor speech Senator Ervin said that Mr. McCarthy's strident
anti-Communist campaign reminded him of the time Uncle Ephraim was asked at a
revival meeting to say what the Lord had done for him. Uncle Ephraim, Senator
Ervin said, struggled to his feet and said, ''Brother, He has mighty nigh ruint
me.''

But Mr. Ervin's stands on a number of other issues in his 20 years in the Senate
were at odds with those of many of his Democratic colleagues.

An old-fashioned conservative Democrat, he opposed most civil rights legislation
in the 1950's and 1960's. He opposed giving 18-year-olds the right to vote. He
supported an expansion of wiretapping by the state courts. He generally voted to
support business over labor. He endorsed American involvement in Vietnam.

He also led the Senate fight against the equal rights amendment for women,
arguing that he was ''trying to protect women from their fool friends and
themselves.''

Expert on the Constitution

Mr. Ervin was respected as the the Senate's leading expert on the Constitution,
and his advice was widely sought on constitutional issues. He once said that the
Constititution was one of the greatest books ever written in English.

While he originally opposed the Supreme Court's 1962 decision banning organized
prayer in public schools, he decided after long study that the Court had been
right, concluding that the decision protected religious liberty.

In his autobiography, ''Preserving the Constitution,'' published this spring,
Mr. Ervin was critical of recent attempts to authorize officially sanctioned
prayer in public schools and to extend tuition tax credits to parents who send
their children to private schools.

Surveillance Opposed

In a letter last month to President Reagan, Mr. Ervin said, ''The Government
must keep its hands off religion if our people are to enjoy religious freedom.''

Even before gaining national attention as head of the Watergate committee, Mr.
Ervin had endeared himself to the American Civil Liberties Union by leading the
Congressional fight against a surveillance system being put together by the
Government in 1970.

The system envisioned computerized files on citizens who participated in
dissenting political activities and civil disorders. Such files, he argued,
raised the specter of a police state and would be clearly unconstititonal.

The Constitution, he once said, should be taken like mountain whisky, undiluted
and untaxed.

His Time and Place

Mr. Ervin was a true product of his time and place, combining the stubborn pride
and humor of mountain people with the intellectual curiosity of a youth who grew
up watching his father practice law in the courtrooms of his native Morganton.

Born Sept. 27, 1896, Sam J. Ervin Jr. attended the University of North Carolina,
then served 18 months in France in World War I, where he was wounded twice in
battle and was twice cited for gallantry.

He was admitted to the North Carolina bar in 1919.  He received a law degree
from Harvard Law School in 1922, then returned home to marry his childhood
sweetheart, Margaret Bruce Bell, and practice law.

In 1925, he served in the North Carolina General Assembly, where he helped
defeat a bill that would have banned the teaching of the theory of evolution in
the public schools. He said: ''Only one good thing can come of this. The monkeys
in the jungle will be pleased to know that the North Carolina Legislature has
absolved them from any responsibility for humanity in general and for the North
Carolina Legislature in particular.''

He became a County Court judge in 1935, a Superior Court judge in 1937, and
served in the United States House of Representatives in 1946 and 1947 before
being named to the North Carolina Supreme Court in 1948. In 1954, he was
appointed to fill the Senate vacancy left by the death of Senator Clyde Hoey.

Regret for One Vote

Upon retiring in late 1974, Mr. Sam returned to Morganton, living in the same
house where he grew up, driving his car daily to his office to practice law and
write his books.

In an interview two years ago, he said that of all the votes he had cast in the
Senate, there was just one he regretted, his vote against Medicare.

''I didn't trust the Federal Government to administer it properly,'' he said.
''But I think it's done a pretty good job.''

Asked if he received Medicare payments, he replied: ''Yes. Oh, Lord, I have to
have it.''

Mr. Ervin is survived by his wife; their son, Sam J. Ervin 3d, a Superior Court
Judge in Mecklenburg County; and two daughters, Mrs. William E. Smith and Mrs.
Gerald M. Hansler.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 6, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, the obituary of former Senator Sam J. Ervin Jr. on
April 24 misidentified the court in which Mr. Ervin's son, Sam J. Ervin 3d,
serves as a judge. It is the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth
Circuit.

GRAPHIC: photo of Sam Ervin Jr.

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ACTIVISM AT SCHOOLS SEEMS TO BE STIRRING AS PROTESTS CONTINUE

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1205 words


On college campuses around the country yesterday thousands of student protesters
took over administrative buildings, boycotted classes and held teach-ins,
rallies and marches demanding that the schools end investments in companies
doing business in South Africa.

At the University of California at Los Angeles, 200 protesters occupied a campus
building yesterday, after a demonstration Tuesday by more than 2,000 students,
many bearing placards with slogans like ''Apartheid Kills'' and ''Divest Now.''
In Albany, two dozen chanting students staged a sit-in at the business office of
the State University of New York's central administration building. And at the
University of Madison at Wisconsin, about 200 demonstrators occupied a
conference room at the State Capitol.

Latest Sign of Resurgence

The ''National Anti-Apartheid Protest Day,'' organized by a coalition of student
groups, was the latest of numerous indications of a tentative and somewhat
limited resurgence of student activism at American colleges and universities
this spring. For the first time in many years, campuses are stirring to calls to
take a stand on the political and social issues of the day. The coalition
estimates that protests were organized on more than 70 campuses.

Thus far, most of the attention has been focused on Columbia University, where
on April 4 student protesters barricaded a campus building demanding that the
university get rid of $32.5 million in investments in companies doing business
in South Africa.

The Columbia protest is scheduled to end today, without the students' having
achieved their stated goal. But on other campuses, including Harvard University,
the University of Louisville in Kentucky, Oberlin College in Ohio and San Jose
State University in California, rallies, marches and sit-ins on issues ranging
from South African divestment to Central America and nuclear disarmament have
broken out and are still in progress.

Those activities contrast sharply with the popular image, developed in the
mid-1970's, of university campuses as passive bastions of conservatism and of
students as self-absorbed and exclusively career-oriented. Talks with students
at universities scattered across the country indicate that they find that image
far too simplistic and somewhat out of date.

''In my eight years, the climate on campus has certainly changed enormously,''
said Tom Keenan, a 25-year-old graduate student at Yale University. ''You can
feel the difference between something like a forum to discuss things and the
kind of movement that decides enough is enough and takes an active turn. That
seems to be what is happening this year.''

Image of Passive Students

''The image of the passive campus was definitely correct for most of my college
years,'' added Mr. Keenan, who has participated this year in demonstrations
against recruitment by the Central Intelligence Agency and in support of
striking Yale staff workers. ''But it's definitely changing.'' A recent study
sponsored by the Higher Education Research Institute at the University of
California at Los Angeles and the American Council on Education indicates
students support a wide variety of liberal positions. The study, published in
January in the Chronicle of Higher Education, is based on interviews last year
of 182,370 incoming college freshmen at 345 schools, who were asked their
opinions on a variety of political, social and economic issues.

The survey, conducted every year since 1966, found that support for increased
military spending among this year's incoming freshmen declined to 33 percent
from 39 percent in 1982.

A majority of the freshmen also supported a national health care plan and school
busing for desegregation by the largest margin since the survey began, and they
also favored legalized abortion and higher taxes for the wealthy. But support
for the legalization of marijuana and abolition of the death penalty declined to
record lows.

''There was very strong endorsement for a number of liberal positions on what
are viewed as litmus test issues,'' said Dr. Kenneth Green, who helped conduct
the survey. ''There was no support at all for the idea of a universal,
monolithic trend toward conservatism among college students.''

The current generation of college students differs from that of the late 1960's
and early 1970's, Dr. Green said, in that now ''there is less willingness of
large numbers of students to act'' on their beliefs.

Minority of Students

Student activists at several universities acknowledge that they are still a
minority among their peers. But they believe that the political climate on
campus offers more possibilities for the emergence of a widely supported student
movement than at any time since the end of the war in Vietnam a decade ago.

''Until now, concerned people on campus have felt they couldn't make a
difference,'' said Kevin Harris of the University of Colorado at Boulder, who in
March helped organize a student protest against Central Intelligence Agency
activities in Central America. In the march, 478 people were arrested. Indeed,
some of the new student activists believe that the current round of campus
demonstrations will inevitably create a ''snowball effect'' that will draw new
recruits to political and social causes.

''The passivity you saw on campuses in the past came from a feeling of
powerlessness,'' said Jennifer Skurnik, a 23-year-old Yale senior. ''One thing
that breaks through that is the example of other people fighting.''

''A lot of people don't want to express their concern because they are in an
environment that says it's not cool to be concerned,'' said John Muse, a Cornell
physics major. ''But activism could become cool again.''

Student activists were unanimous in agreeing that among their strongest
recruiting points are the Reagan Administration policies and even the
personality of the President himself.

According to a New York Times/ CBS News Poll, full-time students who voted in
1984 chose Mr. Reagan at a rate 7 percentage points below that of the entire
electorate, with 52 percent of the students voting for Mr. Reagan and 47 percent
for Walter F. Mondale.

''I think a lot of what's going on is in reaction to President Reagan,'' said
Mark Lilly, a junior at the University of California at Berkeley who has
participated in recent demonstrations against South Africa's policy of racial
separation. ''People are frustrated and aggravated with what's going on in El
Salvador and Nicaragua. People with a lot of pent-up energy finally see a chance
to do things constructively.''

But perhaps just as important, the students said, is the emergence of a sense
among students that their actions can produce measurable results. ''

Also important, the students said, is a growing awareness on campus that
political issues are not remote, but can have direct consequences for students.
Military intervention in Central America and the reinstitution of the draft,
said Mr. Lilly, have ''the explosive potential'' to produce ''the instant
coalescence of students into a mass movement.''

Dr. Green agreed. ''If students are affected personally by an issue,'' he said,
''they show more willingness to get involved.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of students at anti-apartheid rally at Columbia University
(NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.) (page A20)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
THE SIEGE OF BLACK ROCK

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 734 words


In the battle for control of CBS, who merits our cheers and who our hisses?
Where you stand depends on where you sit. If you are a CBS stockholder, you
enjoy having your company ''in play,'' as long as the play is serious. You root
for Ted Turner and the ''good guys'' at E.F. Hutton to bid up your stock,
although their cashless package of junk bonds seems a risky proposition,
especially if interest rates rise. You applaud the Turner audacity and await a
more solid offer. If you are CBS management, you root for your own continued
control. That means beating off raiders and sneering at any ''unfriendly''
offers - even those rewarding to stockholders - that would snatch away your
jobs. If your obfuscatory or intimidating tactics fail, this may mean you seek
shelter from a ''white knight'' - like G.E., or American Express, where Henry
Kissinger is a director - to take over your company and guarantee your jobs. Or
you may elect to ''take the company private,'' using the CBS assets as
collateral to borrow the money to buy out the present stockholders. If you are
Ted Turner or a corporate raider, you cloak your bid for power and
self-enrichment in pious concern for stockholders' rights and undervalued
assets. You, like a South American nation, have grasped the central economic
idea of the shallow-pocket world: as long as debt is serviced, it need never be
paid. Sink me no sinking funds: amortization is dead. If you are a television
viewer, especially one who likes ''60 Minutes'' and Dan Rather and crusading
documentaries, you want the News Division of the network controlled by the sort
of management that runs CBS today.

You're for shark repellent, or a friendly takeover, or an internal buyout. If
you are a hard-right ideologue or principled patriot (choose either term), and
you stand with Jesse Helms and General Westmoreland in viewing CBS as a bunch of
lefty peaceniks, you will root for any management change that punishes the crew
in place. You remember how Ed Murrow treated Joe McCarthy and how Howard K.
Smith prematurely buried Richard Nixon and how Dan Schorr zapped Barry Goldwater
(and you forget how the CBS Chairman, William Paley, later forced all three
newsmen to walk the plank). You visit the sins of the Uncle (Walter Cronkite on
Vietnam) on the current anchorman. If you are Bill Paley, you tell your friends
that your 7 percent stock interest sides with management. But if history is a
guide, you are probably growing disenchanted with the executive you hired. When
Ted Turner went to Shearson Lehman (Virgule) American Express for financing, the
bankers there urged him first to take on a credible partner like former Treasury
Secretary William Simon, which Mr. Turner did not do. Messrs.

Paley, Kissinger and Simon are not strangers. If you are a media gadfly worried
about the liberal-leaning television establishment, you are afflicted with
clanging cognitive dissonance. Reed Irvine of Accuracy in Media has zapped Dan
Rather for not being his aggressive self when interviewing Fidel Castro
recently. But Ted Turner became so enthusiastic about Mr. Castro after meeting
him in Havana last year that he sought the Cuban leader's commercial endorsement
for his cable network, and got it. If you are Dan Rather, who strikes me as a
Texas centrist trying to play it hard and straight, you wonder why you have
become the focus of hard-right condemnation. True, when provoked, you sassed
President Nixon in a press conference, but that was eons ago - you are puzzled
at your selection to personify the left in the siege of ''Black Rock,'' as the
CBS headquarters in New York is called. You root for current management, which
moved Mr. Cronkite aside to let you become anchor, and you steadfastly refuse to
be ''chilled'' in your reporting - but what if the man on the 35th floor became
a pal of Jesse Helms? Or of Ted Kennedy?  Select your seat and take your stand.
I am a right-wing newspaper pundit, sometime stockholder, frequent gadfly and
nightly television news viewer. That combination produces this feeling:

Stockholders hire managers to produce profits. News operations most often become
profit centers when, through straight and colorful reporting, they earn the
public trust. That trust is an asset that must not be dissipated through
journalistic corruption, which is subservience to any one point of view.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PORTRAITS OF NEW CARDINALS FROM THE U.S. AND NICARAGUA;
O'CONNOR OF NEW YORK

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 490 words


John Joseph O'Connor, the 65-year-old Archbishop of New York, has been a
forceful presence during his first 14 months as head of the nation's fourth
largest archdiocese.

As the eighth archbishop of New York's 1.8 million Roman Catholics, he has
become embroiled in political debate over abortion and homosexuality,has sharply
attacked social problems such as hunger and homelessness and has firmly defended
church doctrine. The Archbishop of New York has customarily been named a
cardinal and the elevation of Archbishop O'Connor was expected. The last five of
his seven predecessors had also been elevated to Cardinal.

Archbishop O'Connor has approached social and religious issues in a direct
manner, acknowledging that his understanding of church teaching would incur
controversy.

Abortion and Homosexuality

Disputes It has. During the national political campaigns last year, he stirred
debate by insisting that from the hierarchy's point of view a Catholic candidate
could not oppose abortion personally but favor freedom of choice as a public
policy. Both Gov. Mario Cuomo and the Democratic Vice Presidential candidate,
Geraldine A. Ferraro, had taken that stand. Another dispute stemmed from the
Archbishop's refusal to cooperate with the city's executive order demanding
nondiscrimination against homosexuals in hiring practices. Many of the church's
agencies receive city funds and are thereby affected by the order, but the
Archbishop has continued to fight against it.

Church responsibilities have sent the Archbishop on missions to Ethiopia, where
he delivered aid on behalf of the American church, to Central America, where he
was on a fact-finding visit for the hierarchy, and to Rome for consultations
with the Pope and Vatican officials.

Former Military Chaplain

Archbishop O'Connor came to New York after eight months as Bishop of Scranton,
Pa., and 27 years as a military chaplain, during which he rose to the rank of
admiral in the Navy. He wrote about his service in Southeast Asia during the
Vietnam War in a book, ''A Chaplain Looks at Vietnam,'' which argued that the
war was just.

In 1979, he left the Navy and took charge of the Military Ordinariate which
oversaw the religious activities of Catholics in all branches of the military.
In that capacity, he served under the late Terence Cardinal Cooke.

As a member of the hierarchy in the United States, Archbishop O'Connor became
known as an adept spokesman for a conservative viewpoint. He also served as a
member of the five-bishop committee that drafted the hierarchy's recent major
statement condemning nuclear war.

Archbishop O'Connor was born on Jan. 15, 1920, in Philadelphia. He holds
master's degrees in clinical psychology and ethics and a Ph.D. in political
science. He was ordained on Dec. 15, 1945, and taught at the secondary and
college levels before entering the chaplaincy. He was named Archbishop of New
York on Jan. 31, 1984.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'HONOR, DUTY AND A WAR CALLED VIETNAM' ON CBS

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 967 words


TELEVISION pronounces a benediction on Vietnam tonight. ''Honor, Duty and a War
Called Vietnam,'' with Walter Cronkite, is solemn in tone and judicious in
purpose. It examines the American experience in Vietnam, and looks for lessons
we should learn. The ''CBS Report,'' on Channel 2 at 10 P.M., is trying to write
an epitaph.

Thus we hear veterans, recalling what Vietnam was like. Some of the veterans are
bitter; many are moving; almost all raise questions. We also see Mr. Cronkite, a
reassuring presence, in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon. He is
there not so much to report as to muse. As America's most celebrated anchorman,
he was as much a part of the war as the veterans.

Nonetheless, CBS is not really looking at the war; it is looking at feelings
about the war. The program has an air of detached mourning. Mr. Cronkite reminds
us several times that we lost the war, and that Vietnam represented ''the
nation's only military defeat.'' A little incongruously then, he raises the
possibility that we still won the battles.

''With the help of those who were there,'' he says, ''we will look again at what
it was American soldiers came here to do, how well or how poorly they did it,
and perhaps most important, whether Americans learned from their experience.''

This seems like a pretext. ''Honor, Duty and a War Called Vietnam'' does not
tell us how well American soldiers did in battle. The Tet offensive of 1968, for
example, is not examined. Khe Sanh is discussed, but the discussion is
inconclusive. The program is trying is balance a different account.

If Vietnam was the living-room war, Mr. Cronkite's appearance in Hanoi means the
war is now officially over. Network television was last in Vietnam with the fall
of Saigon, 10 years ago next week. Television shaped our view of the war then,
but how are we to regard it now? Solemnly, the program suggests, with a vague
distrust for policy makers who got us into the war, but without assigning them
much blame.

In fact, policy makers and elected officials are only briefly mentioned. When
the program reviews the history of the war, we see a few on old television film.
On the other hand, CBS does give us live heroes. The war they fought may have
been ambiguous, but the heroes were the real thing. ''All those names, all those
died,'' a retired colonel says, touching the wall of the Vietnam Memorial in
Washington and crying, ''Good soldiers, good soldiers.''

Later, Mr. Cronkite and Representative John McCain, once a Navy pilot and now a
Republican Congressman from Arizona, visit the cell in Hanoi where Mr. McCain
was held after his plane was shot down. ''There was a great deal of pain here,''
Mr. McCain says. ''There was a great deal of suffering, a great deal of
loneliness. There was also a lot of courage displayed.''

Meanwhile, even though Mr. Cronkite is in Vietnam, America's old adversaries are
not much in evidence. Prime Minister Pham Van Dong makes only a token
appearance, blithely dismissing North Vietnamese and Vietcong casualties in the
war as ''light.'' (The Pentagon estimates the casualties at 1 million dead, with
three times that many wounded.) CBS is examining the war through American eyes.

Thus a question: Does ''Honor, Duty and a War Called Vietnam'' reflect the
American mood, or will it help to create one? On balance, this critic thinks it
reflects it. CBS, frequently, and simple-mindedly, berated by some conservatives
as left wing, mirrors popular thinking as much as it changes it.

Sometimes, however, this has been tricky, particularly as applied to Vietnam.
Consider one of Mr. Cronkite's most famous broadcasts. On Feb. 27, 1968,
following the Tet offensive, he told his television audience that he had been
''too often disappointed by the optimism of American leaders, both in Vietnam
and Washington, by the silver linings they find in the darkest clouds.''
Therefore, he said, the United States had to ''negotiate'' an end to the war in
Vietnam.

This was a stunning moment in journalism. An anchorman, once considered to be a
news reporter, was now a newsmaker. He was telling the Government what to do.
President Johnson became distressed. On hearing the broadcast, he said that
''losing'' Mr. Cronkite meant losing the ''center'' of American public opinion.

At the same time, it is at least possible that when Mr. Cronkite made his
celebrated remarks he was already at the center of public opinion. Americans had
seen the Tet offensive on television, and they had not liked it. Mr. Cronkite
may only have been expressing a popular disenchantment.

Is he close to the center of public opinion when he tells us what we should
learn from Vietnam? He begins with a warning: There are a ''number of conflicts
around the world that have the interest of politicians and the attention of the
Pentagon.'' He says we must hope that one of them does not become another
Vietnam.

''Recent history, however,'' Mr. Cronkite adds, ''leaves little room for
optimism.'' On the other hand, he says, there is a way out:

''If, in the future, there is a greater reluctance to send soldiers off to some
uncertain war with obscure objectives; if no war can be considered without the
consensus of the American people and Government.''

Some reasonable people might question whether Mr. Cronkite is in the center of
public opinion this time. All wars are uncertain, and in the beginning many
objectives may seem obscure. The Constitution, meanwhile, delegates authority to
pursue a war, much less consider one, to the Commander in Chief. Consensus is to
be desired, but how could it ever be defined? Even a so-called just war could
never be waged.

Burton Benjamin is the executive producer of ''Honor, Duty and a War Called
Vietnam.'' It is written and produced by Brian T. Ellis.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THEROUX TALE TO BE FILMED THIS YEAR

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 454 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, April 24


Saul Zaentz, the Academy Award-winning producer of ''Amadeus,'' will finance a
$16 million movie based on Paul Theroux's novel ''The Mosquito Coast.'' The film
will be directed by Peter Weir and will most likely star Jack Nicholson as Allie
Fox, who rejects an America polluted by fast food and television to become a god
and a madman in the tropics.

''The Mosquito Coast'' was purchased in the spring of 1982 by Jerome Hellman,
who won an Academy Award in 1969 as the producer of ''Midnight Cowboy.''

''The complexity of the material put people off,'' said Mr. Hellman in
explaining why it had taken three years to finance ''Mosquito Coast.''

Neither Mr. Hellman, who also produced ''Coming Home,'' nor Mr. Zaentz, whose
''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest'' won five Oscars in 1975, shies away from
risky and seemingly uncommercial movie material. ''I still believe there's an
adult audience out there,'' said Mr. Zaentz, whose shaggy beard makes him look
like a hopeful Santa Claus. In fact, Mr. Hellman's movies about a paraplegic
Vietnam veteran and a male hustler, and Mr. Zaentz's movies about Mozart and a
mental hospital did respectably at the box office. In France and Scandinavia,
''Amadeus'' outgrossed ''Ghostbusters'' and ''Gremlins.''

Kundera Novel to be Filmed

In the wake of ''Amadeus's'' eight Academy Awards and tidy little profit, Mr.
Zaentz - who has tended to make three films a decade - is making two movies in
1985. In addition to backing ''The Mosquito Coast,'' he will finance and produce
a movie based on Milan Kundera's ''Unbearable Lightness of Being,'' a novel
about transitory human relationships played against the political background of
Czechoslovakia. The movie will be directed by Phillip Kaufman, with three of the
four leading roles played by European actors.

Mr. Zaentz is budgeting ''The Unbearable Lightness of Being'' at a frugal $5
million to $7 million. ''The movie can get its money back, but it will never be
a big picture,'' he said. ''With luck, 'The Mosquito Coast' might be a big
picture.''

Negotiations with Mr. Nicholson are in the final stages, Mr. Hellman said. As
for Mr. Weir, he has been eager to direct ''The Mosquito Coast'' since he read
Paul Schrader's first-draft screenplay in 1983. ''But it was an ambitious film
and it didn't help matters that Peter's 'Year of Living Dangerously' wasn't a
commercial success,'' said Mr. Hellman.

The solid commercial success of Mr. Weir's ''Witness'' this winter finally
''kindled interest'' at the studios, said Mr. Hellman. ''Unfortunately, some of
the interested people were unnerved by the very things that excited us. But Saul
thinks there's an audience for 'The Mosquito Coast' as we want to make it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN STILL PUSHING REBEL AID, BACKED BY DISGRUNTLED DEMOCRATS

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1178 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


White House officials and a group of disgruntled Democrats met today in an
attempt to revive President Reagan's request for aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.

The Democrats, party moderates, expressed disappointment that a coalition of
conservative Republicans and liberal Democrats combined Wednesday to kill a
compromise aid package that some of them had helped draft over the last few
weeks.

''I don't think the issue is over yet,'' said Representative Dave McCurdy, an
Oklahoma Democrat, who said he met with White House officials today. ''Many of
us are concerned about the development of a policy. Right now we don't have a
policy.''

Despite the setback for the Administration, officials said the fight for aid
would continue.

''We will be back and back and back until America does the right thing,'' Vice
President Bush said. Secretary of State George P. Shultz, drawing a parallel
between Indochina and Central America, said the United States had to help the
Nicaraguan rebels to prevent a repetition of the ''horror'' that resulted from
the Communist takeover in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. [Page A8.] In Managua,
President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said Wednesday that his Government would soon
carry out its pledge to send 100 Cuban advisers home and to free a number of
prisoners charged with subversion. [Page A6.] 'Communist Victory,' Rebels Say In
Washington, two Nicaraguan rebel leaders said that the defeat of the aid measure
was a ''Communist victory'' and that Democrats had a responsibility to bring the
Sandinistas to the negotiating table. [Page A6.] The battle over aid for the
rebels could resume next week when the House Select Committee on Intelligence
starts work on the intelligence authorization bill for the fiscal year beginning
Oct. 1. The aid package defeated Wednesday was for the current year. The
Administration has already requested $28 million for next year.

In addition, lawmakers are examining a variety of other legislative vehicles
that could be used to carry aid to the rebels . But Representative McCurdy said
those seeking a compromise would ''let the dust settle,'' and let tempers abate,
before deciding on their next move.

''There's a lot of distrust,'' he said. ''And a lot of people are locked in to
previous positions. It has became a very emotional situation.''

Those emotions were visible on Wednesday when the House went through a tense
series of votes and finally decided to do nothing. Senator Bob Dole of Kansas,
the majority leader, said of the House, ''They ended up stepping all over
themselves.''

The legislative battle began last year when Congress postponed a final decision
on President Reagan's request for $14 million in military aid to the rebels. As
Congress prepared to take the issue up this spring, the Administration realized
it faced certain defeat and offered a compromise.

The money would be spent only for nonmilitary purposes, President Reagan said,
while talks proceeded between the rebels and the Nicaraguan Government. But the
funds could be converted to military purposes if those talks failed to succeed
within 60 days.

House Had Three Choices

That plan, too, failed to win support, so the Administration retreated again. On
Tuesday, just before the Senate voted on the President's request, he issued a
long letter promising to use the money only for nonmilitary purposes and to
resume talks with Nicaragua. The plan passed the Senate, 53 to 46, but nine
Republicans rejected Mr. Reagan's proposal.

The House faced three options. The first, Mr. Reagan's original proposal, was
soundly defeated on Tuesday, despite his letter. The second, drafted mainly by
moderate Democrats, would have provided $14 million in aid to Central America,
but nothing directly to the Nicaraguan rebels.

Under this plan, $10 million would have gone for refugee relief, to be
administered by international agencies, and $4 million would have been provided
to police any peace treaty. This was adopted by the House, 219 to 206.

Defeated by Two Votes

The third option, which had White House backing, would have given the rebels $14
million in nonmilitary aid through the Agency for International Development, not
the Central Intelligence Agency. It lost by two votes, 215 to 213, and today
Republican leaders blamed the White House for not being more effective in
lobbying for the plan.

''It was not handled well, from start to finish, by one and all,'' said
Representative Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican whip.

The Republicans fully expected to win the vote on their plan and the defeat left
them disheartened and bitter. Minutes later, they voted in a bloc to kill the
entire bill, which at that point contained the moderate Democratic amendment.
Since liberal Democrats who reject all forms of aid also opposed the bill, the
final tally was 303 to 123.

Democratic leaders said they were ''shocked and surprised'' at the Republican
decision to jettison the entire bill and prevent a conference with the Senate.
Jim Wright of Texas, the majority leader, had breakfast with Secretary of State
Shultz this morning and said the Secretary was ''stunned'' by the move.

Mr. Wright described the Republican decision as an ''emotional overreaction'' to
the defeat of their amendment, but Republicans leaders said they had more
practical motives. Mr. Lott said the moderate proposal attached to the bill had
been too diluted. Moreover, he said, the Democrats named to any conference with
the Senate would be too liberal to produce a compromise acceptable to
Republicans.

In particular, Republicans were alarmed over a provision in the Democratic
amendment that would have permanently banned all military aid to the Nicaraguan
rebels. Such a ban is now in effect, but it runs out at the end of the current
fiscal year.

Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the Speaker of the House and a critic of the
Administration's policy, said today that ''I don't get any satisfaction'' from
the defeat of the bill. But he said that when he spoke by telephone with
President Reagan just before the vote, he reminded the President that 40 House
Republicans had voted against the Administration's original plan on Tuesday.

'Murky' Situation Noted

The Speaker recalled that he had told the President: ''They left you in the
belief that your policy was wrong. They are responding to the will of the
American people.''

To many lawmakers, the House vote against all aid proposals reflected confusion
over the future direction of Central America policy. Lee H. Hamilton, the
Indiana Democrat who heads the Select Committee on Intelligence, summed up a
common view today when he said: ''The policy statement that is significant from
yesterday is that Congress does not want military aid. After that, it is
murky.''

''The House is still struggling with this question,'' added Mr. Hamilton, a
co-author of the Democratic plan. ''There is growing support for some kind of
economic or humanitarian assistance, but what type, and how it should be
delivered, are large questions that remain unresolved.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY USES ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD TO PROVIDE REALISTIC TRAINING

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words

DATELINE: FORT IRWIN, Calif., April 21


''I'm dead, but I don't know who killed me,'' said a dusty sergeant commanding a
dozen ''Soviet'' infantrymen in a mock battle. When a rifleman asked what he
should do next, the sergeant flopped to the ground, saying, ''I'm dead - I can't
fight anymore.''

The next morning, the same troops were defending a rocky outcrop several miles
to the north against a numerically superior battalion of the Second Armored
Division. The attackers had destroyed most of the defenders' tanks, which had
been modified to resemble Soviet T-72's, and three American M-1 tanks rumbled
out of the dust and smoke around the eastern shoulder of the outcrop.

''Oh, no!'' a military umpire exclaimed. ''They should have dismounted some
infantry and cleaned this area out first.''

The accuracy of this prediction was almost instantly confirmed, as concealed
defenders with shoulder-held antitank weapons aimed and fired. One by one,
bright yellow strobe lights on the M-1 tanks began to blink, signifying that the
tanks had been destroyed.

Realistic Battle Conditions

Such incidents take place throughout the year as the Army trains its soldiers
and officers here under highly realistic battle conditions in which mistakes are
instantly penalized and military performance is analyzed daily in painstaking
detail.

This is accomplished on an electronically monitored battlefield about the size
of Rhode Island in the southern California desert. The instrumentation at the
Army's National Training Center permits computers to track the location and
movement of about 500 tanks, armored personnel carriers and other vehichles, and
records their maneuvers in vivid computer displays that show the folds and
wattles of the rugged terrain.

The use of harmless, low-power laser beams instead of real ammunition also makes
it possible to score the firing of a wide range of weapons, from 105-millimeter
tank cannons to .223-caliber M-16 rifles.

Perhaps most important, the mock engagements fought between visiting Regular
Army units and a special ''Soviet motorized rifle regiment'' that serves as a
sparring partner duplicates the ''fog of war'' with remarkable faithfulness.
This tends to teach commanders the difficulties of retaining control over
dispersed, fast-moving vehicles and of maintaining communications despite enemy
efforts to jam radio frequencies.

Emphasis on Better Training

So far, 160,000 troops have gone through the 20-day training courses at the
center. The center itself reflects a growing emphasis in all the armed services
on better training, involving accurate, electronic scoring under conditions that
closely resemble an actual battle.

''The training center provides a complete, objective, historical record of an
operation,'' said Col. Frank Miller, the center's chief of staff. ''And we can
replicate the speed, ferocity and doctrine of Soviet forces.''

Many of the men who have trained here seem to endorse that view. Even Vietnam
combat veterans often describe as ''awesome'' the sight of 144 ''Soviet''
armored vehicles thundering at them.

Weapons Fire Laser Beams

There are several elements that contribute to the realism.

One is the Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System, called Miles, which
permits weapons to fire computer-coded laser beams. Individual soldiers carry
receiving sensors on their webbed equipment harnesses and their helmets, and
vehicles carry sensors on their armor plates. The coding of the beams takes into
account the distance between the muzzle and the target, and can register near
misses as well as the probabililty of a kill.

The computer can discriminate, too; it rejects a hit from a rifle on a tank, for
example, as impossible of achieving a kill. But it permits some heavy machine
guns to destroy a thin-skinned armored personnel carrier.

If an infantryman is hit by a beam, his equipment emits a continuous, annoying
sound. To turn it off, he must take a key from his own rifle and insert it into
a lock - an action that renders the rifle inoperable. A tank or personnel
carrier's special strobe light emits two fast blinks for a near miss and
persistent blinks when it has been hit.

The Army and the Marine Corps can use the Miles system elsewhere, but Fort Irwin
greatly adds to its usefulness through the remote radio relay stations and video
cameras on the battlefield. This allows monitors at the base to follow and
record the movements of vehicles, but not men on foot, and to record which
vehicle has registered a kill.

Since 1981, when the center opened, the instrumentation has been expanded from
an abililty to handle a few score vehicles to several hundred.

Full-Time 'Controller-Observers'

Another advantage of the training center is the presence of about 200 full-time
''controller-observers,'' or maneuver umpires. At least one controller follows
every training unit down to the level of a four-tank platoon, usually with a
running commentary on a special radio frequency.

Still another advantage is the presence of a well-trained opposing force made up
of two battalions of troops in the mock Soviet regiment. They wear black berets
with red stars and spend from 200 to 250 days a year in the field, sometimes
under extreme weather conditions.

The use of electronic ammunition is supplemented by ''live fire exercises'' in
which defensive and offensive tactics are practiced, using an elaborate array of
pop-up targets at which the training units can fire real ammunition. The targets
pop up in ranks, emitting flash and sound, in a way that simulates an advancing
enemy.

In addition to video tapes, elaborate computer-generated displays provide a
graphic depiction of any part of the battlefield.

A New Scenario Every Day

In a recent exercise, this record clearly showed that a commander who began an
attack with his 30 tanks in a diamond formation of four groups quickly found his
rear element in the lead and his engineers lost to the side. He was unable to
cross antitank ditches and a mock mine field the engineers could have cleared in
minutes.

Each day, a scenario is created setting the location of battle and the size of
opposing forces, but neither commander knows where the other is or what he may
do. Night reconnaissance patrols, or the careless use of headlights, may settle
the next day's ''fight.''

The computer and video records are played back each day for the officers
involved in the training exercises. The reviews are polite but merciless. The
mock battles are not used, however, as instruments to grade officer performance,
but as a ''training tool'' that can be worked into training programs at their
home bases.

Gen. George S. Patton trained armor units on the same terrain just before World
War II, but without such realistic training aids.

One umpire, watching a tank commander on a screen ''run up to the barbed wire
and die'' when he could have crushed the wire, said, ''This is the best training
we have ever had.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of armored vehicle at training center (NYT/Fred F. Conrad); photo
of infantrymen (NYT); photo of commanders at camp (NYT)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ LIKENS LATIN LEFT TO INDOCHINA COMMUNISTS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


Secretary of State George P. Shultz, drawing a parallel between Indochina and
Central America, said today that the United States had to help the Nicaraguan
rebels to prevent repeating the ''horror'' that resulted from the Communist
takeover in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

Speaking to several thousand State Department employes four days before the 10th
anniversary of the North Vietnamese capture of Saigon, Mr. Shultz appealed for
aid for the ''brave Nicaraguans'' who, he said, are struggling ''to save the
people of Nicaragua from the fate of the people of Cuba, of South Vietnam,
Cambodia and Laos.''

''Those who assure us that these dire consequences are not in prospect are some
of those who assured us of the same in Indochina before 1975,'' he said. ''The
litany of apology for Communists, and condemnation for America and our friends,
is beginning again. Can we afford to be naive again about the consequences when
we pull back, about the special ruthlessness of Communist rule? Do the American
people really accept the notion that we, and our friends, are the
representatives of evil?''

'They Are Tired of Setbacks'

''The American people believe in their country and in its role as a force for
good,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''They want to see an effective foreign policy that
blocks aggression and advances the cause of freedom and democracy. They are
tired of setbacks, especially those that result from restraints we impose on
ourselves.''

He did not specifically mention the refusal by Congress so far to approve $14
million in aid that the Administration has sought for the Nicaraguan rebels. But
his aides said that Mr. Shultz was very upset at the failure to win legislative
backing and had played a direct part in drafting the speech. Mr. Shultz,
speaking from a podium in the lobby of the State Department, addressed several
thousand employees who had been given a half-hour off from their duties to
listen to him.

Mr. Shultz's overriding theme was that whatever faults non-Communist governments
might have, they paled in comparison with the abuses inflicted once Communists
take over. He warned that the same fate would befall the people of Central
America if the United States did not stand firm in support of the
anti-Communists.

'Do We Want Another Cuba?'

''The ordeal of Indochina in the past decade,'' he said, ''as well as the
oppressions endured by the people of Cuba, and every other country where
Communists have seized power, should teach us something. The experience of Iran
since the fall of the Shah is also instructive. Do we want another Cuba in this
hemisphere? How many times must we learn the same lesson?''

''This horror was precisely what we were trying to prevent,'' he said of the
Communist rule in Indochina. Mr. Shultz said: ''Broken promises. Communist
dictatorship. Refugees. Widened Soviet influence, this time near our very
borders. Here is your parallel between Vietnam and Central America.''

Ever since the Reagan Administration became involved in bolstering the
Salvadoran Government against the rebels there, and in aiding the
anti-Sandinista rebels in Nicaragua, many critics have warned that such aid
could ultimately involve the United States in ''another Vietnam.''

But Mr. Shultz drew a different parallel, arguing that Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia have suffered a worse fate since coming under Communist rule.

''The Communist subjection of Indochina has fulfilled the worst predictions of
the time,'' he said. ''The bloodshed and misery that Communist rule wrought in
South Vietnam, and in Cambodia and Laos, add yet another grim chapter to the
catalogue of agony of the 20th century.''

''Just as the Vietnamese Communists used progressive and nationalist slogans to
conceal their intentions, the Nicaraguan Communists employ slogans of social
reform, nationalism, and democracy to obscure their totalitarian goals,'' Mr.
Shultz said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
THE VISITOR FROM SEOUL

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1110 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, April 25


Rarely does a day pass without photographs of President Chun Doo Hwan appearing
on the front pages of South Korea's Government-regulated newspapers. Nightly
news programs begin invariably with long recapitulations of his day.

Yet for all his familiarity, almost inescapability Mr. Chun, who is to meet with
President Reagan in Washington on Friday, remains a distant figure to most South
Koreans, five years after he seized control of an unstable Government as head of
a military coup.

Personal glimpses of him are few; even the wedding of his daughter four months
ago was not reported. When Koreans are asked for an opinion of their President,
the reply, regardless of economic level or political background, tends to be,
''He is not popular.''

Military Is Behind Him

How important it is for the 54-year-old leader to be popular is an arguable
point. He assumed power as an army general in 1980, won an uncontested election
the next year and remains answerable, in the main, only to himself. He has the
military behind him, and has kept big business largely satisfied. In South
Korea, not much more is needed to stay on top.

But foreign diplomats and political analysts here believe that over the last
five years Mr. Chun has done little to build broad personal support. Should he
stumble, they argue, he may find few friends around to help him maintain his
balance. He has not, these analysts say, established his ''legitimacy,'' at
least not according to his country's Confucian traditions.

One friend is being paid a call this week. In President Chun's third meeting
with President Reagan over the last four years, Mr. Reagan is expected to affirm
American support for South Korean security and for political and diplomatic
progress in this nation of 40 million people.

How much personal acclaim Mr. Chun will receive is unclear, even though he can
point to considerable accomplishments.

South Korea under him has strengthened relations with its one-time colonial
master, Japan. It has consolidated American support after several rocky years
during the Carter Administration. It has moved toward friendlier dealings, even
trade, with its old enemy, China. It also has begun discussions with North
Korea, spasmodic and inconclusive though they may be.

Political Necessity Cited

Domestically, the economy has chugged along. The press is less fettered than a
few years ago, political opposition is more fierce and uniformed police officers
have been removed as an intimidating presence on college campuses.

However, Mr. Chun receives little personal credit from his countrymen for these
developments. What he does, many people say, is the result of political
necessity. They note that much of the progress involves actions such as
releasing banned politicians from a black list that the President himself had
created.

Mr. Chun, who appears to have struck a balance between antidissident hard-liners
and soft-liners among his advisers, fuels disaffection with occasional hints
that new crackdowns are not unthinkable.

At a recent public gathering, he referred to talks that his ruling party had
begun with a new opposition group. ''Why should I resort to force when I can
rely on dialogue,'' newspapers quoted him as having said.

A Permanent Liability

The main reason for questions about his ''legitimacy'' is the way in which he
came to power after the assassination of President Park Chung Hee in 1979.

In May 1980, after the military grabbed control under martial law,
anti-Government demonstrators took the streets in the southwestern city of
Kwangju. Over a 10-day period, troops ordered into the city by General Chun
killed about 200 people, by official count, and many times that number,
according to local residents.

''Kwangju'' is as immediately evocative for many South Koreans as ''My Lai'' or
''Attica'' are in other countries, and it is a permanent liability for Mr. Chun.
''Kwangju,'' a Western diplomat said, ''is the albatross around his neck.''

What most South Koreans see on television and in newspapers is a baldish man
with a steady gaze and ill-defined features. People who have dealt with Mr. Chun
up close describe a man with unmistakable military bearing and determination.
His powers of conceptual thinking are often called into question, but never his
will.

One of 10 Children

Chun Doo Hwan, according to a Government biography, was born on Jan. 18, 1931,
the second son among 10 children of a poor family in Hapchon, a farming village
in mountainous South Kyongsang Province.

After attending public schools in the city of Taegu, he entered the Korean
Military Academy because it was free, an accident of fate that sealed his
future.

His class of 1955, the academy's so-called ''11th class,'' was the first to last
a full four years. Its members, while never having seen Korean War action,
regarded themselves as destined to govern one day, and few were more likely
candidates to lead than the strong soccer team captain, Chun Doo Hwan.

During his military career, which ended in 1980 after he had promoted himself to
full general, Mr. Chun commanded special forces troops, led a regiment in South
Vietnam and headed an intelligence unit.

In 1958 he married Lee Soon Ja, daughter of the military academy's
superintendent. They have three sons and a daughter.

Lee Soon Ja - Korean women retain their original names - has been a strong
presence, and some here argue a political liability as well. She is too
outspoken for many South Koreans. Moreover, members of the Lee family have been
caught up in embarrassing financial scandals.

Civilians Are Appointed

Supporters believe that Mr. Chun has grown in the job, acquiring a
self-confidence that makes him more willing to tolerate criticism and endure
setbacks.

As evidence, they cite his assured behavior in October 1983 after a bomb
exploded in Rangoon, Burma, killed some of his closest aides and came close to
killing him, too. He did not turn, as some expected, to the generals who had
dominated his Cabinet early on. Rather, he appointed civilians to fill vacant
posts, especially those dealing with economics, his No. 1 priority.

Ironically, many political analysts say, Mr. Chun's greatest achievement may be
his departure from office. His seven-year presidential term expires in 1988, and
under the Constitution of his Fifth Republic he must step down.

Mr. Chun has said repeatedly that, despite widespread skepticism, that is
exactly what he will do. If so he will become the first South Korean leader to
transfer power peacefully, and one diplomat said, ''He may be treated better by
history than by his own people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of demonstrators (UPI); photo of President Chun Doo Hwan and Hyun
Sook Kye (UPI)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 27, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. RESCUES FLIERS IN GREENLAND CRASH OF NICARAGUA PLANE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 824 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 26


The crew of a United States Air National Guard plane rescued three fliers last
weekend from a Nicaraguan-owned plane that had crashed on the Greenland icecap.

A spokesman for the embassy of Denmark, of which Greenland is a territory,
quoted a report from the Danish police in Greenland as saying that Aeronica, the
Nicaraguan domestic and international airline, had bought the plane in Southern
Yemen and that it was being ferried to Nicaragua.

The Danish police report said the five-man crew that had been hired in Southern
Yemen included an American, an Israeli and an Indian, who were the three
survivors. The others were a Filipino, who died in the crash, and a Jordanian,
who died later of injuries and cold. The temperature during the night on the
icecap was 13 degrees below zero.

A spokesman for the Nicaraguan Embassy said Aeronica had hired the crew in
Southern Yemen to fly the plane to Managua and train Nicaraguan pilots and
crews, who had no experience with the type of plane that crashed. The spokesman
said the plane was to have been used on a route between Managua, the capital,
and the country's Atlantic coast.

Asked why the plane had been bought in Southern Yemen, which is on the Arabian
peninsula bordering on the Red Sea, the spokesman said, ''I guess we got it
cheaper.'' The pilot of the rescue plane, a transport fitted with skis, was
Lieut. Colonel Raymond Tousey of the New York Air National Guard based in
Schenectady. He said in a telephone interview that the Nicaraguan-owned Fokker
27, a twin-engine propeller driven plane made in the Netherlands, lacked the
range to fly directly across the Atlantic and was therefore puddle-jumping
across the North Atlantic. ''That's the old World War II ferry route for
fighters and light bombers,'' he said.

A spokesman for the Defense Department here said the Pentagon knew little more
about the episode than had been disclosed at midweek in a press release
announcing the rescue.

The Fokker 27 is a model that can be used for a variety of civilian and military
purposes, carrying passengers, cargo or paratroopers. Some Fokker 27's have been
fitted with surveillance devices for maritime reconnaissance or rigged with bomb
racks to attack shipping, according to Jane's All the World's Aircraft.

The crew of the downed plane was led by Craig Dennis, Colonel Tousey said.
According to The Associated Press, Mr. Dennis has said that he is an American
who flew for the Central Intelligence Agency during the Vietnam War and now
ferries planes for a living.

Colonel Tousey, of Clermont, N.Y., who runs a farm and flies for the Air
National Guard several weeks a year, said the Nicaraguan plane had taken off
from Iceland but ran low on fuel on the way to Greenland. The plane radioed a
distress signal to an American radar station in Greenland.

Under Radar Surveillance

The spokesman for the Danish Embassy said the pilot of the plane reported that a
fuel pump had gone bad and that he was seeking a place for an emergency landing.
But the pilot reported that fog prevented him from finding an airstrip in
eastern Greenland.

The radar station, part of the Distant Early Warning, or DEW, line, had the
plane under radar surveillance, Colonel Tousey said, and was able to determine
the map coordinates of its location after it ran out of fuel and crashed.

''There was just one straight line of debris,'' Colonel Tousey said.

The Air National Guard team, which flies the only ski-equipped C-130 transports
in the United States Air Force, was at Sondrestrom Air Base in Greenland on a
routine supply mission, flying fuel to radar sites, when it received the request
for the rescue, Colonel Tousey said.

Survivor Waves Shirt

Colonel Tousey said he took off in one plane at about 8 P.M. Saturday and found
the downed Nicaraguan plane, but could see no survivors. Because dark was
settling in and the weather was getting bad, he did not try to land.

The next morning, about 4:15, two C-130's flew to the crash site, where the
crews saw a man waving his shirt. Colonel Tousey landed his plane, found three
men alive and picked up two bodies. The Colonel said he was on the ground for
about an hour.

Asked about reports that the Nicaraguan plane carried large amounts of cash,
gold, drugs and Chinese literature intended for the Sandinista Government in
Managua, Colonel Tousey said, ''I saw none of that, but then I wasn't looking
for anything like that.''

The Danish police report said the survivors were taken back to Sondrestrom Air
Base, where they were put into ambulances and taken to the base hospital. The
Israeli, who needed more medical attention than the base could provide, was
flown to Copenhagen the next day, the report said.

The Danish police said the American and the remaining member of the crew had
been kept in Greenland for questioning and an investigating team would be sent
from Copenhagen to inquire into the cause of the crash.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 27, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 532 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 29. 1. This girl is performing an annual rite of spring in Japan. What is
it? 2. In a confidential Army survey of its officer corps, (very few/half/almost
all) of the respondents agreed with the statement, ''The bold, original,
creative officer cannot survive in today's Army.'' 3. For Jose Holguin, the
burial of Herman Knott at the National Cemetery in Farmingdale, L.I., ended a
42-year quest. Explain. 4. Vladimir Horowitz plans to give a recital at Carnegie
Hall. But he will be sitting in the audience while he does. Explain. 5. Although
he had never served as President of Brazil, Tancredo Neves was buried wearing
the Presidential sash. What were the circumstances? 6. A 99-year-old formula has
been revised, and a 135-year-old trademark will be removed. What companies
announced these changes? 7. The nation's oldest public school, established on
April 23, 1635, or MDCXXXV as they put it, celebrated its 350th anniversary.
What school is it? 8. A champion who recently spoke of retirement will risk his
title again. Who is he and explain? 9. The White House tried to prevent
Republican members of the House of Representatives from signing a letter, sent
by 257 Congressmen, asking Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany to withdraw
his invitation to President Reagan to visit the military cemetery at Bitburg.
True or false? 10. The Federal authorities made arrests and seized weapons at
the Ozark headquarters of a group called the Covenant, the Sword and the Arm of
the Lord. What kind of group is it? 11. A professor of Renaissance epic poetry
who for eight years has been a spokesman for higher education announced his
intention to resign next June. Identify him. 12. Just as scientists predicted,
Pu'u O performed right on schedule. What is Pu'u O and what happened? 13. ''It
became a victim of extremes. A lot of liberal Democrats didn't want anything,
and the Republicans acted in a fit of pique.'' This was said by a Congressman
about a stinging setback for the Reagan Administration. What was it? 14. Ten
years after the fall of Saigon, there are almost (500/1,500/ 2,500/3,500/5,000)
Americans still missing in action from the Vietnam War. 15. The airline that
pioneered flights across the Pacific agreed to sell its Pacific operations for
$750 million to United Airlines in order to raise cash to modernize its fleet of
planes. What airline is selling? 16. Representatives from more than 60 countries
gathered in Indonesia to celebrate a movement that was founded there 30 years
ago. By what name is the movement known? 17. ''Anyone who quotes me as saying
things are good needs their bolts tightened,'' said the Pentagon's Inspector
General. To what was he referring? 18. A venture in another sport turned out
well for George Steinbrenner, principal owner of the Yankees. Explain. 19. New
York State court officials intend to eliminate a piecemeal system. What is their
plan? 20. In a reversal of a previous statement, the Soviet Union said it
(would/would not) reserve the right to use force against unknown intruders found
near Soviet military installations in East Germany.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of girl, question no.1

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 27, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REMEMBERING RANKIN

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 480 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 26


''I never ran for Congress,'' Jeannette Rankin once said. ''I ran for women's
suffrage and against war.''

Despite this disclaimer, she did, in fact, run for Congress, becoming its first
female member 68 years ago, on the eve of the United States entry into World War
I.

On Wednesday a bronze statue will be unveiled in the Capitol Rotunda to
memorialize her. And the fact that she will be only the sixth woman represented
in the array of 94 statues placed there no doubt would have both amused her and
incensed her suffragist's spirit.

For whatever else Jeannette Rankin did, she never shied away from controversy,
never feared to swim against the political tide.

She was an early and ardent suffragist in her native Montana, a state that gave
women the right to vote in 1914, six years before ratification of the
constitutional amendment granting suffrage to all women in the nation. She was
the only member of Congress to vote against entry into both World War I and
World War II. And in 1968, at the age of 87, just five years before her death,
she led the Jeannette Rankin Brigade of several thousand women to the Capitol to
protest the Vietnam War.

Though Miss Rankin was a Republican, Montana's two Senators, John Melcher and
Max Baucus, both Democrats, applauded the Montana Legislature for its vote to
place her statue in the Capitol here. Each state is entitled to furnish two
statues, and until now Montana has been represented only by a statue of Charles
Marion Russell (1864-1926), who was known as the Cowboy Artist.

The Rankin statue was crafted by Terry Mimnaugh, a Montana artist who bears a
striking resemblance to Miss Rankin in her young years.

Miss Rankin was sworn in as a House member May 2, 1917. Four days later she was
one of 56 members to vote against involvement in World War I, a politically
risky step that ruined her 1918 bid for a Senate seat.

Returning to the House for another term a quarter of a century later, she cast
the only vote in Congress against declaring war on Japan. ''As a woman,'' she
said, ''I can't go to war, and I refuse to send anyone else.''

Though she served only those two terms in Congress, the years away from the
Capitol were busy ones. She lobbied for Federal wage-and-hour and child-labor
laws. She spent years with the National Consumers League. And she traveled
around the world espousing peace. She died in May 1973.

The five other statues of women in the statuary collection are of Maria L.
Sanford of Minnesota, an orator and educator; Esther Hobart Morris of Wyoming, a
judge and early suffragist; Dr. Florence Rena Sabin of Colorado, a teacher and
scientist; Frances E. Willard of Illinois, an educator, orator and founder of
the Women's Christian Temperance Union, and Mother Joseph of Washington State, a
nun who learned the building trades from her father and built a number of
hospitals there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jeannette Rankin in 1917; Photo of statue of Jeannette Rankin

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 27, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Sihanouk Will Remain With Cambodian Group

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 26


Prince Norodom Sihanouk has withdrawn his request to step down as president of
the coalition of Cambodian rebel groups fighting the Vietnamese occupation, the
coalition's office in Peking announced today.

Prince Sihanouk's decision came after the vice president of the coalition, Khieu
Samphan of the Khmer Rouge, asked him to stay on, a spokesman said.

It was the fourth time Prince Sihanouk has threatened to resign since the uneasy
alliance of the Khmer Rouge and two non-Communist factions was formed in 1982 to
combat some 160,000 Vietnamese occupation troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 27, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV: LESSONS OF VIETNAM ARE EXPLORED BY NBC

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 866 words


If you see only one television news program about Vietnam, make sure this is it:
''Vietnam: Lessons of a Lost War,'' an NBC ''White Paper,'' on Channel 4 at 10
o'clock tonight. In fact, if you see only one television news program, make sure
this is it. The ''White Paper'' is a model. This is Vietnam without tears, but
with sorrow; Vietnam without bitterness, but with blame. Reporting replaces
conjecture. Analysis depends on facts. At the moment, television correspondents
are all over Vietnam, memorializing, commemorating, pondering, explaining:
Saigon fell 10 years ago next week. ''Vietnam: Lessons of a Lost War'' doesn't
leave home. It doesn't have to.

It does, however, address the question most worth asking: What went wrong in
Vietnam? Vietnam, as Marvin Kalb, the NBC correspondent, says, ''is still very
much with us, in our culture, our politics, our diplomacy, our strategy.''

This is true. In the House debate on Nicaragua this week, as seen on C-Span, the
admirable cable network, many references were made to Vietnam, some of them
idiosyncratic. Inaccuracies were bipartisan. Truth, the ''White Paper''
indicates, does not flourish on only one side of the Congressional aisle. It
crouches, waiting to be discovered, or possibly interpreted, somewhere in the
middle.

Hence the conclusions of the ''White Paper'': The Johnson Administration
deceived the American people; the Joint Chiefs advocated a muddled strategy; the
war may have been unwinnable, anyway; North Vietnam, not the Vietcong, was
always the enemy; Tet, a Communist defeat, was interpreted by the news media as
a Communist victory; we probably won, if only by default, the hearts and minds
of more villagers than we thought. There is something here to displease
knee-jerks of both liberal and conservative persuasions.

Meanwhile, the conclusions are buttressed with reporting, although NBC is
incorrect when it talks about Robert S. McNamara's conversion to closet dove in
November 1965. ''That's much earlier than anyone thought,'' Mr. Kalb says
magisterially. He is wrong.

In his book ''Vietnam: A History,'' Stanley Karnow also dates the conversion to
November 1965. Other reporters have, too. Mr. Kalb and his colleagues, however,
amplify the details, apparently using documents obtained under the Freedom of
Information Act. Mr. McNamara, then the Secretary of Defense, urged on President
Johnson a ''compromise solution'' for Vietnam and a pause in the bombing on Nov.
30, 1965.

Then, at a Cabinet meeting on Dec. 18, Mr. McNamara made his case again. Mr.
Johnson asked him:

''No matter what we do in the military field, there is no sure victory?'' And
Mr. McNamara replied: ''That's right. . . . We've been too optimistic. . . . We
need to explore other means.''

Mr. McNamara did not make his doubts public, of course, and neither did Mr.
Johnson. Instead, as Mr. Kalb says, the war was escalated by ''stealth.'' Troop
increment followed troop increment, and the light at the end of the tunnel was
never there.

That conclusion upholds the liberal position; indeed, it was frequently cited in
the House debate on Nicaragua. The ''White Paper,'' however, also explores the
battle of Ia Dang Valley, now largely forgotten, which led to Mr. McNamara's
growing doubt.

The battle was fought in November 1965. The First Cavalry Division defeated
three regiments of North Vietnam's regular soldiers. (Mr. Kalb says the North
Vietnamese suffered more than 600 deaths, while 79 Americans were killed. Mr.
Karnow puts North Vietnamese losses at nearly 2,000, and American losses at more
than 300. Journalism is not always an exact science.) It was clear then that
North Vietnam was in the war.

Nonetheless, liberal mythology insisted that the war was being waged only by the
Vietcong, mostly righteous peasants. In the Pentagon, the doctrine of
counterinsurgency prevailed. The enemy was pursued in rice paddies, rather than
in North Vietnam. Conservatives, reflecting on Vietnam, now say that the
military, properly used, could have forestalled the subsequent disasters in
Southeast Asia. There seems to be some truth on their side.

The ''White Paper'' also gives us what may be the definitive look at the
incidents in the Gulf of Tonkin. On Aug. 2, 1964, the destroyer Maddox was
attacked by North Vietnamese torpedo boats. The Joint Chiefs urged Mr. Johnson
to retaliate. He did not, but instead sent the destroyer Turner Joy to join the
Maddox. On Aug. 4, both destroyers reported to Washington that they were under
attack.

NBC carefully, and artfully, reconstructs what really happened. Even in 1964,
there were doubts about the Gulf of Tonkin; NBC confirms them. The torpedo
attacks and approaching ships reported by the destroyers on Aug. 4 were flashes
on their own sonar screens, caused by waves and weather. When the destroyers
retracted the reports, Mr. Johnson and Mr. McNamara ignored them. They ordered
air raids in ''reprisal.''

Thus, the United States began marching to its first defeat. ''Vietnam: Lessons
of a Lost War'' puts together much of what followed, even the misleading
television reporting on Tet. Anthony Potter is the executive producer; William
Turque is the producer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 27, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON TEST ON NEWS COVERAGE HURT BY COMMUNICATIONS LAPSES

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 26


The Pentagon's first test of a system for arranging news coverage of emergency
military operations, initially marred by a breakdown in secrecy, was later
hampered by a breakdown in communications, participants in the exercise said
today.

Reporters who were flown to Honduras last Sunday in the experiment said their
reports to Washington were delayed because Navy technicians were unable to make
the telephones work on the helicopter carrier Nassau, and because a teletype
machine was busy with routine military messages.

Television and radio correspondents were able to transmit their news only by
handing off their material to reporters based in the Tegucigalpa, the Honduran
capital, a convenience unlikely to be available in a war zone.

'The One Thing We Wanted'

''The Pentagon failed miserably with the one thing we wanted to make this an
effective exercise - that is, the ability to file,'' said Benjamin Shore of
Copley Newspapers. ''I think we could have done a lot better with carrier
pigeons.''

Howell Raines of The New York Times said the technical problems were complicated
by the reporters' military escorts, who treated the reporters' need to send
dispatches with, ''initially, courteous indifference, and then hostile
indifference.''

Mr. Raines described the experience as ''the collision point between two
professional cultures that don't understand each other very well.''

A spokesman for the Pentagon, Michael I. Burch, promised a full review of the
operation so that things would work more smoothly in the future.

''We have forgotten how to handle the press in the field since Vietnam,'' Mr.
Burch said. ''But we'll be back.'' Pools Seen as Valuable Despite the
difficulties, the reporters agreed with Pentagon officials that the problems can
be remedied and that such press pools are a valuable way of assuring that
reporters can witness the initial phase of a surprise military operation.

The pool of 10 reporters and photographers was rapidly assembled last weekend
and was dispatched, without being told the operation was an exercise, to watch
previously announced military maneuvers off the northern coast of Honduras.

The pool system, in which a few reporters send dispatches that are shared by all
news outlets, was devised after reporters complained because they had been
excluded during the first days of the United States invasion of Grenada in 1983.

The pool operation initially went awry Sunday when word of the supposedly secret
mission leaked out, and the Pentagon confirmed it to other news organizations.

One pool participant, Kim Willenson of Newsweek, said that the risk of such
breaches was great and that in the future the Pentagon would probably have to
''hand pick'' reporters permitted to go on such operations.

Other participants, however, said such a procedure would give the military an
unacceptable measure of control.

Antiquated Teletype Used

The reporters, seven of whom described their experience at a Pentagon news
conference this afternoon, said the military did a good job of transporting,
housing, feeding and protecting the group and provided access to troops and
Honduran officials.

But they said the military escorts did not seem to understand that getting the
stories home was the most important requirement of their jobs.

The group's dispatches were transmitted on an antiquated teletype machine aboard
the Nassau, which transferred the messages to Western Union for delivery
overnight.

The first dispatch from the group arrived 21 hours after it was written Tuesday
afternoon.

The correspondents said many of the problems could have been avoided by better
advance planning.

Matthew B. Quinn of United Press International said, ''Much of what we've
learned could have been learned in a long conversation in Washington.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Settlement Approved In a War Protest Case

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 23, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 198 words

DATELINE: ST. PAUL, April 27


The Federal Government and the Honeywell Corporation have agreed to pay $35,000
each in damages under a settlement of a suit by antiwar activists who said the
Federal Bureau of Investigation had infiltrated their groups.

The settlement, approved Friday by Federal District Judge Donald D. Alsop, was
in a suit filed in 1977 by groups and individuals opposed to the Vietnam War who
sought $150,000 in damages. In addition to the assertion of infiltration, the
plaintiffs said the F.B.I. had interfered with their rights to protest against
Honeywell as the war was proceeding.

The American Civil Liberties Union has agreed to turn over the $35,000 it is to
receive from Honeywell to the American Friends Service Committee. The committee,
which was one of the plaintiffs, is working in Laos to remove cluster bombs left
over from the war. Another plaintiff was the Honeywell Project, which opposes
Honeywell's role as a supplier of war materials.

Earlier, the Justice Department defied an order by Judge Alsop to disclose the
names of those who infiltrated the antiwar groups. The department asserted that
disclosing informers' identities would damage an important investigative tool.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN VIETNAM, REFLECTIONS ON THE WAR

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, April 27


Workers scaled utility poles to unfurl the red flag of a unified Vietnam, and
young men and women marched through the twilight at the end of a working day to
the final rehearsal tonight of the big parade.

Ten years ago on

Tuesday, this city collapsed before Hanoi's army and its local allies, the
Vietcong.

Nguyen Van Tang was a Vietcong. Now a 54-year-old colonel in the Vietnamese
Army, he talked today about how he had worked as a plumber and a house painter
to study potential bombing targets in the city.

Col. Dieu Dan Bhong, 60, drove a cyclo, or pedicab, as cover for his
intelligence-gathering work. Lieut. Col. Doung Long Sing, who said he was
responsible for planning many attacks in the city, also brought in the
explosives by public transportation.

A Sense of Exploitation

Stories of these and other ''heroes and heroines of the revolution'' that met
reporters at the headquarters of the city's military command drew a profile of
the Vietnamese insurgent. All said they were recruited while still in their
teens. All had felt some sense of exploitation, they said, often by French
colonizers of Vietnam, who, they said, denied them education and a better life.

Capt. Pham Thi My, 32, said she joined the insurrection at 13 because some of
her friends had been ''raped by G.I.'s.''

The older officers spoke with amusement at the memory of their specialty -
infiltrating, according to Colonel Sing, ''people who we knew would please
Americans'' into jobs at United States installations.

Occasionally, the memories of the old combatants were jogged by visiting
American reporters. A 1965 attack on the United States Embassy left ''no
civilian casualties,'' a Vietnamese officer said.

''I was there and I saw them - Vietnamese casualties in the street, in the
cafe,'' a reporter said.

A Vietnamese officer replied that, ''bullets have no eyes'' and suggested that
the Vietnamese victims may have been shot by embassy guards.

Asked what opinion they had formed of the American fighting man, a Vietnamese
officer said: ''The soldier has a rifle. But more important than having the
rifle in his hands is what does he think about the war in his head.''

There are others whose thoughts on this anniversary are different.

Many residents were neither revolutionaries nor people directly associated with
the Saigon Government. Among them were men and women with American connections
and American friends who in the final moments opted to stay in Vietnam.

''I sat up all night for the first time in my life,'' a middle-aged man said.
''And I made the decision to remain here. You ask, 'Why did I stay?' I answer
with another question: 'Why should I leave?' ''

The man, who said he had worked for American civilians with no connection to
Washington or to the Saigon Government, said he understood those who sought to
hasten the South's collapse, believing it to be a regime devoid of purpose,
lacking in discipline and public morality. He was willing to give the other side
a chance.

'I Had Skills They Needed'

But now, he said, he and others like him, while not wanting to leave, have been
haunted by their decision to stay because their lives have been difficult and
they feel they are no longer making use of their own potential or contributing
to the country.

''They could have used me,'' the man, a writer, said. ''I had skills they
needed.''

Instead, he found himself under suspicion. ''They followed me for a long time,''
he said. ''I can do nothing here. But if I returned to the countryside, they
would say, 'Why does he do that?' And I would be under suspicion again.''

Unable to find a full-time job, and caught in a worsening economy, the writer
and his family jettisoned their treasures: cameras, motor bike, the family
refrigerator. The children now make handicrafts ''to pay for their own
breakfast,'' he said.

His story was echoed by another Western-trained professional, a doctor, who
could have left and could still leave, but chooses to stay because of his
attachment to the city. He said he worries about medical standards slipping but
has been out of the health-care system since he was briefly detained several
years ago after a confrontation with his political superiors.

Saigon, under its new name, remains the apparently prosperous and visibly
graceful counterpoint to Hanoi. Here, the shops and cafes are full of goods and
people. A fleet of blackmarket stalls survived to provide the privileged with
tape recorders, television sets and imported typewriters. Leaving aside private
cars, skyscrapers and affluent neighborhoods, which it does not have, Ho Chi
Minh City is not too far removed in appearance from some of its non-Communist
Southeast Asian neighbors like Bangkok and Jakarta.

The presence of hundreds of foreigners - a Western press corps nearly 200 strong
(local papers said 1,000 had applied to come) and invited guests from the
antiwar movement in the United States and Europe - has brought crowds to the
hotels.

Some residents asked if this foreign influx meant a breakthrough in relations
between Vietnam and the United States. Others worried that after the
celebrations, a new attempt to curtail the city's freewheeling economic and
social style might come.

Little Sense of Festivity

There is little sense of festivity here this weekend, outside the areas set
aside for the celebrations. Residents say districts have been assigned quotas to
provide the crowds at Tuesday's parade.

There is an official sense of urgency, however. The city center is replete with
paint buckets and brooms, and crews are putting the finishing touches on
projects all over town.

No Vietcong flags are flying this year, though a few appear on posters. South
Vietnam's revolutionaries, who are now described as having ''cooperated'' with
the North Vietnamese Army in its final push on Saigon rather than having been
the architects of it, were quickly taken under Hanoi's wing after the capture.

A visitor asking about the absence of the Vietcong flag was told they could be
seen in the city's museum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnamese soldiers in Ho Chi Minh City preparing for parade
to place on Tuesday (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOCIAL EVENTS;
ON LAND AND SEA

BYLINE: By Robert E. Tomasson

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 60, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 730 words


Barnard Benefit April 30 - Drop in for a drink at Sotheby's on York Avenue at
72d Street from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M. and meet the irrepressible Ruth Gordon, who
hasn't stopped acting and writing since her Broadway debut in 1915, and her
husband, Garson Kanin, the director and playwright. The benefit is for the
Barnard College Scholarship Unit. Tickets, $75 ($40 for Barnard graduates of the
last five years), at the door. Nautical Evening May 2 - Come aboard the 377-foot
bark Peking, one of the largest sailing ships afloat. Sip cocktails, eat a
buffet dinner, dance on deck and wander around the 74-year-old ship, built in
Germany and seized as war reparations by the British following World War II. The
party aboard the four-masted ship, permanently moored at the South Street
Seaport, starts at 7 P.M., and guests are invited to wear nautical clothes. The
evening will benefit Cancer Care, the social-service agency founded 40 years ago
to help cancer patients and their families cope with the illness. Tickets, $125,
from 212-221-3300. For the Disabled May 2 - In its 30 years, the World
Rehabilitation Fund has assisted 150 countries with programs to help the
disabled, training 5,000 medical people in care for the disabled and more than
1,000 specialists in making braces and artifical limbs. All told, 3 million
patients have been assisted. Dr. Howard A. Rusk, founder and chairman of the
fund, will be among those honored at a 30th anniversary black-tie celebration at
the New York Hilton, starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. and followed by dinner
and entertainment. Tickets, $300, from 212-340-6064. In Renaissance Style May 2
- The Bloomingdale House of Music on West 108th Street was founded in 1964 to
provide children and adults with a music education in a neighborhood where there
was none. The school's open-house benefit concert at the Trinity School, on West
91st Street near Amsterdam Avenue, starts with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed
by a performance by Calliope, a professional Renaissance band, and then a buffet
supper. Tickets, $40, from 212-663-6021. Cabrini Fete at Waldorf May 3 -
Archbishop John J. O'Connor will be honored, Sergio Franchi will sing and 1,200
guests will dine and dance at the annual St. Francis Cabrini Award Dinner at the
Waldorf-Astoria. The black-tie event, starting with cocktails at 7 P.M., will
benefit the Cabrini Hospice Endowment Fund and establish a special health care
fund for needy patients. Tickets, $250, from 212-725-6215. For Veterans May 6 -
A spectacular evening to benefit the ''Dear America Celebration'' of the New
York Vietnam Veterans Memorial Commission will get under way with 6 P.M.
cocktails aboard the carrier Intrepid, moored in the Hudson River. Dinner will
follow, and at 8:45 guests will board two yachts to sail around the tip of lower
Manhattan into the East River for a 35-minute fireworks display. The yachts will
then return the guests to the Intrepid's pier. The black-tie evening will
benefit a job placement, counseling and retraining program for Vietnam veterans.
Tickets, $500, from 212-760-7842. Brooklyn Development May 6 - One of the first
community-development corporations in the nation (and one of the most
successful), the Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation has attracted some
$350 million in public and private funds. Established in 1967, the corporation
has promoted a series of interrelated economic, physical and social
redevelopment projects in the Brooklyn community. Vice President Bush will give
the keynote address at the annual black-tie founder's dinner. It will start with
cocktails at 6 P.M. at the Sheraton Centre. Awards will go to C. Douglas Dillon,
Roswell L. Gilpatric and former Senator Jacob K. Javits, among others. Levity by
Art Buchwald. Tickets, $350, from 212-997-0100. Art Therapy May 6 - For 22
years, the Creative Arts Rehabilitation Center has received patients from
psychiatric clinics, hospitals and private therapists for programs utilizing
music, art, dance, drama and poetry aimed at providing stability for emotionally
disturbed children and adults. At present, 85 people are in programs at the
center, on West 51st Street. A black-tie spring benefit for the center will be
held at Doubles, Fifth Avenue at 59th Street in the Sherry-Netherland. Cocktails
at 7:30 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing. Tickets, $175, from 212-246-3113.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE LIVING AND THE DEAD

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 760 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


There is something else to remember on the 40th anniversary of the end of the
last war: not only the dead but the living, not only the disasters of the past
but the achievements of these last 40 years.

The ancient enmity between Germany and France has been composed. Nationalism is
still a dominant force, but Western Europe is not thinking about the cemeteries
of the past but struggling ever so slowly toward economic and occasionally
political unity.

Meanwhile, these 40 years have seen the most dramatic liberation of the hungry
colonial peoples in the history of the world. They face desperate problems in
their escape from slaverythat we should probably understand, since after a
century of American history, we had to fight a civil war between the states to
liberate the blacks and are still struggling with the problem.

The record of America in dealing with the tragedy of the two world wars of this
century is mixed. A case could be made that if the United States had committed
itself in advance to fight for the defense of Western civilization, and armed
itself to do so, it might have avoided both the First and the Second World Wars;
but this it did not do, and the American people didn't want it to.

Since then, the United States has learned two lessons: First, it could not stand
aside but had to make clear in advance that any threat to the major free nations
of the world would be resisted by the military power of the United States; and
second, that it had to have the military power to make that warning credible.

Accordingly, after the Second World War, Washington took more commitments to
fight for the freedom and independence of more nations than the British or
French ever did in their long imperial history. This was done with the approval
of both political parties in Washington under both Democratic and Republican
Presidents.

No serious historian would insist that the United States refuse to recognize
that the Russians lost over 20 million in the last world war and therefore were
entitled to defend their borders. At Yalta, President Roosevelt agreed to their
protection, provided they allowed the Poles and others in Eastern Europe a free
choice over their own affairs, but in the end this is precisely what Moscow
rejected.

In fairness to Washington, again with the support of both political parties, the
United States invited the Soviet Union to help in the reconstruction of Europe
after the last world war under the Marshall Plan. This offer the Russians
rejected.

Also, Washington proposed the international control, even the abolition of
atomic weapons, under the Baruch Plan, the Lilienthal Plan and the Acheson Plan,
but again Moscow refused, believing this was a trick.

So there was clearly then as there is now a crisis of confidence between the
nuclear powers; and the latest controversies between the two, even under Mikhail
Gorbachev in Moscow, and at the arms talks in Geneva, have differed not only on
the control of nuclear weapons on earth but in outer space.

Despite his silly blunders about what cemeteries he will visit, and all the
uproar to make him change his European tour, President Reagan is in a strong
position. Never in the history of war have the victors been more generous to the
vanquished than the United States was to the Germans and the Japanese, now our
allies and competitors for world trade.

If, 40 years ago, those of us who went through the Blitz in London, the airlift
into Berlin and the subsequent struggles in Korea and Vietnam had wondered in
those days about the tangles of world politics today, my guess is that we'd have
thought they would be terrible but maybe manageable, and would have been
reasonably optimistic about the future.

After all, the Europeans were in charge of world politics and world order for
300 years and stumbled into two world wars within 20 years, whereas these two
stumbling giants in Moscow and Washington have at least avoided another world
war for two generations, or considering the popularity of sex these days, maybe
for three.

In short, the sacrifices of the dead in these two world wars have not, when you
look at Europe, been a total waste. It is not the Europe of the dreams of Jean
Monnet, or the world of Woodrow Wilson with his dreams of the League of Nations
to end all wars, or of Paul Valery, with his hope of not only a League of
Nations but a League of Minds. But the dream goes on, and after 40 years it
seems more reasonable even now, despite all the present arguments, than it was
at the end of the last world war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
LESSONS OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


We went into Vietnam, Henry Kissinger wrote recently, on the assumption that
Hanoi was ''the cutting edge of Sino-Soviet global strategy.'' But ''in
retrospect,'' he said, ''we know that Hanoi was working for its own account.''

In other words, that comment blandly tells us, the founding premise of the war
was false. We did not have to fight in Vietnam to contain the two great
Communist powers. Indeed, the Chinese and Soviet Governments detested each
other. The only thing that kept them together for years was the Vietnam War.

Beware Ignorance: That is the first profound lesson of the American war in
Indochina. The United States should not undertake large foreign enterprises
without some knowledge of the people and interest involved, and of the relevant
history. It should not make commitments in the dark.

That may seem obvious. But the officials who took America into the war were
ignorant of the most obvious facts of history: that Vietnam and China had been
bitter enemies for 2,000 years, for example. The notion that Vietnam was a
stalking horse for Chinese aggression was laughable to anyone familiar with the
area, but leaders of the United States Government acted on that premise.

Beware Simple Analogies is a related lesson. We looked at Vietnam and saw
Munich. But the people and the history were altogether different. The immediate
backdrop was colonial, for one thing, a fact with reverberating consequences.
General de Gaulle tried to tell us, but we would not listen.

The danger of analogies has to be emphasized, because we are hearing them again.
Secretary of State Shultz tells us that Nicaragua is Vietnam - as if there were
no history of American intervention in Nicaragua, no general Latin resentment of
such intervention.

If Mr. Shultz could free himself from the grip of that simple-minded analogy, he
might think about how Mexico and Brazil and Venezuela would react if we
succeeded in overthrowing the Nicaraguan Government.

Know the Limits of Power: another necessary lesson. The United States is the
greatest military power on earth, with weaponry enough to destroy all life 10
times over. But it does not follow that we can impose our view whenever and
wherever we want: not even on a country as weak and poor as Vietnam.

Have we learned that lesson? It seems not, for 10 years after the Communist
victory many voices are telling us that we could have won.

Yes, the United States could have wiped Vietnam off the face of the earth. But
sane Americans do not mean that when they speak of winning; they mean imposing a
lasting political settlement that would have left South Vietnam under a
non-Communist regime. And how could that have been done - by a permanent
American occupation force?

The point is that we had tried everything else: saturation bombing, defoliation,
massive intervention in the politics of South Vietnam, remaking its army on
American lines, enormous military aid. It didn't work, and our own military
specialists know why. We were up against an enemy with an unimaginable
willingness to take casualties, an enemy fighting in its own country and
prepared to wait us out, an enemy that was everywhere.

Mr. Kissinger, in his recent reappraisal of Vietnam, said we really had won when
we signed the Paris accords of 1973, but Watergate so weakened Richard Nixon
that he could not enforce them. To put it plainly, he could not resume bombing
when he wished.

Once again Mr. Kissinger seems to have confused the United States with Prussia.
The chance that our society would have accepted repeated reintervention in
Vietnam after 1973 was nil, with or without Watergate. And that leads to the
final lesson.

Know Ourselves: Our effectiveness in the world depends on keeping faith with our
character. America has a certain vision of itself, a moral vision, and its
strength wanes as it departs from that vision.

It is the lesson that Henry Kissinger cannot grasp. He complains that Congress
in mid-1973 voted to prohibit U.S. military action in or over Indochina, but he
fails to mention why. With the Vietnam truce on, Mr. Nixon had shifted the
B-52's to Cambodia and was bombing that poor country - without a shred of legal
authority to do so.

''America's very anguish testified to its moral scruples,'' Mr. Kissinger
concedes. But he does not see that the scruples really matter - that our
influence in the world rests as much on our example of freedom and economic
strength as on our considered use of arms. We are more effective when we do not
pursue the obsessions of a Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A War Memorial on the Colorado Slopes

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 217 words


To the Editor:

Probably unknown to Maya Lin, architect of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington (''The Black Gash of Shame,'' editorial, April 14), a very similar
monument has long been present in the U.S. Erected lovingly by members of the
10th Mountain Division, it lists alphabetically the names of the division's
World War II dead, fallen during actions on the Aleutian island of Kiska and in
Italy.

It is high up in the Colorado Rockies at Tennessee Pass on Route 24, at an
altitude of over 10,000 feet. It is near the base of the ski hill on which this
group of volunteer U.S. resident skiers and mountaineers trained. Adjacent is a
similar, polished granite stone, dedicated to the 99th Norse Battalion, Office
of Strategic Services, who also trained there.

As with the Vietnam Memorial, these monuments are wholly lacking in heroics.
Though they are stark and simple, some of those whose names are listed truly
were heroes.

The now-elderly ski troopers, when in Colorado, often leave the ski slopes to
return to Tennessee Pass. After 40 years, it also is ''a place for reverence,
for homage, for silent tears.''

We hope the newly reactivated 10th Mountain Division, to be based at Fort Drum,
may never need such a memorial. JESSE B. SHAPIRO Poughkeepsie, N.Y., April 15,
1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam in America

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 722 words


To the cry of ''No More Vietnams,'' the United States has tied itself into knots
over Nicaragua. The President wants a virtual declaration of war against the
Sandinistas - no more piecemeal humiliations by Soviet proxies. Congress, in a
stunning demurral, says no more piecemeal investments of prestige in a war we're
unwilling to send American boys to finish.

Some of the Vietnam echoes are evoked by the calendar. It is 20 years to the day
since American ground troops went into battle in Vietnam, and 10 years since
their final ignominious withdrawal. But there's a simpler explanation for our
present ambivalence: ignorance. Americans, even those in authority, are
obviously unsure about the conditions and stakes in Nicaragua. Where the facts
seem so perplexing, how much easier to try the case by analogy.

For Congress, the overriding lesson of Vietnam is do less: sign no blank checks
for warmaking. It is not convinced that the Sandinistas pose a threat justifying
war. And if they did, it sees no plausible plan for overthrowing them.

For the Administration, the lesson is do more. Here it is, as rendered by
Secretary of State Shultz: ''Broken promises. Communist dictatorship. Refugees.
Widened Soviet influence, this time near our very borders. Here is your parallel
between Vietnam and Central America.'' He says the failure in Vietnam not only
betrayed the people of Indochina but led Congress to hobble the President's
authority, thus emboldening the Russians and ''destabilizing'' the globe.

These readings of history are not all wrong or irrelevant. But they are woefully
oversimplified. Americans did not need Vietnam to learn the nature of Communism.
They did not go into Vietnam to diminish Soviet influence but what they
ignorantly thought was China's. And just what was it that cast so much doubt on
America's wisdom and power, restraint or excess?

Nicaragua is closer than Vietnam, and arguably a more vivid American interest.
But it is in no sense a Soviet power. Precisely because it is nearby, America
could quickly snuff out any real security threat. Nicaragua's Marxists may yearn
to spread revolution, but their opportunities to do so depend more on American
behavior than Soviet ambitions. Like Vietnam, Nicaragua may be too heavily armed
for its size, but it has had much more reason to fear invasion.

The ultimate lessons of Vietnam for all Americans should be evident. This
country will not effectively wage war unless it understands the reason for the
pain. Even a hesitant resort to force creates uncontrollable imperatives. It
soon requires exaggerating the stakes, then destroys the balance between ends
and means and finally forecloses diplomacy and compromise. When America stands
in peril, that price has to be paid. Where less-than-vital interests are at
stake, the path away from force needs to be as clearly marked as the path in.

For an astute appreciation of America's interests and dilemmas in Nicaragua,
read the report in today's New York Times Magazine by Mario Vargas Llosa, the
Peruvian novelist.

''The kind of massive, and bloody, military intervention that will be needed to
overthrow the Sandinistas will not result in a democracy,'' he says. ''Only a
dictatorship can impose order in a country devastated by terrorism and civil
war. To maintain the existing fragile freedoms under the present regime, the
only choice for the opposition is to reach some kind of an agreement with the
Sandinistas. Although the regime has traveled far down the road toward
totalitarianism, the challenges and difficulties it faces are an inducement to
compromise.''

That may be wrong. So may be the author's judgment that the Soviet Union has
decided against paying the price of taking Nicaragua under its wing, like Cuba;
or that Nicaragua's revolution looks a lot like Mexico's. But where are the
comparably clear-eyed analyses by the United States Government? Where are the
lists of American demands, distinguishing between intolerable threats to our
security, justifying war, and lesser interests to be sought with lesser
sanctions or rewards?

The lesson of Vietnam is simply that, when in doubt, look a dozen times before
leaping. Congress, which cannot have its own diplomacy, has not rejected a
President's policy. In its justified confusion, it asks that he produce one.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AGE HASN'T COOLED THE FIRE INSIDE ALI

BYLINE: By IRA BERKOW

SECTION: Section 5; Page 1, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 2567 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


THE SPRAWLING, three-story house was quiet, except for the tinny too-wa, too-wee
of birds in a small aviary next to the office room on the first floor. It was
early on a recent morning and the cool, shadowed office was dimly lit by two
antique candelabras which had a few of their small bulbs burned out. An antique
lamp was also lit and with its slightly crooked shade peered over the large
black mahogany desk scattered with letters and an Islamic prayer book. Nearby
were several open boxes stuffed with mail.

Behind the desk, three large windows opened onto a back yard, half in sunlight,
with cypress trees and pruned bushes and a swimming pool. Along another wall in
the office, a pair of black men's shoes stood by themselves in the middle of a
brown-suede couch. In another corner, a television set, with another on top of
it, rested on the Oriental rug that covered most of the floor of the room. On
the wall facing the desk was a marble fireplace without a fire.

Suddenly, a torch appeared in the doorway. The fire, burning at the end of a
rolled-up newspaper, was followed by a large man in black-stockinged feet who
trotted into the room. ''Hoo, hoo,'' he said, as the flame burned closer to his
hand, and he tossed the torch into the fireplace. Quickly, the logs in the
fireplace crackled with the flame, and Muhammad Ali, the torchbearer, watched
them burn. Then he sat down in an armchair in front of his desk and in a moment
closed his eyes.

He said something, indistinct, in a gravelly mumble, and the visitor, in a chair
facing him, asked Ali if he would repeat it.

''Tired,'' he said, with a little more effort, his eyes still closed. It was 8
o'clock in the morning and Ali had been up since 5:30 saying his daily prayers.

He stretched his legs. He wore a light blue shirt, unbuttoned at the cuffs,
which was not tucked into his dark blue slacks. At 43, Ali's face is rounder and
his body is thicker than when he first won the world heavyweight championship by
knocking out Sonny Liston in Miami in February 1964. The 6-foot-3-inch Ali
weighed 215 then and is now about 240 pounds.

In the ensuing years, he would weigh as much as 230 in the ring as he lost and
regained the title two more times - an unprecedented feat in the heavyweight
division. Ali, who was stopped in a one-sided bout by Larry Holmes while
attempting to win the title yet a fourth time, retired five years ago, but he is
hardly forgotten.

A few days before, he had been at ringside at the Hagler-Hearns middleweight
title fight in Las Vegas, Nev. Numerous ex-champions were introduced before the
bout. Ali was saved for last.

He was asked now how he felt about that moment. He said nothing, and it appeared
he was sleeping. Then: ''A-li, A-li, A-li,'' he said, opening his eyes and
mimicking the chant that arose among the 16,000 fans when the ring announcer
introduced him.

''I had to go like this,'' he said softly, raising his right index finger to his
lips, ''to calm the people down.

''A lot of fighters, when they quit no one ever hears of them again. But I've
gotten bigger since I quit boxin'. Look at this,'' he said, nodding to a box in
the corner, ''people from all over the world writin' me. Thirty-one boxes full
of fan mail in four years.''

One was from Bangladesh, sent to ''Loos Anjeles,'' and calling Ali ''my unknown
Uncle.'' Another from West Germany asked ''Mr. Ali'' for his autograph. A third
was from Drakefield Road in London and sent to the New York Presbyterian
Hospital, where Ali had gone late last summer for a checkup. He has been
diagnosed as having Parkinson's Syndrome, a nerve disorder.

Ali asked the visitor to open the letter and read it aloud.

''I am very sorry to know of your temporary problem,'' wrote the Briton, ''and
wish you most sincerely a rapid recovery. Many of my friends who are fans of
yours are thinking the same, that you will in a very short time be back to your
old poetic self and come and see us in dear old London. . . .''

Do you still write poetry? the visitor asked Ali.

''No,'' he said, ''no more. That was in a different time. Eighteen times callin'
the round. 'That's no jive, Cooper will fall in five.' 'Moore in four.' ''

The visitor recalled a personal favorite, when Ali predicted how his first fight
with Liston would go. it turned out that Liston didn't answer the bell for the
seventh round. Did Ali remember the poem?

''Mmmmm,'' he said. It wasn't sure what he meant by that.

But he began, his voice still very low:

''Ali comes out to meet Liston, And then Liston starts to retreat.

''If he goes back any farther, he'll wind up in a ringside seat.''

He paused thoughtfully, then continued.

''And Liston keeps backin' but there's not enough room, ''It's a matter of time
- There! Ali lowers the boom.

''Ali lands with a right - what a beautiful swing!

''The punch knocks Liston right out of the ring. . . .''

Just then the phone rang. ''My phone's ringin,' '' he said. ''Hold on.'' He
reached over to his desk. ''Yeah, naw, naw,'' he said sleepily into the phone.
''I wouldn't try that for no $5,000, you crazy?'' He noded. ''Check ya later.''
And hung up. ''Where was I?''

He was reminded that he had just knocked Liston out of the ring.

''Who woulda thought,'' he continued, ''when they came to the fight, ''That
they'd witness the launchin' of a hu-man satellite.

''Yes, yes, the crowd did not dream when they laid down their money, ''That they
would see a total eclipse of the Sonny.''

Ali's voice was fading again. ''I wrote that 22 years ago,'' he said, his words
getting lost in a throat. ''That was a long time.'' He is taking voice lessons
from Gary Catona, who had come into the room during the recital of the old
limerick. Catona is a voice and singing teacher who three weeks ago had come to
Los Angeles from Austin, Tex., to try to help Ali speak more clearly.

Ali began to speak more slowly and less distinctly over the last several years.
There was much speculation about him suffering a variety of illnesses. During
his hospital visit in New York last September, doctors determined that he had
Parkinson's Syndrome.

Catona believes that the only problem with Ali's voice is that his vocal muscles
are weak, that they lack resonance.

Ali was asked what was wrong with his voice. ''I dunno,'' he said,
''somethin'.'' ''Muhammad never really had strong vocal muscles,'' said Catona.
''He used to scream out his words. His normal speech was never a normal
speech.''

Ali and his voice teacher schedule a one-hour lesson every day, but Ali travels
a lot and they don't always connect. ''But he's good when we do it,'' said
Catona. ''It's like building body muscles, you've got to work at it. He sings
the sounds of the scales. 'Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!' '' Catona sang, his voice rising at
each 'Ah!'

Catona and Ali had already had the session at the piano in the living room, and
beyond this Ali was asked what he's been doing with himself lately.

''People are interested in you,'' he was told. ''You're one of the most popular
figures. . . .'' ''Popular niggers?'' he interrupted. ''Figures,'' the visitor
repeated.

Ali looked at him playfully out of the corner of his eye.

''What am I doin' now, oh, I'm so busy,'' he said, growing serious now. ''I'm
busy every day. I've got all this mail to answer - they're startin' fan clubs
for me all over the world, in Asia, in Europe, in Ireland, in China, in Paris.
But my mission is to establish Islamic evangelists, and to tour the world
spreadin' Islam.''

He converted from Christianity to the Islamic faith 21 years ago, changing his
name, as the world knows, from Cassius Clay to Muhammad Ali.

On the shelf above the fireplace stood a Sports Illustrated cover from May, 5,
1969, laminated on a wooden plaque. The cover showed the young boxer wearing a
crown, with the caption, ''Ali-Clay - The Once - and Future? - King.''

What's the difference between Cassius Clay and Muhammad Ali? he was asked.

''As much difference as night and day,'' he said. ''Cassius Clay was popular in
America and Europe. Muhammad Ali has a billion more fans all over the world.
Cassius Clay had no knowledge of his self. He thought Clay was his name, but
found out it was a slave name. Clay means 'dirt, with no ingredients.' Cassius -
I don't know what that means. But Ali means 'The most high,' and Muhammad means
'worthy of praise and praiseworthy.'

''Cassius Clay had Caucasian images of God on his wall. Muhammad Ali was taught
to believe that there should be no image of God. No color. That's a big
difference.''

He rose and got a large briefcase from under his desk. He withdrew several
religious pamphlets with pictures of Jesus Christ. All but one was white. Then
he took out a Bible and opened it to Exodus 20:4, and asked the visitor to read
it. ''Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above. . . .''

''Ooohh,'' said Ali. ''Powerful, isn't it. But what are all these. Man, you
thought boxin' was powerful. Boxin's little. These pictures teach supremacy. The
Bible says there should be no pictures of God, no images, he should be no color.
But you see that God is white. Tarzan, King of the Jungle, was a white man.
Angel's food cake is white, devil's-food cake is black. Man, ain't that
powerful? ''Cassius Clay would not have the nerve to talk like this - he'd be
afraid of what people might say or think. Ali is fearless, he's hopin', prayin'
that you print this. Cassius Clay would not have the courage to refuse to be
drafted for the Vietnam war. But Muhammad Ali gave up his title, and maybe he
would have to go to jail for five years.''

He rose again and this time brought back a plastic box, flipped up the latches,
and opened the lid. It was a box of magic paraphernalia.

He took two red foam rubber balls and made them become four right before the
visitor's eyes, then turned them into a box of matches, then made them disappear
altogether. His eyes widened in mock shock. He still has the fastest hands of
any heavyweight in history. It was a very good trick. How did he do it? ''It's
against the law for magicians to tell their tricks,'' he said. ''It's a tricky
world,'' he said. He next transformed three small unstretchable ropes of varying
sizes into the same size.

He made a handkerchief disappear, but, on the second showing, he was too obvious
about stuffing it into a fake thumb.

''You should only show that trick once,'' he said, a little embarrassed.

He redeemed his virtuosity by putting four quarters into the visitor's hand,
snapping his fingers, and ordering the quarters to become two dimes and two
pennies. The quarters obeyed. He snapped his fingers again and the quarters
returned; the pennies and dimes vanished.

''It's magic for kids,'' he said. ''It's my hobby. See how easy they can be
deceived? But these aren't childish things. They make you think, don't they?''

It was mentioned that perhaps Ali's best magic trick was transforming the small
house he lived in as a boy in Louisville into this 22-room house with expensive
antique furniture. He made more than $60 million in ring earnings and
endorsements. ''But the Government took 70 percent,'' he said. He says he is
financially secure. He doesn't do commercials, for example, because, he said,
''I don't need the money.''

He lives here in Wilshire with his two children by Veronica Ali, 8-year-old Hana
and 6-year-old Laila. They employ a live-in housekeeper. His six other children
live with his two former wives.

''My wife likes antiques,'' he said, walking into the living room. He pointed to
a tall clock against the wall. ''It's 150 years old,'' he said.

Gary Catona now took his leave, and arranged for a session the following
morning. Ali led his visitor for a tour of the house. ''I'm not braggin','' he
said, ''just showin'. I don't like to talk about what I have, because there's so
many people hungry, homeless, no food, starvin', sleepin' on the streets.''

In the dining room, is a long dark table with 12 tall, carved chairs. On the
second floor are the bedrooms. In the kids' rooms, toys and stuffed animals
tumbled across the floor. There's an Oriental sitting room, and guest room.

The phone rang. ''City morgue,'' he answered. He spoke briefly and hung up.

They ascended the carpeted staircase to the third floor. On a wall are a pair of
red boxing gloves encased in glass. One glove is signed, ''To the champion of
champions - Sylvester Stallone.'' On an adjoining wall is a robe with
multi-colored sequins that bears the inscription, ''The People's Choice.'' In
the corner of the case was a photograph of a man with his arm around Ali. It is
Elvis Presley, who gave Ali the robe.

In the adjoining room is a large pool table with a zebra skin lying over it.
Trophies and plaques and photographs line the wall and cover the floor.

He was asked about recent efforts to ban boxing.

''Too many blacks are doin' well in it, so white people want to ban it,'' he
said. ''But how do I live here without boxin'? How would I ever be able to pay
for all this? Look at Hearns and Hagler. Two poor black boys, but now they help
their mother and father and sisters and brothers. It's from boxin'.

''There's more deaths in football than boxin'. Nobody wants to ban football. You
see car races. 'Whoom, whoom.' Cars hit the wall, burn up. Motor boats hit a
bump. Bam! Don't ban that, do they?''

Going back down the stairs, the visitor is met by a nearly life-size painting of
Ali in the ring wearing white boxing trunks. He is on his toes and his arms are
raised in triumph. The signature in the corner of it reads, ''LeRoy Neiman,
'71.''

Did Ali miss fighting. ''When the fight's over,'' he said, ''you don't talk
about it anymore.''

The visitor asked about his health. ''I don't feel sick,'' Ali said. ''But I'm
always tired.''

How did he feel now? ''Tired,'' he said, ''tired.''

A doctor friend, Martin Ecker of Presbyterian Hospital, has said that if Ali
takes his prescribed medication four times a day - the medication is L-Dopa,
which in effect peps up the nervous system (the disease does not affect the
brain) - then Ali's condition would be improved substantially. The medication
does not cure the disease, but it increases alertness.

Ali is inconsistent in taking the medication. He believes it doesn't matter if
he takes the medication, because he is in the hands of Allah, and that his fate
is sealed. Days go by when he doesn't take the medicine. But when friends urge
him to, or when he is going to make a public appearance, then he is more
inclined to take his dosage.

Did he feel that after 25 years of amateur and professional fights, of countless
hours of sparring, that he had taken too many punches?

He stopped on the second-floor landing. He rubbed his face with his hands. ''Uh
uh,'' he said, softly. ''Look how smooth. I very rarely got hit.''

As the visitor turned from Ali and opened the door to go, he heard an odd
cricket sound behind his ear.

The champ smiled kindly but coyly. There was either a cricket in the house or
something that sounded like a cricket in his hand.

Walking to his car in this quiet, elegant neighborhood, and then driving out
past the security guard at the gate, the visitor realized he would not plumb the
mystery of the cricket sound in Muhammad Ali's house. It's a tricky world, he
recalled, and he would leave it at that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Muhammad Ali at home (NYT/Greg Cava); Photo of Muhammad Ali
pracicing the piano in his Los Angeles mansion (NYT/Greg Cava); Photo of
Muhammad Ali after Sonny Liston fight in 1964 (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN NICARAGUA

BYLINE: By Mario Vargas Llosa; Mario Vargas Llosa, the Peruvian novelist,
recently won the Ritz Paris Hemingway Award for his novel ''The War of the End
of the World.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 37, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 11680 words


IS NICARAGUA A MARXist-Leninist state? Is it another Cuba or is it on its way to
becoming one? To find the answers to these questions, I traveled to the heart of
the revolution.

En route to Nicaragua, I made a stop in Venezuela, where a friend expressed his
amazement. ''You? In Managua? That place is practically another Cuba. With your
reputation as a right-winger, things could go badly for you. Be careful.'' (For
reasons that elude me, anyone defending freedom of expression, free elections
and political pluralism in Latin America is known as a right-winger among the
area's intellectuals.) Actually, I wasn't careful at all. Instead of going
badly, things went so well that I was worn out - bone-tired from the hospitality
lavished on me by the Sandinistas and by the opponents of the regime. During my
monthlong trip in January, I talked to hundreds of people. I traveled through
most of the country, where fewer than three million people live in an area
somewhat larger than that of Greece. And I found striking differences between
Nicaragua and Cuba.

By its fifth year, Fidel Castro's Cuba had become a Soviet satellite. Cuba's
economic and military survival depended on the Soviet Union. Every sign of
opposition had been suppressed. The private sector was eliminated. The party
bureaucracy had extended its tentacles throughout the country and ideological
regimentation was absolute.

In Nicaragua, five and a half years after the fall of the dictator Anastasio
Somoza Debayle, a pluralist society - even though it is under stringent state
control - still exists. Private enterprise dominates agriculture, cattle
raising, commerce and industry. Political opponents openly denounce the regime
through the Democratic Coordinator, a coalition of anti-Sandinista political
parties, labor unions and business groups. And despite severe censorship,
criticism can be found in La Prensa, the weekly Paso a Paso, and two or three
radio news programs.

There is no doubt that political opposition is tolerated because it is not very
effective. As the November elections demonstrated, the Sandinistas do not allow
competition on real terms (they refused to postpone the elections in order to
complete negotiations with the popular Coordinator coalition so that its
candidates could appear on the ballot). But it is also true that the opposition
is not subjected to the terror and paranoia that threaten all dissidence in a
totalitarian state.

Nicaragua, which now plays host to thousands of visible and invisible advisers
from the Soviet Union, Cuba and the countries of the Eastern bloc, receives
military and technical assistance from these countries. But Nicaragua is far
from being a satellite of the Soviet Union - not because of a decision by the
Sandinistas, who would, I believe, have been glad to place themselves under
Moscow's protection, but because of Soviet reluctance to assume the burden of
another Cuba or to risk a direct confrontation with the United States. (During
my stopover in Venezuela, President Jaime Lusinchi told me that he had asked the
Soviet Union if it was planning to send MIG's to Nicaragua; the reply he
received through the Russian Ambassador was: ''We're not that crazy.'') This
explains Fidel Castro's speech late last year in which he announced what
everybody already knew: that Cuba would maintain a prudent neutrality if
Nicaragua were invaded. He urged the Sandinistas to reach a negotiated
settlement with the United States within the framework of the Contadora
agreement. (The treaty was first put forward last year by the Contadora nations
of Latin America as their proposal for a peaceful settlement for Central
America.) Limited aid from Moscow, combined with internal resistance to the
establishment of a Marxist-Leninist regime, economic disasters brought on by
nationalization and statism in the early years of the revolution, as well as
deprivations caused by rebel terrorism and sabotage, have all served to moderate
the Sandinistas' Communist stance.

They now appear to be following a vaguely neutral, nation-alist and socialist
political model - one that they believe will make the regime's survival and the
achievement of domestic peace more likely. If this direction is maintained,
there is a chance that the Sandinista regime will evolve into a loose socialist
dictatorship independent of the Soviet Union. Yet, one cannot rule out the
possibility of a sudden return to the Sandinistas' original intentions (to turn
Nicaragua into a Marxist-Leninist state) should the external circumstances
change - for instance, if the Soviet Union should suddenly decide to take
Nicaragua under its wing.

In the meantime, the Sandinistas have boldly announced they would sign the
Contadora agreement, devalue their currency, reduce subsidies to transportation
and abolish those for certain basic goods. They have also announced a moratorium
on arms purchases and promised that 100 of the Cuban military advisers - a
fraction of the total - would be sent home. They are declaring that their regime
is a nonaligned, pluralist mixed economy. That is now half true, but it could be
a reality if in exchange for their concessions, they could obtain peace and
guarantees of non-intervention. In Nicaragua, myth and reality often go hand in
hand.  One day, Vice President Sergio Ramirez Mercado said to me while I was
having supper at his house: ''I suppose you know the motive behind the wining
and dining by the Sandinistas and the reactionaries. We all want you to say nice
things about us in your article and bad things about the other side.''

Ramirez is a 43-year-old novelist with a fine sense of humor; we've been friends
since before the Nicaraguan revolution. He lived in West Berlin and was head of
a university press in Costa Rica before the revolution. Ramirez's enemies say
that he exaggerates his radicalism in public so that he won't lose influence
with his Sandinista comrades; in fact, they say, he is one of the most moderate
men in the regime.

It is an interesting twist: a Sandinista accused of being a closet moderate.
During my month in Nicaragua, I came across many such ironies. Take Managua, the
capital. I used to think that the most labyrinthine city in the world was Tokyo.
I was wrong; it's Managua.

The earthquake of 1972, which destroyed most of the city, has left vast ghostly
spaces in the center of Managua. The Sandinistas have converted part of the Gran
Hotel, severely damaged in the earthquake, into a theater. There, on Jan. 9,
three days after my arrival, on a stage built over what once was a swimming
pool, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra presented a folkloric program for the
foreign delegations that had come for his presidential inauguration, held the
next day.

The Government had provided me with an escort, the novelist Lizandro Chavez
Alfaro, director of the National Library. He is maniacally punctual, insisting I
arrive at my appointments an hour ahead of time. That day was no exception,
which was fortunate. As the other guests were arriving, I had had the
opportunity of touring a section of the hotel that now houses a Museum of Modern
Art. It was a brilliant idea to display abstract, surrealist and primitive
paintings and sculptures among ruins that looked as if they had been designed
ex-profeso by a daringly imaginative architect. I could never find the ruins of
the Gran Hotel again. People would give me directions, but I could never follow
them.

The streets of the rebuilt capital are all side streets; they have no names and
the houses have no numbers. Directions are pure conundrums. ''Go 70 varas up and
20 down from where the little tree used to be.'' What little tree are they
talking about? A tree that once existed in the past, no one knows when, at a
spot where there is now nothing, but Managuans still use the ''tree'' as a point
of reference. A vara, roughly three feet, is a medieval Castilian measurement
that nobody else in the world uses except the Nicaraguans. And how does one
interpret ''up'' and ''down''? I was given a variety of explanations. According
to some, ''up'' is the east, where the airport is located; ''down'' is the west,
where you find the cemetery. According to others, both terms come from the
Indians, for whom ''up'' meant where the sun rises and ''down'' referred to
where it sets.

Outside Managua, I was entranced by the variety and beauty of a landscape dotted
with lakes, volcanoes, jungles, rugged mountains and plains that support a
thriving cattle in-dustry. To travel the Atlantic coast, official permission is
required because of the battles between the Government and the 70,000 Miskito
Indians, a third of whom have fled to Honduras. In the rest of the country, one
can travel freely, even along the northern frontier with Honduras, where there
is a strong anti-Sandinista rebel presence. (A map of Nicaragua appears on page
44.) On some of these trips I was accompanied by the affable Lizandro Chavez,
who is a native of Bluefields on the Atlantic coast. On others, I was alone. I
was surprised by the lax security measures and the general normalcy of life,
even in Esteli and Jinotega, where abandoned villages, destroyed cooperatives,
blackened wrecks of burned vehicles and other signs of war with the
contrarevolucionarios are everywhere. Bluefields and its environs were the only
areas where I noticed a certain anxiety in ordinary residents. Yet attacks and
incursions by rebel Miskitos there are less frequent than along the Honduran
border.

Chavez arranged the interviews with governmental officials, and I took care of
interviews with the opposition myself - at least for the first few days. By the
second week, I wondered how I would find the time to squeeze in conversations
with just a third of the ministers, owners, farmers, former political prisoners,
businessmen, unionists, journalists, priests, feminists, evangelicals and poets
(even madmen with ''essential information'' for my article) who had contacted
me. At the same time, I was deluged with invitations to social events.

Nicaraguan hospitality is legendary, but the invitations were symptomatic of the
importance that both the regime and its opponents place on what is said about
Nicaragua outside the country. Both sides know that the fate of Sandinism is
being decided not only inside but also outside Nicaragua, especially in the
United States.

LTHOUGH THE SANDINISTAS may be prepared to make almost any concession to restore
peace to their country, they are obdurate about one point: They will not
relinquish power. The desire to hold on to power is, of course, not peculiar to
the Sandinistas. It characterizes totalitarian and authoritarian regimes, even
the discreet dictatorship of the Institutional Revolutionary Party in Mexico.
Don Emilio Alvarez Montalban, an ophthalmologist and a conservative, is a
respected political analyst for the opposition who has a keen appreciation of
the ironic. One evening he says to me: ''Every day this revolution smells less
and less of Moscow and more and more of Mexico City.'' I tend to agree with him.

Most of the opposition, however, respond angrily to any suggestion that the
ruling Sandinista Front is less than totalitarian. At their meetings, they cite
examples of human-rights abuses, the mockery of the Anti-Somocista People's
Tribunals, the harassment of free trade unions, the abolition of the right to
strike, the cancellation of 24 radio news programs, the contradictory decrees
and threats of confiscation leveled against the business community, the Marxist
indoctrination of the young in the schools and the army. Those attending the
meetings are not circumspect in their choice of words. Some, after giving their
full name, make ferocious - and unverifiable - attacks on the Commanders: They
have stolen the best homes; they have a house of assignation on the Southern
Highway; they have turned Sacuanjoche Restaurant into a place where Cubans,
Russians, Bulgarians and the other Communist advisers can indulge their
orgiastic fantasies.

When I say that in the totalitarian countries of my acquaintance a meeting like
theirs would be inconceivable, they reproach me for my naivete. Can't I see that
this kind of ''tactical'' tolerance will soon end? They are risking their
freedom, perhaps their lives, by speaking up.

I always leave these meetings admiring their tough stand, but skeptical of their
effectiveness. The civilian opposition appears to be associations of the elite,
so prone to internecine wrangling that they leave themselves open to the
Sandinistas' divide-and-conquer tactics. Almost all of the opposition parties -
the Democratic Conservatives, the Liberals, the Christian Socialists and the
Social Democrats - have a splinter group in the National Assembly.

There are capable and highly intelligent men among the opposition leaders, but
their overall political activity is impractical. They refuse, for instance, to
admit that it was a mistake to boycott the November elections. Regardless of how
fraudulent they may have been (they were no more rigged than the ritual
elections in Mexico or the ones held recently in Panama), participation would
have given the opposition more representatives on the national level (the
non-Marxist opposition parties took 29 seats in the 96-member Assembly), more
clout in denouncing official excesses and errors, as well as the opportunity to
exert some influence on the system.

Instead, they preach a legalism and an orthodox liberal democracy that Nicaragua
has never had and that, sadly, it probably will not have in the near future. By
telling each other, and trying to convince everyone else, that the country is
now, or is about to become, a totalitarian satellite of the Soviet Union, they
have adopted the politics of catastrophe - of waiting for the contras, aided by
the United States Marines, to rescue them.

And who are the contras? The Sandinistas call them ''mercenaries'' and
''gangs''; President Reagan calls them ''freedom fighters.'' Most of them are in
the Nicaraguan Democratic Force, which operates out of Honduras and is led by
Adolfo Calero Portocarrero, former head of the Conservative Party. Then there is
the Revolutionary Democratic Alliance in the south, along the Costa Rican
border, which is headed by Eden Pastora Gomez, the former Sandinista.

The Government and the opposition versions of the war with the contras are so
contradictory that trying to see the two sides clearly often leads to confusion.
But one point is clear: The ''bourgeoisie'' is not at the front. This is a war
between poor men. Most of the contras - like the badly wounded Sandinista
soldiers I saw in the German Pomares Field Hospital in Jinotega - are peasants.
Many have only a vague idea of what they are fighting for. Some think they are
fighting Yankee imperialism. Others, judging by contra leaflets, believe that
they are engaged in a crusade against the forces of Satan.

The contras can inflict a great deal of damage on the Sandinista regime. Perhaps
they can do more harm than they have already (7,968 casualties in four years,
according to President Ortega; the equivalent figure in the United States would
be 600,000), but they have no chance of overthrowing the Government. The support
they enjoy in certain peasant and bourgeois quarters is not enough to provoke a
general uprising similar to the one that toppled Somoza.

Furthermore, the contras' economic and military dependence on the Central
Intelligence Agency and the United States arouses irremediable suspicion even
among those who are hostile to the Sandinistas - who remember the numerous North
American interventions and occupations, especially the one that left the Somoza
dynasty as its legacy. Pablo Antonio Cuadra, the noted Roman Catholic poet,
writer and co-editor of La Prensa, and one of the most respected of the
opposition figures, tells me that ''the C.I.A.'s covert aid to the contras has
been a very serious mistake.'' A North American invasion is not the solution if
one is trying to preserve democratic options in Nicaragua. The kind of massive,
and bloody, military intervention that will be needed to overthrow the
Sandinistas will not result in a democracy. Only a dictatorship can impose order
in a country devastated by terrorism and civil war. To maintain the existing
fragile freedoms under the present regime, the only choice for the opposition is
to reach some kind of an agreement with the Sandinistas. Although the regime has
traveled far down the road toward totalitarianism, the challenges and
difficulties it faces are an inducement to compromise. Because the opposition
parties do not recognize this, they have become marginal to the central
political realities of Nicaragua.

HE GROUPS THAT HAVE BEEN EFFEC-tive in forcing the Sandinistas to modify their
Marxist-Leninist intentions are the farmers and industrialists. Unlike their
Cuban counterparts a quarter of a century ago, they did not fly to Miami when
the Government turned progressively Communist soon after it came into power.

Enrique Bolanos Geyer, a prosperous industrialist, rancher and farmer, is a
steadfast critic of Sandinism. He is also president of the Superior Council of
Private Enterprise (known as Cosep), the country's largest business federation
that had financed three political strikes against the Somoza regime in 1974.
''Bolanos's problem, and Cosep's problem, is that they haven't resigned
themselves to their loss of political power,'' claims Vice President Sergio
Ramirez. ''We have no difficulty in reaching an understanding with Carlos
Pellas, the multimillionaire, or other industrialists who discuss credits,
foreign currency, stocks and investments with us. But no capitalist will ever be
president of the Central Bank again, or dictate our economic policy, and that is
what Cosep cannot accept.'' Perhaps he is right. But beneath the apparently
incompatible doctrines, there are signs of cooperation between the capitalist
sector and the regime.

Before the Sandinista revolution, the Pellas family was, after the Somozas, the
second richest. The family still has vast holdings, the most important of which
is the San Antonio Refinery in Chichigalpa. I spend a day there, escorted by the
young, dynamic Carlos Pellas, who elected to stay in Nicaragua when his father
and brothers moved to Miami. There are 3,000 workers on the payroll (5,300
during the harvest), and about 20,000 people who live on company-owned land. In
recent years, there has been a decrease in production, stemming from an
affliction whose ravages can be seen everywhere: the scarcity of foreign
currency.

The Government's delay in giving the refinery dollars to pay for repairs and
replacement parts meant that many of its trucks and tractors were out of
service, and the transport of sugar cane to the factory was reduced drastically.
Moreover, rats devoured some 200 tons of sugar cane because the refinery did not
receive the $100,000 it had requested to buy poison. ''Because we couldn't get
that money on time,'' says Pellas, ''we've lost 400,000 quintales of sugar;
that's approximately $2,700,000.'' (A quintale is about 100 pounds.) Since the
revolution, about 70 of the company's technicians and professionals have left
the country. Two of the currently employed engineers have moved their families
to Costa Rica and visit them every two weeks. Why? ''So that our children won't
be called up for patriotic military service, and because we're afraid the
country will become Communist.''

As often as they voice fears that the Sandinista Government is headed toward
Communism - a fear common among the middle class - the refinery's professionals
complain about the lack of worker discipline that Sandinism has brought with it
and of the high cost to the owners of continuing to pay the salaries of workers
conscripted into the army.

Nevertheless, the San Antonio Refinery is expanding (by expanding, an owner not
only gets more foreign currency but shows his faith in the Government). The San
Antonio Refinery has built a new mill that will equal the output of its factory.
''I think the company is secure for another five years,'' says Pellas. ''Only
God knows after that.''

The man touted by the regime as its ''capitalist'' is Samuel Amador. ''He's the
capitalist we show to foreigners so they won't think we're Communists,'' jokes
Vice President Ramirez when he introduces me to Amador. It is a role the
flamboyant 48-year-old farmer and rancher plays marvelously well.

I spend a weekend with him in Sebaco, 66 miles from Managua, in his mansion with
its marble, its two gigantic heart-shaped swimming pools and its 11 dogs. It is
the house of a Nicaraguan Great Gatsby. ''It cost me $800,000,'' Amador tells me
as he raises his little finger with its flashing diamond ring. What is $800,000
to a man happy to have lost $2.5 million during the war that overthrew Somoza?
He has just been elected Sandinista representative to the National Assembly.

That weekend, Commander Jaime Wheelock Roman, the Minister of Agrarian Reform,
and 50 North Americans arrive by bus for supper. Amador tells his visitors that
the best proof that ''Nicaragua will never be Marxist'' lies in his four
estates, his 3,750 acres of rice, sorghum and vegetables, his livestock, his new
houses in Matagalpa, his 180 employees, the vineyards he intends to plant, and
the tourist project he will launch this year in the Jinotega Mountains.

He introduces me to his two teen-age sons, ''volunteers in the coffee harvest,''
who, he assures me, will do their pa-triotic military service. ''For now they're
turbas, so what?'' (''Turbas,'' a derogatory term for the masses, or mob, are
civilians used by the Sandinistas for political intimidation. ''Yes, we are the
turbas, so what?'' has become their rallying cry.) At night, as we stroll
through his garden full of frogs, he confesses that his happiness is not
absolute. He has two daughters living in California who refuse to visit him and
who write to him that ''one day the Communists will slit your throat.'' When I
ask him if there is anything in the regime that isn't perfect, he says:
''A.T.C.'' (the Association of Rural Workers, the official peasants' union).
They have taken over his lands twice, and Amador has had to use all his
influence to dislodge them.

According to Cosep, the private sector is a fiction in Nicaragua. ''What kind of
landowners are we?'' its members ask. ''The state decides what we should plant
and when we should plant it. We can sell only to the state, only at the price it
sets. It pays in cordobas and decides when, and in what currency, it will give
us money for upkeep and equipment. With the banks nationalized, we have to
depend on the state for credit, too. And we live with the threat that they'll
confiscate our land on the pretext that we're sabotaging the economy.''

The Sandinistas' point of view is quite different. ''We are saving the private
sector in Nicaragua,'' claims Commander Wheelock. I accompany him as he escorts
the Prime Minister of Iran, Mir Hussein Moussavi, on a tour of the Cuban-built
Timal Refinery in Malacatoya, 14 miles from Managua, which is the biggest
refinery in Nicaragua and which was opened by Fidel Castro on Jan. 11.

''The peasant masses were hungry and angered by the exploitation they had
suffered,'' Wheelock continues. ''They were pressing for the lands, and there
were many unjustified takeovers. But thanks to agrarian reform, which has
distrib uted two million manzanas'' - about 3.7 million acres - ''and because
the peasants trust us, we have avoided widespread expropriation of private
holdings. We are slowly rectifying whatever abuses may have taken place.''

I ask him why employers are not allowed to pay their workers bonuses or give
them higher salaries than those set by the state. His reply: ''To avoid the
anarchy that would result during the current crisis if there were rivalry
between employees of different companies, and to avoid the creation of
privileged elements within the working class.''

Relations between the owners and the Sandinistas, although full of mistrust, are
not always negative. Seventy-five private rice growers organized the National
Association of Rice Growers in 1979 and are affiliated with Cosep. They are
proud that their 22,500 acres produce 50 percent of the rice grown in Nicaragua
- that is, 92 million pounds, which is the output of the 35,000 state-owned
acres the Government expropriated from Somoza. None of the 75 have been exiled
or had their property confiscated. Three plantations were taken over, but the
rice growers' association moved heaven and earth and managed to recover them.

''After endless negotiations,'' says Mario Hanon, the association's president,
''we convinced them to let us open our own marketing association. We handle 90
percent of the private production and 10 percent of the state harvest as well,
since the state companies have discovered that if they sell rice to our
marketing association, payment is fast and reliable, which is not the case with
the state marketing agency.

''We can't sell freely, only to buyers sent by the state, but at least our rice
is processed and sold efficiently,'' continues Hanon. A short, energetic man in
his early 50's, Hanon is an engineer who was imprisoned by the Sandinistas for
four months soon after they took over. ''At the National Rice Commission . . .
we have marathon discussions with the Government delegates, but, I must confess,
they've always set a price - at least until now - that meets our expectations.''

The leaders of the rice growers' association say that they have earned the
respect of the Sandinistas, which is why they were allowed to establish a
research company specializing in fertilizers, as well as a seed-exporting plant.

''It may be that not all the trade associations are as united as we are,'' says
Hanon. ''We're like a fist. As soon as there are rumors of confiscations, we
hire lawyers, we swamp the regime with letters, lawsuits, claims, requests for
meetings. We knock on Commander Wheelock's door, and if he doesn't open it we
climb in through the window. The Cuban advisers for the state rice plantations
were a disaster, and that worked in our favor, too.''

As I say goodbye to Hanon and his colleagues in the association's office in
downtown Managua, I tell them that at least from their perspective, the future
of private enterprise does not seem so dismal. ''We've put a tape in our heads
that plays the same thing over and over,'' says Hanon. '' 'Nothing's happened
here; let's get to work.' The trouble is that sometimes the tape breaks and we
remember the crisis, the war, the insecurity. That's when we begin reeling - and
we're not even drunk.''

T COVERS 10 OR 12 BLOCKS IN the eastern end of Managua, and its multicolored
displays in crowded kiosks, stalls and counters recall the bazaars of the Middle
East. It is called the Oriental Market - Nicaragua's black-market heaven.

The shelves in the supermarkets and stores that sell merchandise at
Government-fixed prices are usually half-empty, and people have to wait on long
lines to buy subsidized or rationed goods. But go to the Oriental Market and
nothing is scarce and there are no lines. Prices, however, are much higher than
the official ones.

When I was in Nicaragua, toothpaste - officially priced at 27 cordobas
(equivalent to $1) - was not for sale anywhere except at the Oriental Market,
where it cost $7. The tailors' cooperatives were supposed to sell jeans for $18,
but the supply did not even remotely match the demand. Jeans were available at
the Oriental Market for $180. The Oriental Market also dispensed medicines that
were in short supply at the pharmacies.

What the Sandinista Government had intended to do was to protect the ''real
wages'' of the workers and, through price controls and subsidies, to price
essential goods within reach of even the poorest citizen; in January, the
average monthly salary for a worker ranged between $110 and $150. But, some say,
this policy has turned Nicaragua into a country of speculators, hoarders and
smugglers - a country where the most profitable business is the channeling of
goods from the legal economy into the black market.

I mentioned to a Government official that the only people who benefitted from
this system were the wealthy, that it actually harmed the poor for whom the
system had been created. ''That's the problem when you set up socialism
halfway,'' he said. ''If we had nationalized the entire economy, this corruption
would not exist.''

A few days after I left Nicaragua, I read in the paper that the Sandinista
regime had decided to abolish subsidies for agricultural products and to allow
the free market to determine prices.

ICARAGUA IS ONE of the most Catholic countries I know. When I was traveling
through the department of Esteli, I saw caravans of peasants in their Sunday
clothes, many of them barefoot to fulfill a vow, who were walking to the
Sanctuary of Our Lord of Esquipulas in El Sauce, some 45 miles away. Every
Nicaraguan village has its saint and honors its patron's feast with a
celebration that usually lasts several days and includes festive processions and
rituals.

Religion has long been inseparable from politics in Nicaragua, but perhaps the
most critical debate in the country today is between the ''people's church'' and
the Government on one side, and the church hierarchy and the majority of the
faithful on the other.

Many Catholics fought with the Sandinistas against Somoza, and almost all the
leaders of the Sandinista National Liberation Front (F.S.L.N.) - even those most
devoted to Marxism like Tomas Borge Martinez, the Minister of the Interior, or
Carlos Fonseca Amador, a founder of the Front - had a Catholic education. The
Catholic hierarchy had frequent confrontations with Somoza, and after his
overthrow gave the Sandinistas its blessing in a pastoral letter. But the
support was shortlived. It ended with the radicalization of the regime and the
rise to prominence within the Government of the ''people's church,'' which
advocates a synthesis of Marxism and Christianity. The supporters of this
movement claim that the first duty of Christians is commitment to the
revolution, and they identify sin with ''unjust capitalist social structures.''

''We are not a parallel church, but a reform movement that is trying to live in
solidarity with the poor,'' says Jose Arguello, editor of Amanecer, which is
published by the Antonio Valdivieso Ecumenical Center. ''For us the problem is
not whether the revolution is moving toward Marxism, but whether it is going to
survive. The alternative is not democracy but something like the situation in
Guatemala or El Salvador. A Marxist country is better than a dead one.''

Ernesto Cardenal Martinez - a priest, poet, Minister of Culture and one of the
most extreme advocates of the ''people's church'' - has proclaimed that the
''true Kingdom of God is a Communist society, and Marxism is the only solution
for the world.'' (Cardenal, one of four revolutionary priests in the Sandinista
Government, was recently suspended a divinis for not resigning his ministerial
post.) Nicaragua has consequently become the magnet for liberation theologians,
Socialist Catholics, radical theologians, apocalyptic prophets and
Marxist-Leninist priests from all over the world.

Its name notwithstanding, the ''people's church'' is largely composed of members
of the religious elite - priests and laymen whose intellectual disquisitions and
sociopolitical work lie beyond the scope of most of the Catholic poor. The
majority of Nicaraguan Catholics, like Catholics in the rest of Latin America,
do not practice the reflective, intellectualized, critical religion that the
''people's church'' espouses. On the contrary, theirs is a simple, intuitive,
disciplined and ritualized faith that has always strengthened the church in
Latin America. The efforts of the leaders of the ''people's church'' to combine
politics and religion have only found a response in the intellectually militant
members of the middle class, many of whom are already converts.

The most outstanding figure in the ''people's church,'' the Franciscan Uriel
Molina, is saying a solidarity mass in the church of Santa Maria de los Angeles
in Managua's Rigueiro District, where he has been priest for many years. The
chapel is circular and bare of statues except for one of the Virgin. There are,
however, huge revolutionary murals in which Christ is dressed as a Nicaraguan
peasant and villainous Yankee imperialists and well-fed soldiers shoot young
people carrying Sandinista flags. The Peasant Mass, by the composer Carlos Mejia
Godoy, is punctuated with revolutionary songs written to very pretty music.

The lesson in Father Molina's sermon deals with the ''process of revolutionary
social change which Christians should experience through their faith.'' When the
time comes for the embrace of peace, the mass turns into a political meeting.
More than half of those attending are North American visitors. Encouraged by the
presence of state television cameras, they rush toward Commander Tomas Borge,
who is beside me, kiss him, photograph him and ask him for his autograph. I
whisper to him: ''The revolution's in trouble - this looks like Hollywood.''
''MOST NICARAGUAN CATH-olics,'' says the Archbishop of Nicaragua, Miguel Obando
y Bravo, ''are loyal to the bishops and the Pope.'' There is strong evidence he
is right.

I see it at the Festival of San Sebastian in Diriamba, where a lively crowd
gives an old priest an ovation when he takes the microphone as the procession
begins and shouts: ''The Communists are responsible for this war, and they're
forcing our boys into the army to fight it.'' And I see it most of all in the
excitement Monsignor Obando generates in his public appearances.

When I attend mass at his church of Santo Domingo de Las Sierrietas on the
outskirts of Managua, Nicaraguans of all classes - waving Nicaraguan and Vatican
flags - receive the Archbishop with applause (it is his birthday) and cheers for
the Pope. Beneath the traditional appearance of the church and its traditional
decorations, everything, including the congregation's exaggerated enthusiasm, is
as politically charged as it was in the Rigueiro District. (Ever since John Paul
II's visit to Nicaragua in 1983, the Pope has become a buzz word: Cheering him
is equivalent to protesting against the regime.) At 59, Monsignor Obando is a
charismatic personality. His cardinal's vestments cannot hide his rugged Indian
features and his compact peasant's body. In contrast to his adversaries,
Monsignor Obando has no intellectual pretensions. He is a conservative like John
Paul II, with whom he is on very good terms. He combines commitment to tradition
and ecclesiastical authority with a sense of justice and a notable ability to
communicate his spiritual message to humble people.

''The regime is not totalitarian yet, but every day there are more signs that it
is moving in that direction,'' he says. ''We are in favor of reform. We are
opposed to the great economic gap between rich and poor. But social justice is
one thing, and filling a country with hatred, preaching the class struggle,
advocating war to the death between capital and labor - that is another matter
entirely.''

I tell him what Tomas Borge told me: ''We're worried that the C.I.A. will try to
assassinate Monsignor Obando and blame us.'' The Archbishop sighs. ''Somoza said
the same thing: 'I'm afraid that the Sandinistas will kill you and blame me.'
And he tried to give me protection, which of course I refused, just as I had
refused the Mercedes-Benz he wanted to give me as a gift. Tell Commander Borge
that he doesn't have to send me protectors, because I already have four of them:
the Father, the Son, the Holy Spirit, and myself.''

He tells me that in late 1983 a peculiar incident occurred. On his way home from
a pastoral in the country, ''three armed men dressed as soldiers stopped the
car; only the driver and I were in it. They forced their way in and made us
drive to an isolated spot and park. In the darkness they insulted me and said
they were going to kill me. I always carry a two-way radio and I managed to
shout into it what was going on. This surprised them, and they ran away.
Apparently their orders were just to frighten me.''

Pastoral letters of the Nicaraguan bishops criticizing the regime have touched
on highly controversial issues, such as the conflict between the Sandinistas and
Miskito Indians; the church blames the situation on acts of violence by the
Government. But the pastoral letter of a year ago provoked the greatest furor
when it advocated a dialogue between the Government and the contras. The
Sandinistas have steadfastly refused to negotiate with the rebels.

It is, however, the church's frontal attack against Marxism, perhaps even more
than the economic crisis or external pressures, that has been a moderating
influence on the regime. The Sandinista Directorate recently established a
dialogue with the bishop's conference. While I was in Nicaragua, there were two
private meetings, one between Monsignor Obando and President Ortega, and another
between President Ortega and the president of the bishops' conference, Msgr.
Pablo Antonio Vega, but the results were not made public. THE PEASANT VILLAGE of
Cuapa is in the department of Chontales, in the center of Nicaragua. One night
in 1981 the sacristan, Bernardo, went into the church and saw a brilliant light
that radiated from the Virgin and illuminated the entire chapel. The phenomenon
disappeared when Bernardo switched on the electric light.

One morning three weeks later, when he was fishing along the river, the
sacristan suddenly felt great joy. The landscape around him began to change: the
sun was in eclipse, he heard birdsong and the rustling of leaves, and he saw
flashes of lightning. A cloud descended to earth. On the cloud was a beautiful,
barefoot young woman, with her hands clasped, a cape embroidered with jewels
wrapped around her, a crown of stars on her head. She had chestnut hair,
honey-colored eyes, bronzed skin. She stretched out her hands and a feeling of
warmth flooded through the sacristan. ''What is your name?'' he stammered. ''My
name is Mary.'' ''Where do you come from?'' ''From heaven. I am the Mother of
God.''

This first vision took place on May 8. There were four more, in June, July and
September, always on the eighth of the month. The sacristan was also summoned on
Aug. 8, but he couldn't respond because the river was in flood and he could not
cross over. In his last vision, it was not the young woman who appeared to him
but a little girl about 8 years old.

In the first vision, the Virgin asked Nicaraguans to say the rosary with their
families, and she exhorted them to love one another, to fulfill their
obligations and to make peace. She also said: ''Nicaragua has suffered a great
deal since the earthquake, and if you do not change, Nicaragua will continue to
suffer and you will hasten the coming of the Third World War.''

The message was unequivocal in the second vision. Bernardo asked her what she
thought of the Sandinistas. Her answer: ''They are atheists, Communists and that
is why I have come to help the Nicaraguans. They have not kept their promises.
If you ignore what I ask, Communism will spread throughout America. But you must
not leave the country; you must not turn your back on your problems. If you
listen to my pleas, Nicaragua will be the light of the world.''

Bernardo, a friendly man in his early 40's, tells me the story in a mild voice.
We are in the garden of a seminary in Managua where he is in seclusion. He says
that he still cannot reveal everything that Mary told him. He has that quiet
look of the believer that I find fascinating yet unnerving. He tells me that
when Monsignor Vega, who is the Bishop of Juigalpa, authorized him to reveal the
miracle, and crowds of pilgrims began to come to Cuapa, three Government
officials visited him and offered him a farm with good land and cows, free of
charge, if he would say the Virgin was a Sandinista. He answered that he could
only tell the truth. They offered a compromise: All he had to do was to stop
saying she was anti-Sandinista. ''I cannot betray her,'' he replied.

Then a campaign against him began in Barricada and Nuevo Diario, the two
official newspapers, and on television. He was called insane, hysterical,
delusional. One morning at dawn, the police broke into his house and tried to
kidnap him, but the devout who slept close by came to his rescue. Two years ago,
the church brought him to the seminary in Managua to protect him; he takes care
of the garden and regales the seminarians with stories of the visitations.

By the time Bernardo was moved to Managua, the Virgin of Cuapa had become an
object of veneration in Nicaragua. Tens of thousands of the faithful have
crowded into the village, sometimes led by Monsignor Vega and Monsignor Obando.
Whenever the censorship allows, La Prensa publicizes the pilgrimages and defends
Bernardo. The church hierarchy has let it be known that ''the petitions of the
Virgin were not in opposition to the teachings of the church.''

The efforts of the ''people's church'' to eradicate ''bourgeois mariolatry''
have been unsuccessful. During Commander Ortega's inauguration, Monsignor Vega,
who read the benediction, cleverly evoked the Virgin of Cuapa before hundreds of
guests and millions of television viewers. When the Valdivieso Ecumenical Center
tried to counterbalance this ''mariolatry charged with potential
counterrevolutionary politics'' with novenas that proposed a progressive and
revolutionary image of the Mother of Christ, the hierarchy declared the novenas
impious and denounced the center for anti-Christian activities.

This is not a medieval history. In Nicaragua today, belief or disbelief in the
Virgin of Cuapa situates people on one side or the other of the country's
ideological conflict.

HE NEWSPAPER LA Prensa is the voice and catalyst of the anti-Sandinista
opposition. I attend an independent-union meeting of its employees in Managua,
which has been called because the Government censor suppressed 60 percent of
their copy the day before and the newspaper could not be published.

All copy must be presented to the Ministry of the Interior by midmorning. Three
or four hours later, the Director of Media, Lieut. Nelba Cecilia Blandon,
returns the materials, indicating the paragraphs, articles, headlines and
photographs that must be excised. On the average, a quarter of the paper was
censored in 1984, and since censorship was established three years ago, the
paper could not publish 29 times. La Prensa has a ''morgue'' of approved texts
that it substitutes for those that have been cut.

During the meeting on Jan. 9, the eve of the anniversary of the assassination of
the paper's previous editor - Pedro Joaquin Chamorro (who was reportedly killed
by Somoza loyalists) - the staff gives a warm welcome to his widow, Violeta de
Chamorro, who often visits the offices of the newspaper which she owns. A motion
is approved urging President Ortega to abolish censorship and to end harassment
''of our workplace.''

Jaime Chamorro, brother of the slain journalist, co-edits the paper with Pablo
Antonio Cuadra. Chamorro is an important leader of the Conservative Party and
one of the most outspoken members of the opposition. He explains that Sandinista
persecution takes many forms: intimidation of the paper's distributors by the
''turbas'' that has forced 20 of its 150 outlets to close; denial of foreign
currency to the paper for the importation of raw materials; the withholding to
the paper of news items from state agencies, and pressure on contributors and
employees to end their association with the paper.

Despite all this, and despite the fact that the paper comes out as late as 6 or
7 in the evening in order to comply with the censorship procedures, La Prensa
sells all of the 70,000 copies permitted under the paper quota. On days La
Prensa cannot publish, its readers send in the price of the paper as a token of
solidarity and in recognition of La Prensa's symbolic value. ''I'll stay in the
country only until they close it down for good,'' says an engineer at a sugar
refinery.

Is the regime aware that censorship damages its image in the rest of the world?
''This is a war of aggression,'' Tomas Borge explains. ''Let the attacks and
sabotage against our country by the C.I.A. and the mercenaries end, and
censorship will end. We are at war, and every country at war uses censorship to
protect security.'' He adds that official publications must also submit to
Lieutenant Blandon's scissors. ''What happened to Allende in Chile is not going
to happen to us,'' says Daniel Ortega. ''Before the coup, the Government was
destabilized by the C.I.A.-controlled media.'' Several Sandinistas, Jaime
Wheelock among them, lived in Chile during the Allende period, and they are
haunted by what happened to the slain leader's party, Popular Unity.

Total censorship, however, is difficult to achieve. Photocopies of suppressed
texts circulate from hand to hand; people discuss them on the street and read
them to each other on the telephone. And the anti-Sandinista stations - Radio
Impacto in Costa Rica and the contras' September 15 that apparently broadcasts
from Honduras - are heard everywhere. But perhaps the most serious consequence
of censorship is the impoverishment of political debate in the news media. There
is, in fact, no debate: There are only attacks and mutual incomprehension.

The level of the two official newspapers is very low. Barricada is made up of
communiques and Nuevo Diario tends toward sensationalism. The editor of Nuevo
Diario is Xavier Chamorro, the brother of La Prensa's co-editor. Until recently,
Barricada's editor was Carlos Fernando Chamorro, son of La Prensa's slain
editor. A reserved, secretive young man who spouts the passionate and truculent
slogans of the Sandinistas, Carlos Chamorro is now in charge of the Government's
Propaganda Department.

In many minds, the Chamorro family has become a symbol of a divided country.
Violeta de Chamorro, an elegant, courageous woman whom history has pushed to the
front lines, assures me that her divided family (and there are many such
families in Nicaragua today) still meets occasionally for lunch, and that they
talk to one another cordially about everything except politics. Mrs. Chamorro
herself was a member of the Provisional Government, but resigned because of
differences with the Sandinistas.

Censorship has so exacerbated La Prensa's opposition to the Government that
although Lieutenant Blandon censors one-quarter of the copy every day, with what
remains the paper manages to strike a blow against the regime even when it seems
to be reporting the weather or the miracles of the Virgin. Nicaraguans decipher
the allusions and barbs just as the Spaniards did during Franco's last years
when censorship was beginning to weaken and newspaper readers routinely read
between the lines. La Prensa, which questioned the validity of the November
elections, never calls Commander Ortega ''President of Nicaragua.'' It always
refers to him as the ''Executive Officeholder'' - the same term Pedro Joaquin
Chamorro used for Anastasio Somoza Debayle.

OMMANDER TOMAS BORGE, Minister of the Interior, is one of the nine members of
the National Directorate of the Sandinista Front. He is the sole survivor of the
five who founded the Front in 1961. Born into a poor family from Matagalpa, he
went toschool with Carlos Fonseca Amador, another of the Front's founders, and
he began to conspire against Somoza when he was 14. He spent six and a half of
his 54 years in prison, five in the mountains as a guerrilla and 19 years in
hiding.

He is the oldest of the Commanders of the Revolution (the rest are in their
30's), the most talkative, the one most inclined to confuse desire with reality,
and the most amiable. He is a short man with curly hair, a broad chest and
vaguely Oriental features. His exuberance charms journalists. At a dinner with
foreign correspondents in Managua, the reporters unanimously describe Borge as
''the only Commander whose speeches aren't boring.''

If it is true that all Nicaraguans have a kind of natural addiction to poetic
imagery - Nicaragua has a higher percentage of good poets than any other Latin
American country - in Tomas Borge this trait has been honed to a perversion. In
front of the Ministry of the Interior he has hung an enormous poster that
proclaims the ministry ''Guardian of the People's Happiness.'' The title of his
book on Carlos Fonseca is ''Carlos, Dawn Is No Longer a Temptation.''

Writers are often guests at Borge's house. He is an avid reader, and I am
certain he suffers from a frustrated literary vocation. Although I sometimes
think he idealizes and colors Nicaraguan reality until it turns into science
fiction, at other times I am convinced that he speaks with utmost candor.

On the day of our first interview, we are in the simple house where he lives
with his wife and several young children. He says it is a shame I write good
novels but have such bad political ideas, and I respond by asking if what they
say about him is true: that he is the hardnose of the revolution, Moscow's man
and Cuba's tough guy, a fanatical Marxist and Communist. The part that bothers
him is ''hardnose.'' ''They say that about me? I'm the softest of the bunch. Let
me tell you something. If I had been the candidate in the November elections,
the bourgeoisie in this country would have voted for me. Know something else?
The prisoners' children love me.''

''We're the only revolution in the world that hasn't shot anybody, that has
abolished the death penalty,'' he says. ''And as for my police, all you have to
do is walk down the street to see how respectful they are toward the people.
This is the only country in Latin America where nobody's afraid of the police.
Just yesterday I sent some cops to break up a strike - the workers had taken
over the premises. I arrived a little later and what do you think I saw? The
strikers and the cops were having beer together!''

Days later, when he learns that I am going to attend Father Uriel Molina's
solidarity mass, he suggests we go together. We arrive early and walk along the
miserable unpaved sreets, past the shanties of plywood and tin in the Rigueiro
District. There is no wild cheering when the poor recognize Borge, but many of
them wave, call him by his first name, and some even brave his guards - soldiers
armed with machine guns - to embrace him. He is the classic politician: He
kisses babies, picks up children, and gives the pencils and ballpoint pens he
has in his pocket to anybody who asks for one.

After mass we go to eat at Lobster's Inn. The after-dinner conversation lasts
more than four hours. I ask him if he misses his life in the mountains. ''Not at
all. I'm a city man. Those five years as a guerrilla were terrible. A
guerrilla's life seems very romantic, but it's really monotonous, uncomfortable,
and your one daily, absorbing, obsessive concern is hunger.''

He asks me why I am not a revolutionary like other Latin American writers -
Garcia Marquez, for example, or Julio Cortazar. I try to explain, but he doesn't
seem particularly convinced by my conviction that without freedom all social
reforms are bound to fail sooner or later. He says that Fidel Castro, who spent
three days in Nicaragua for Daniel Ortega's inauguration, told him that in spite
of my criticisms of Cuba, he wanted to meet me but wasn't able to find me.
''Your police must be terrible,'' I tell him, laughing.

He assures me they are enormously efficient. ''We've infiltrated the contras; we
know all their moves and catch them like rabbits. I've even infiltrated the
C.I.A. We don't use torture, so our only option is to be very good cops.''

Toward the middle of January, Borge gives a dinner in my honor at his house. It
is one of the few chances I have to talk with Nicaraguan writers. I discover
that Nicaragua is like the rest of the world. Writers don't discuss literature
when they get together: They talk about other writers who aren't there, and they
talk politics. There are about 25 poets and novelists at the dinner, including
Ernesto Cardenal, Minister of Culture, who is an excellent poet. I have attacked
him for some of his outrageous demagogic statements, but every time we meet he
is very cordial and suave, acting as if he knows nothing about what I have said
about him.

Borge denies the insistent rumors that over and above his ideological
differences with Commander Jaime Wheelock (Borge is radical and Wheelock is
moderate) they despise each other. He also insists it is not true that relations
between himself and Daniel Ortega are strained because Borge wants to be
President. ''Revolutions are invincible,'' he says, ''unless they commit suicide
by becoming divided, which was the case in Grenada, where Maurice Bishop was
murdered by his own comrades. If we were disunited, the United States would
invade immediately.''

Borge's claim that prisoners are not tortured is disputed by Dr. Lino Hernandez
Triguero of the Permanent Commission on Human Rights. ''We have proof,''
Hernandez tells me, ''of tortures that leave no mark. Prisoners are locked
inside a dark cell for two or three months, for example. In the case of Dr.
Alejandro Pereira, a political prisoner, Borge's men made him listen to a tape
of his wife's voice pleading with him to confess to the charges against him.''

How many political prisoners are there in Nicaragua? There are conflicting
statistics. According to Borge, of the country's 6,000 prisoners, 2,000 are
Somoza's ex-guards and about 200 are contras. According to the opposition, the
number is much higher. Enrique Sotelo Borgen, a Conservative representative in
the National Assembly, estimates that there are about 10,000 political
prisoners.

Many of the prisoners accused of being counterrevolutionaries are in the Zona
Franca prison where, according to the Commission on Human Rights, there are at
least ''1,000 political prisoners in filthy and inhumanly overcrowded cells.''
The prisoners are allowed one visit every two months from one family member for
one hour. The visitors start lining up at the prison gate the night before. I
ask Borge for permission to visit Zona Franca; although he promises he will send
it, I never receive the permit.

At our last meeting, Borge takes me to one of the prides of his ministry: the
''open farms.'' At one, 14 miles from Managua, there are 59 prisoners - all
former Somocista guards - who plant corn, beans and other food products on a
125-acre farm. There is no security of any kind, and the farm is run by a
prisoners' council whose president, a former sergeant sentenced to 29 years in
prison, was Somoza's bodyguard. They have visitors every Sunday, and every six
months they can spend a week with their families. The farm has two rooms set
aside for ''conjugal meetings.'' According to Borge, there are seven ''open
farms'' with a total of 900 prisoners, who are chosen on the basis of good
behavior.

At the beginning of our visit to the farm, a former lieutenant in the guards who
has six months left to serve asks Borge for an early pardon. Borge makes this
proposal to the prisoners: ''I'll let him out if you promise not to ask me to
shorten all of your sentences.'' They agree. But at the end of the visit an
official comes to Borge with the case of another prisoner who signed into
Somoza's guard when he was 14 years old. He has been sentenced to 10 years in
prison, and has already served five. His behavior has always been exemplary.
Borge calls the prisoner over and asks him what he would do if he were free.
''I'd finish school and then I'd study medicine.'' Borge cuts the five years off
his sentence and gives orders for his immediate release. The young man begins to
cry. The cameras of the state-controlled television, which accompany Borge on
his tours, record it all.

HE SANDINISTAS boast of having received 67 percent of the vote in the recent
elections, but the organizational structures in Nicaraguan society make it
difficult to determine if the figure is a real reflection of the regime's
popularity.

The Cuban-style Sandinista Defense Committees organize the populace by street
and district. Anyone who does not belong is an outcast, since it is through
these committees that one receives the coupons to buy rationed and subsidized
basic commodities. The committees also grant the certificates of good conduct
required for obtaining passports, state jobs or student scholarships.

The committees have made a valuable contribution to the campaigns for literacy
and mass vaccinations, and they played an important role in the success of
police operations against crime and drug traffic. In Managua, there is no drug
problem among the young. It is safe to walk through any neighborhood, day or
night, and the American Ambassador has only one bodyguard in contrast to the six
needed by his counterpart in Costa Rica and the eight in San Salvador. The chief
function of the defense committees, however, is to spy on neighbors.

Besides these committees, other mass Sandinista organizations include the
official unions, which have not replaced the independents but have reduced and
marginalized them, and the People's Army, which now has compulsory military
service.

Although it is obvious that most of the population take part in these
organizations, it is also obvious that participation is often grudging because
it is unavoidable. Two days after my arrival, I spend a morning in Nagarote, 26
miles to the west of Managua.

About a week earlier, army recruiters - soldiers themselves - came to the
village at dawn and battered down doors in their search for deserters and draft
dodgers. The villagers reacted violently, fighting with fists and stones while
someone rang the church bells to alert those who were still asleep. The
recruiters retreated, but they came back with ''turbas'' armed with truncheons.
In the meantime, the villagers had torn up the paving stones and built
barricades in the streets. Nagarote was not pacified until midnight, after many
villagers had been wounded or arrested.

The dozen or so women who tell me the story in the village church, where
thrushes fly around the naves, are angry and frightened. ''They say they'll be
back tonight to take the girls away, too. They take away boys we've worked so
hard to raise just to have them die like dogs.'' The women also complain about
shortages, high prices, long lines and poor transportation. (The
state-controlled transportation system is awful: One day in Managua I waited on
line for an hour and a quarter for a bus, and once I got inside I thought I
would die of asphyxiation.) Three weeks later, I see 50 women, humble women like
the ones from Nagarote, in the hallways of Archbishop Obando's house. They are
there to tell Monsignor Obando about a similar though less-violent incident in a
Managua shantytown. The roundups by the recruiters in movie houses, buses and
sports stadiums is a topic that follows me around Nicaragua.

On the Atlantic coast, while I am waiting for a boat on the Bluefields dock, I
hear two officials talking about ''the kids who've gone to live in the woods to
escape patriotic military service.'' And in a Managua seminary, two young
seminarians - who were rounded up themselves as they were walking along the
street, and who were later released - tell me about the boys who waited for a
red light, disarmed the guards in the truck that was taking them away, and then
escaped. For much the same reason that many American youths evaded the draft
during the Vietnam War - to avoid getting killed - many Nicaraguan youths prefer
to go into hiding rather than serve the two years in the army fighting the
contras.

The explanation for the Government's recourse to a military draft, imposed in
January 1984, that is so openly despised by so many people is that the war
against the rebels leaves them no alternative. ''It's not only a question of
mobilization at the front,'' Vice President Ramirez tells me. ''Many of the
personnel protect public buildings and production centers threatened by
sabotage.''

More than 35,000 young men are believed to have been called up. In the
countryside, youths as young as 14 and 15, who have no papers on them, have been
rounded up. According to the Sandinistas, recruits receive a three-month
training program before they are sent out to fight. The families of such youths,
as well as opposition members, say that soldiers are sent out after a week's
training, if that.

Nonetheless, it would be wrong to assume that anger at Sandinista policies means
that every Nicaraguan who complains is an enemy of the regime. Every one of the
enraged women in Nagarote voted for the Sandinista Front. Says one of them: ''I
pray that with President Ortega's help, things will get better.''

The war, contra sabotage, the Government's totalitarian measures, a weakening
economy - all of these factors have cooled the once almost-universal support for
the regime. However, broad segments of the population, especially the poor,
still favor the Government.

They have received concrete benefits from the revolution in the areas of health,
education and land distribution, even though statist policies, combined with the
worsening economy, have often impeded these reforms. All Nicaraguans have access
to hospital care, for example, but the hospitals usually have no medicines to
give them. Lowering the cost of basic food products through subsidies has caused
a decline in agricultural production because it is cheaper for the peasant to
buy food in state-run stores than to plant it.

But the egalitarian impulse that motivated the reforms, the desire to make
amends to those Nicaraguans who had suffered neglect and abuse for centuries,
still holds immense persuasive power. Even Arturo Jose Cruz, a leader of the
Democratic Coordinator, the civilian opposition coalition, and the person least
likely to be impartial about the regime, recognizes this.

He is in Managua for a few days, and I meet with him in a small house in Altos
de Santo Domingo. Cruz, who now lives in Washington, is the best-known
opposition figure abroad. An elegant intellectual, Cruz became the president of
the Central Bank soon after the revolution and was his Government's Ambassador
to Washington before he broke with the Sandinistas. I ask him if any good has
come out of the revolution.

''Agrarian reform is a carefully conceived plan,'' he replies, ''and the
literacy campaign, rural development, the improved status of women - they are
all positive. But their most important achievement is that they have broken down
the tremendous class barriers that once divided society. The Sandinistas'
mistake is thinking that none of these accomplishments is compatible with
freedom.''

T OFTEN HAPPENS IN revolutions. Before their triumph, the dynamic power of their
call is centered on the libertarian impulse - hatred of the tyrant, of
repression, of censorship. Once in power, however, egalitarianism takes control,
and conflict between the two impulses is inevitable. This has happened in
Nicaragua.

Tragically, liberty and equality are harsh antagonists. At the heels of a
revolution, there is a temptation to establish social justice by sacrificing
individual freedom; conversely, a desire to safeguard liberty can lead to
further exploitation and unspeakable inequality. Real progress depends on
achieving a tense equilibrium between the two ideals. No socialist revolution
has yet achieved that balance.

The Nicaraguan revolutionaries who took power after a gallant struggle against a
dynastic dictatorship believed they were free to distribute land, guarantee full
employment, develop industry, lower the cost of food and transportation, end
inequality, eradicate imperialism and aid neighboring countries in their own
revolutionary struggles.

Five and a half years later, they are beginning to discover that transforming a
society is far more difficult than setting up ambushes, attacking barracks or
robbing banks. Furthermore, Marxist-Leninist slogans are no panacea for the
brutal conditions of underdevelopment, the broad diversity of human responses
and behavior, and the limitations placed on the sovereignty of poor, small
nations when they become pawns in the rivalry between superpowers.

In my conversations with Sandinista leaders, they appear to be gradually
learning the bourgeois art of compromise. Of the nine members of the
Directorate, the one who is reputed to have learned it best is 39-year-old
Commander Daniel Ortega.

I am told that Violeta Chamorro has called him ''the best of all of them.'' He
is also the quietest - a tough, somber man who seldom smiles. I accompany him on
a tour of the northern front where he visits war widows and orphans, as well as
soldiers wounded in contra ambushes - youths of 15, 16, 18 years of age with
ruined faces, hands, legs. Throughout, his expression of cold solemnity never
wavers.

On my last day in Nicaragua, he invites me to lunch with his wife, Rosario
Muril-lo, at their comfortable home (the house of a banker who went into exile)
in a well-to-do neighborhood of Managua. Rosario Murillo is a slender, warm
woman who is a poet and a representative in the National Assembly. Their seven
children, several from their previous marriages, live with them.

Daniel Ortega doesn't drink or smoke; he runs 3 miles and works 15 hours a day.
He began to conspire against Somoza when he was 13 years old, and he spent seven
years in prison for robbing a bank to obtain funds for the revolution. Although
the nine Commanders assert emphatically that they are absolute equals, Commander
Ortega, in fact, has been emerging as a leader, first as Coordinator of the
Governing Junta and now as President.

I tell him that my month in his country has been a schizophrenic but privileged
time for me. Every day, I speak alternately with Sandinistas and the opposition
who, from one hour to the next, offer me the most contradictory versions of the
same facts. I say I am alarmed by the mutual deafness between the regime and the
dissidents.

''We'll get to understand one another gradually,'' he assures me. ''We've
already begun a dialogue with the bishops. And now that the Assembly is
beginning to discuss the Constitution, we'll reopen the dialogue with the
parties that boycotted the elections. Perhaps it will go slowly, but our
internal tensions will be resolved. That's not the hard part. The hard part is
negotiation with the United States. There's the root of all our problems.
President Reagan has not renounced the idea of destroying us. He seems to
negotiate, but then he pulls back. . . . He doesn't want to negotiate. He wants
us to surrender.

''We've said that we're willing to send home the Cubans, the Russians, the rest
of the advisers. We're willing to stop the movement of military aid, or any
other kind of aid, through Nicaragua to El Salvador, and we're willing to accept
international verification. In return, we're asking for only one thing: that
they don't attack us, that the United States stop arming and financing . . . the
gangs that kill our people, burn our crops and force us to divert enormous human
and economic resources into war when we desperately need them for development.''

Rosario Murillo calls us to the table, and I do not have the chance to tell
Ortega that in my opinion negotiations with the Reagan Administration seem the
simpler of the Sandinistas' two major problems: the United States and the
civilian opposition. When the United States Government realizes that the
Sandinista regime will not be overthrown by the contras, and that a direct
intervention would be catastrophic for the cause of democracy in Latin America,
it will probably negotiate what are, in the long run, its greatest concerns:
getting the Soviet Union and Cuba out of Nicaragua and cutting off aid to the
Salvadoran rebels. I have no doubt that Commander Ortega and his colleagues will
grant that in exchange for peace.

What they won't grant so readily is what the domestic opposition wants: full
democracy and power sharing. Unfortunately, they are loyal to an old Latin
American tradition, one that they share with a good number of their adversaries.
They believe, although they don't admit it, that real legitimacy resides in the
weapons that enable you to take power, and that once you have power, there is no
reason to share it.

That is why it is so difficult for the regime to reach an understanding with an
opposition that tends to back itself into an all-or-nothing position. And yet
the survival of the Sandinista revolution depends on negotiation, agreement - or
at least accommodation - with its opponents. Perhaps that is not the ideal
solution for those of us who still support the ''forms'' of democracy, but it is
worth every effort to promote social justice within a system that is at least
minimally pluralist, to fend off the suffocating despair and injustices endemic
to Marxist dictatorships.

One night in Nicaragua, Don Emilio, the old conservative and political analyst,
tells me this: ''Our native Latin American culture is all powerful. It swallows
up everything you give it. It assimilates everything and eventually puts its own
stamp on it.'' I think to myself that is exactly what Ruben Dario did, that
obscure Nicaraguan who started out imitating the French symbolists at the end of
the 19th century and ended up revolutionizing poetry in the Spanish language.
Will Latin American culture swallow up the impatient Marxism of the Sandinistas
and turn it into something else, something better? The circumstances are
auspicious.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tomas Borge (William F. Gentle/Picture Group) (page 93); photo
of Enrique Bolanos (William F. Gentle/Picture Group) (page 93); photo of Luis
Perez in front of mural (page 46); photo of Fidel Castro, President Ortega and
Vice President Ramirez (Paolo Bosio/Gamma-Liaison) (page 42); photo of man in
defense office (Diego Goldberg/Sygma) (page 41); photo of women shopping in
barren store

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHO RUNS NEW YORK NOW?

BYLINE: By Sam Roberts; Sam Roberts is a reporter on the Metropolitan staff of
The Times

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 27, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4720 words


Edward Costikyan knows power when he sees it. For several years, beginning in
the mid-1960's, the Park Avenue lawyer and former head of Tammany Hall compiled
an annual roster of New York's 10 top power brokers - the most significant
individuals making the most important things happen. He gave up the list more
than a decade ago. ''If I wanted to do something today and was promised 10
people to make it happen, who would I pick?'' Mr. Costidyan asked rhetorically.
''I'd be hard pressed. Because when you say, 'What is power?' one question is,
'Is there power?' ''

There is power in New York City, but its nature has changed dramatically in the
two decades since Mr. Costikyan's days as a Democratic leader - days when public
officials like Robert Mosses bulldozed entire neighborhoods to make way for
highways; when labor leaders like Harry Van Arsdale of Mide Quill or John DeLury
settled strikes with a wink; when Gov. Nelson Rockefeller harnessesd his family
fortune to public office and imposed his personal agenda unpon the city.

''Who are the power brokers?'' a young Mayor John Lindsay asked sarcastically in
1966. ''They know who they are.'' They knew, all right, and so did everyone
else.

These days it's different. Power has become more diffuse as more and more
individuals gain influence.

Driven by the civil rights movement, by reaction to the war in Vietnam, by
Watergate and by a growth in participatory democracy in general, successive
waves of reform loosened the hold of public officials on the machinery of
government. The city's 1975 fiscal crisis spend this trend by redefining roles.
Elected officials had less money to distribute. Unions lost first claim on the
city budget to private bankers who held the mortgage on the city's future. An
expanding public constituency - the newly empowered poor - placed overdue
demands on city services while commanding a greater share of government funds
through mandated welfare assistance.

Political power has shifted from the central city to the suburbs, from City Hall
to the courthouses. The heads of virtually every hierarchal structure, from
good- government groups to organized crime, no longer command absolute loyalty.
Today, more hands grip the decision-making process; some never leave
fingerprints.

As a consequence, the people who are making the deals and shaping the future of
the city are, more than ever, private individuals. They never have to face the
voters; most New Yorkers don't even know their names. Although they often band
together to advance a specific project, they seldom evolve into an enduring
force.

The strength of the old power brokers was largely derived from the institutions
they headed. Personality, self promotion, visibility, intelligence and an
ability to conceive new ideas and promote them counted too, of course, but they
weren't mandatory. Since rank no longer guarantees power, these other attributes
have taken on a new significance.

Some of the deal makers who exemplify the new power elite are behind New York's
most ambitious blueprint for urban renewal in a generation, the Times Square
Redevelopment project. For decades, people talked about rebuilding the city's
commercial and symbolic crossroads. One plan after another was put forward, then
dropped. Finally, after four years of discussions, the city and state agreed
last year to a $2 billion package to be developed under the auspices of the
state Urban Development Corporation subsidiary. Why these negotiations succeeded
illustrates how power is manipulated nowadays, and by whom.

Although the state and city had worked together on the scheme for the 13-acre
complex of office buildings, theaters, hotel and merchandise mart, their
planners could not agree on which developers would get the lucrative contracts.
In 1983, a compromise was reached. Although the principal actors were the mayor
and the Governor, the go-between who arranged for them to meet was a respected
private political consultant, David Garth. The developers included Trammell
Crow, a Texas billionaire making his New York debut, who would operate the
merchandise mart; a Brooklyn condy company heir, George Klein, who would build
the office towers; and Jerry Speyer, the managing partner of Tishman Speyer
Properties, recruited at the last moment to oversee construction of the
merchandise mart. Advancing the interests of Mr. Klein and Mr. Speyer, among
others, was the ubiquitous public relations consultant Howard Rubenstein.

Competition among the developers and their lawyers and publicists for key roles
in building and operating the merchandise mart, the centerpiece of the project,
was fierce. The man who was able to assemble the final cast was Ben Holloway of
Equitable Real Estate Group (a subsidiary of the life-insurance giant), which
owns New York office buildings and hotels valued at $1.9 billion. Described by
one city official as the ''glue,'' Mr. Holloway managed to unite developers who
had never worked together as a group before and, most likely, never will again.

Minor characters in the Times Square scenario included activists on a local
community board, who gained promises of $25 million in neighborhood improvements
in exchange for their blessing of the project.

But some players who traditionally might have been included were left waiting in
the wings. James McManus, the Democratic district leader and scion of a
political dynasty that has called the shots on the West Side since the turn of
the century, was never consulted. Nor were the leaders of the building trades
unions. Not so long ago, they would have been called upon to do more than pack
the galleries for the project of this magnitude - they would have been invited
to share the glory of announcing construction jobs in return of their guarantee
of labor peace. A generation ago, their absence would have been unthinkable. In
fact, with the exception of the Mayor and the Governor, the principal actors in
the Times Square story would have been totally different. Groups of concerned
citizens would have been relegated to the balcony, but they would have been able
to name all the players without a Playbill. That cast had appeared together many
times before, sort of an urbandevelopment repertory company: the Rockefeller
family; Robert Moses; labor's Van Arsdale; Tammany's Carmine DeSapio, and
Francis Cardinal Spellman, if a Catholic school or hospital happened to stand in
the way, or if anyone had the temerity to plan a new store that would open on
Sundays.

Theodore H. White gave men like these their name: power brokers. The name stuck,
the power did not. supplementing - even supplanting - these power brokers today
are the process brokers: public-relations specialists like Mr. Rubenstein and
media strategists like Mr. Garth, lawyers and lobbyists who can fight City Hall
without ever having to go there. These people understand precisely which
ever-changing combination of players and rules can unlock the doors to the
community boards and the courtrooms. They know how to bring together various and
sometimes competing groups to make a deal and to get things done.

Mr. White has a name for these groups, too. He calls them ''constellations of
satrapies.'' More than ever before, the city's skyline and the everyday life of
New Yorkers are being shaped by these inconstant constellations that form on
single issues and then fall apart, only to come together again in some new
configuration when another cause becomes compelling. No politician can chart
their course for long; no single leader of labor or business controls their
movements.

Since they operate in a society run more by shifting coalitions than by a spirit
of common purpose, the deal makers are likely to be lured less by civic pride
than by profit. New York has always been a city of let's make a deal. Now the
game has become more complex. There are so many rules.

Real estate is to New York what oil is to Dallas. And, as a 38-year-old
wildcatter, Donald Trump is one of this city's most successful deal makers.

''Defining power in this age is certainly different than it was 25 years ago,''
says Mr. Trump. ''Things were done less delicately. You used to be able to bull
something through, but power today is much tougher to achieve.''

Certainly nobody now possesses the power of a Robert Moses. A quarter-century
ago, Mr. Moses held, all at once, the positions of chairman of the Triborough
Bridge and Tunnel Authority and the State Power Authority, parks commissioner
and city construction coordinator. If he was not above the law, it was because
he would have new laws drafted to justify his ends and his means. Without
popular consent, he managed to uproot tens of thousands of people to build some
of New York's greatest public projects.

However noble his goals, by his arrogant exercise of power Mr. Moses virtually
guaranteed that nobody would command such power again. It was the same with
other powerful officials of his era. Voters rebelled; the processes of
government were amended to make them less susceptible to secret manipulation.
Public officials, more accountable and less independent, could no longer
steamroll their pet projects.

But Donald Trump, with bucks to back his brashness, has managed to get things
done, big things, that many other builders have not. In fact, if Mr. Moses were
to be born again, he'd probably return as Mr. Trump. ''I'll say that I don't
think of myself as having power,'' Mr. Trump says, ''and yet if I want to do
something I seem to be able to get it done.''

He built the glittering Grand Hyatt Hotel on 42d Street and the glamorous Trump
Tower on Fifth Avenue, both with the benefit of property-tax abatements. He
bought the New Jersey Generals football team and signed up its star player, Doug
Flutie; he has offered to build a new 85,000-seat stadium in Queens - if the
city and state pay for and prepare the site. Late in 1984, when he purchased a
majority interest in the railroad yards west of Lincoln Center, he became, by
some estimates, the largest individual property owner in New York.

By no account is Mr. Trump the city's wealthiest man. But in Manhattan, where in
1983 31 people each reported making more than $10 million, what distinguishes
the very rich from one another is what they do with their money. Mr. Trump is
willing to spend his, and persuade his partners -like Mr. Holloway, whose
Equitable Group is an equal partner in Trump Tower - to spend theirs. Despite
his disclaimers, Mr. Trump understands that power, like muscle, must be
exercised to be maintained.

''Private power is always wealth or leverage over wealth,'' says Governor Cuomo.
''If Donald Trump comes to me and says he can build a $270 million stadium
without my money, that's power.''

Yankee Stadium - the house that Ruth built and Mayor Lindsay rebuilt more than a
decade ago - was the last major public works project to be completed by the city
on its own. Since then, virtually every change in the cityscape has been made by
private investors acting alone or in partnership with some public authority.

The expansion of Equitable's Manhattan headquarters one block west to a new
office tower on 51st Street later this year, for example, will mark a $200
million commitment by business to transform Seventh Avenue from a gaudy strip of
stores and X-rated-movie houses into what has been hailed as a spiritual
extension of Rockefeller Center. When James D. Robinson 3d, board chairman of
American Express, decided to remain in lower Manhattan and to situate his new
corporate headquarters at the World Financial Center, he too was making a
commitment to the city's future. And whenever takeover lawyers like Joseph Flom
and Martin Lipton devise the legal means to save or swallow a corporation with
offices or factories in New York, they are determining where, indeed whether,
people work.

Those decisions - whether to invest in New York or in the office boom in New
Jersey and beyond - are vital to a city in which the employment outlook is
precariously dependent on industries liberated from geographic constraints by
technology. These so-called switchboard industries are run (not owned) by a
generation of managers of multinational corporations who lack any sentimental
or, for that matter, economic stake in the city's survival.

The proliferation of red tape that hamstrings would-be power brokers gives new
importance to the process brokers. These people often comprehend the intricacies
of arcane zoning and tax laws because they or their partners wrote those laws.

They include such lawyers as John Zuccotti, the former deputy mayor; William
Shea, whose power is commemorated by the Queens stadium that bears his name, and
Samuel Lindenbaum, who has represented Mr. Trump and whose father was a member
of the City Planning Commission under Mayor Robert F. Wagner.

The premier publicist among the process brokers is Mr. Rubenstein, whose client
list reads like an interlocking directorate of who runs New York, from the Real
Estate Board to the New York Commodities Exchange to the Association for a
Better New York. For Mr. Rubenstein, focusing public attention on an issue is
only one step in congregating the coalitions required to accomplish his clients'
goals. He also has acquired an uncanny knack for sizing up grounds for
compromise. In 1983, for example, when some developers balked at their minimal
roles in the Times Square redevelopment, Mr. Rubenstein cautioned: ''You have a
long life to live in this city - don't be a warrior.'' They backed off and
eventually each was offered a slice of the pie.

''In the old days, a person with a problem would call a county leader,'' Mr.
Rubenstein recalls. ''Now they seek to form alliances. Where there were five
people who could do anything they pleased 15 years ago without going to jail
(and some of them eventually did go to jail), now you have 50 or 100 people,
many of whom we can't even identify.''

The turnout at the lavish 30th anniversary celebration of Howard J. Rubenstein
Associates last fall was itself a testimonial to Mr. Rubenstein's access and
influence.

''I came here for very selfish reasons,'' Mayor Koch said. ''I wanted to be
where the power is.''

Mr. Rubenstein returned the compliment two months later. He went to Mr. Koch's
60th birthday party, which raised nearly $1.8 million for the Mayor's
re-election war chest. The guest list was studded with city VIP's: Marvin Traub
of Bloomingdale's; George Steinbrenner of the Yankees; Jack and Lewis Rudin,
whose family is one of the city's largest owners of residential real estate
(Lewis chairs the cheerleading Association for a Better New York); Preston
Robert Tisch, president of Loews Corporation and chairman of the Convention and
Visitors Bureau; Robert Wagner, the wily former mayor, lawyer and sometime
process broker, and Mr. Trump.

The Mayor is the most visible symbol of power in New York, which is one reason
Mr. Koch's birthday party was a sellout. It also explains why he is booed at
baseball games and why people court him.

In his memoirs, Mr. Koch recalls a breakfast meeting, after his election in
1977, with businessmen and labor leaders; it was hosted by David Rockefeller and
Harry Van Arsdale:

''Rockefeller said, 'Can I get you some coffee?' and he went up and got me a cup
of coffee. Van Arsdale ran to get me a Danish. It was extraordinary treatment.
And the reason it was so extraordinary is that neither one of these guys likes
me and I suspect that none of the other 28 people in that room ever voted for
me, and they have had several opportunities. So it is the office.

''Now how do I know? Because half an hour later, Senator Javits walked into that
room. And over the course of one of the longest careers in the history of the
United States Senate, Senator Javits has worked for these very people. . . . And
when he came in, only six people stood up and they sent a waiter to get him a
roll.''* The capacity of any mayor to deliver may have diminished over the last
two decades, reduced to the power to say ''no'' to competing demands for money.
But Mr. Koch has made the most of what he's got. Like Governor Cuomo, Mr. Koch
has capitalized on his image as a political outsider.

Still, both the Mayor and the Governor function at the sufferance of the
legislative leadership in Albany and of the Federal Government. In fact, Mr.
Cuomo has singled out the Secretary of the Treasury as the most powerful figure
affecting New York,

* From ''Mayor'' by Edward I. Koch, c 1984, published by Simon & Schuster.
fearing that if the Secretary presses a proposal to disallow income tax
deductions for local levies it would drive business from high-tax states like
New York. Since his party is in power, Alfonse D'Amato, the aggressive
Republican Senator from New York, has become particularly influential. Locally,
other officials have influence in specific areas. Manhattan District Attorney
Robert Morgenthau and United States Attorney Rudolph Giuliani, for instance,
dominate the criminal justice system.

On another level, it can be argued that the street mugger exerts a greater
influence on people's lives than does the police commissioner; it is fear that
often governs what people wear, whether they ride the subway, even whether they
venture outside.

What power Mr. Koch has gained has come largely at the expense of two groups:
organized labor and the Democratic political organization.

New York is still a union town, and Albert Shanker of the United Federation of
Teachers, Barry Feinstein of the Teamsters and Victor Gotbaum of the American
Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees are among those whom
candidates count on to deliver contributions, volunteers and, perhaps, votes.

But the labor movement is not what it once was. During the fiscal crisis, New
York's municipal employees agreed to give-backs and deferred wage hikes. By
investing heavily in Municipal Assistance Corporation (M.A.C.) securities to
bail out the city, many union leaders were transformed from adversaries of City
Hall to junior partners.

Indeed, Harry Van Arsdale, who has chaired the New York City Central Labor
Council since 1957, now complains that ''success has had an adverse effect in
many ways on the labor movement.'' Once, a mere telephone call from Mr. Van
Arsdale could settle a strike or produce votes for some job-generating public
works project. But the balance of power has tipped from blue-collar to
public-service unions. In 1981, it took Mr. Van Arsdale two months just to get a
permit from the Police Department for the Labor Day parade.

Meanwhile, the party chieftains who were the labor leaders' traditional allies
no longer enjoy even the illusion of power. They are political retailers,
reduced to denying a judge renomination or exulting over the appointment of some
deputy commissioner. Roy Cohn, a lawyer who is registered as a Democrat and
whose law partner is Bronx Democratic leader Stanley Friedman, claims better
connections to the Reagan White House and the Conservative Party than any local
Republican Party leader. The Liberal Party has not recovered from the death in
1976 of its master of mirrors, Alex Rose, whose control of a line on the ballot
gave him a strong voice - even a veto - in the selection of candidates and in
public policy decisions.

Many elements undermined party organization: campaign-financing curbs, primary
elections, which replaced clubhouse endorsements, and the evolution of
television into a campaign tool available to anybody with money. In turn, the
use of televison gave rise to the media strategist. David Garth, who is credited
with engineering John Lindsay's re-election upset in 1969, annointed Ed Koch as
a credible mayoral candidate in 1977 just by joining his campaign.

No autocracy has escaped the effects of the changing social and political
climate. For more than two decades, Cardinal Spellman held the Roman Catholic
Archdiocese of New York, and to a lesser degree the secular city, in an iron
grip because politicians presumed that he was capable of delivering the votes of
the city's large Catholic population. When the Cardinal and his emissaries
spoke, City Hall listened to their opinions on how to run the hospitals, the
school system, the Family Court and other government institutions of concern to
the church.

Under Terence Cardinal Cooke, ''the Powerhouse,'' as the archdiocese's
headquarters was once known, generated less control, and politicians and
parishoners became less responsive. Nonetheless, during his short tenure
Archbishop John J. O'Connor, through force of personality and his shrewd use of
the media, has quickly managed to project himself and his philosophy into the
public eye - a Catholic Koch, some say. The Archbishop has challenged elected
officials who fail to express political opposition to abortion. One measure of
how times have changed is the public rebuttal delivered by Governor Cuomo, a
Catholic himself.

Philanthropy has also changed since the 1960's, when the Ford Foundation dreamed
of bridging educational gaps by decentralizing school districts. The creation of
three so-called demonstration districts had no conclusive beneficial impact on
education, but did manage to spark a strike by teachers and leave a legacy of
racial tension. Today, the foundation's programs and goals are often less
ambitious.

Brooke Astor, an unofficial arbiter of social status in the city, is still
powerful because she carefully calculates how to achieve the greatest possible
benefits with the money the Astor Foundation gives away - $136 million during
the last quarter-century. Mrs. Astor's brand of philanthropy is fast fading,
however; few individuals preside over such vast personal fortunes.

Today, recruiting Jacqueline Onassis to a cause, such as the preservation of
Grand Central Terminal, guarantees publicity. But Mrs. Onassis and others
contribute more by lending their names than by donating actual dollars. Some,
such as Martin Segal, the chairman of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts,
and Vartan Gregorian, the president of the New York Public Library, are powerful
because of their flair for fund raising and for building bridges between private
philanthropy and public purposes. Performers imbued with public spirit are more
likely to get together for a specific benefit or to cut one record on behalf of
the hungry in Bangladesh or Ethiopia than to endow enduring foundations that can
underwrite programs with long-term goals.

Even David Rockefeller, a power broker on everybody's list when he was chairman
of Chase Manhattan and when his brother Nelson was the Governor, is now regarded
as more of an elder statesman. While he has galvanized a broad representation of
the city's business community to speak with a single voice through his New York
Partnership, the group has been more successful at calling attention to problems
than at implementing solutions. Mr. Rockefeller's support of the Westway highway
and development project along the Hudson was not enough to nudge it through the
bureaucracy and a 10-year tangle of litigation.

''I've always found difficulty knowing what one means by power,'' Mr.
Rockefeller says. ''Certainly there's no way I can compel people to do what they
don't want to do. What I do have is the ability to pick up the phone, and that
facilitates things. They're simply willing to listen, and if it makes sense
they'll do it. I suppose you can say that's power.''

The greatest instruments of power,'' says Governor Cuomo, ''are ideas that will
win the loud consensus from the people and the devices that will communicate
those ideas to the people.''

''The media deliver the message and mold public opinion, and those who select
and articulate the news are the most powerful,'' he adds. The Governor ought to
know; he was instantly catapulted to national prominence by his televised
keynote speech at last summer's Democratic convention.

Others who have achieved power by publicizing their philosophy include Donna
Shalala, the president of Hunter College of the City University, and Felix
Rohatyn, a senior partner at Lazard Freres. Mr. Rohatyn's official power is
derived from his chairmanship of M.A.C., the grid of bankers and businessmen
that was imposed upon the city a decade ago to monitor its finances and borrow
on its behalf. But he is best known as a cerebral celebrity.

''My power,'' Mr. Rohatyn says, ''derives from my relationship with the
Governor, my independent position as senior partner of a successful investment
banking house and my ability to communicate with large numbers of people through
the press and through television. The only real power I think I have is whatever
power my ideas have to ultimately create change.''

Among New York's newspapers, The Daily News boasts the largest circulation but
The New York Post has attracted attention because of its sensational treatment
of stories. Since it reaches so many opinion makers, The New York Times is
generally perceived as playing a special role in setting the agenda of public
debate by its coverage of the news and its editorials.

Private individuals have used the courts to advance their ideas - and to have
them enforced. New York expects to spend $200 million this year to provide
shelter for every homeless person who needs it, thanks primarily to the efforts
of Robert Hayes, who, as a young Wall Street lawyer, filed a suit in 1979 on
behalf of homeless men. Similarly, Marcy Benstock, a community activist, and
Albert Butzel, an environmental lawyer, have succeeded in stalling the Westway
project for a decade through their relentless campaign of lobbying, public
relations and lawsuits.

Fewer and fewer judges hail from the political clubhouse, which might explain
their willingness to make decisions without regard to fiscal consequences for
the city - decisions that elected officials must weigh against the competing
desires of voters. For example, in response to suits by the Legal Aid Society,
in 1983 Federal District Court Judge Morris E. Lasker ordered hundreds of
inmates released from an overcrowded city jail. It is unlikely that any elected
official would have dared to make such a decision.

Once again newcomers are starting to ask, in various accents, for their share of
power. New York's most recent immigrants - arriving from Asia, the Caribbean,
South America, India, Pakistan and the Soviet Union - are boosting the city's
percentage of foreign-born toward the peak, 40 percent, reached in the early
part of this century. They are also replenishing the city's middle class,
although they are placing immediate demands on city services.

''Clearly the political structure is unbalanced racially,'' says Mr. Rohatyn,
noting that no black or Hispanic now holds elective citywide or boroughwide
office. ''These things don't remain that way.''

In poverty pockets from Bedford-Stuyvesant to Harlem, embryonic political
coalitions are mobilizing both the poor and an emerging black and Hispanic
middle class to speak with a louder voice. Early this spring, black and Hispanic
candidates were mounting campaigns for mayor, city council president and three
borough presidencies.

Given the complexity of government, whoever manages to gain office is likely to
discover that it was easier to build the city than it will be to rebuild it. If
the leaders are to accomplish anything, they will have to work with fluctuating
coalitions - larger and more fragile alliances than ever before. And they will
discover that it will take months or years to realize goals that a handful of
visionary power brokers could have achieved over breakfast only a generation
ago.

If television made the medium the message, then participatory democracy and the
accompanying constraints on public officials' exercise of authority have
elevated the process into the power. So many people now have access to the
processes of government that none, individually or as members of an elite group,
can reign with the impunity enjoyed by the power brokers of the past.

''If this is a phase, it's going to last for a long time,'' predicts Louis
Winnick, a deputy vice president of the Ford Foundation. ''It takes a powerful
threat that's felt by commonalities of people to cause them to plead for a king
again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER OPINION;
A HOMETOWN BOY RETURNS

BYLINE: By MARK H. MASSE; Mark H. Masse now lives in Cleveland.

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 32, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1478 words


IT was the season for Woodstock, Vietnam and the Amazin' Mets.

Cousin Brucie blared on the radio, while guys like Chuck McCann, Sandy Becker
and Officer Joe Bolton were TV favorites. A buck could get you a meatball wedge
and a Coke, with a pack of Devil Dogs or Ring Dings thrown in for a dime.

It was also a time of great dreams for one 16 year old from Harrison. This was
the summer of 1969, just a couple of weeks before the start of my senior year at
Harrison High, and I stood ready to reap the rewards of a lot of hard work, hope
and ambition. I looked forward to so many things within my grasp - starting on
the high school's championship football squad, winning a college scholarship,
dating the best-looking girl in the class, and sharing the kinship of my buddies
for one last great year before we all had to go out in the real world.

But my dreams never came to pass, because my family moved abruptly, just before
the start of my senior year. And my aspirations were packed away like so much
furniture on that moving van bound for Ohio.

It's not that life ended after Harrison, but my hometown existence would always
seem shortchanged, sort of suspended in animation, because I had to leave before
realizing my expectations. And no matter what I achieved in that high school in
Ohio, it could never compare to what I had hoped to conquer in Harrison.

Now, 15 years later, I was returning to my New York roots to be in the wedding
of Anthony, my oldest friend in the world. I went back with the anticipation of
having a good time and renewing acquaintances from half a lifetime ago. But
there was more to this trip than a simple homecoming, for I would unearth
memories that had been stashed away for years in my subconscious. It was in some
ways to be a bittersweet return visit to Harrison, not unlike reading some old
love letters from a girlfriend who broke your heart long ago.

Harrison is the kind of town bound to leave an impression; it is a richly
textured ethnic area that could pique the interest of many a sociologist. In the
broad brush strokes of memory, the town has always been a study in contrasts and
contradictions. Located minutes away from midtown Manhattan, it is considered by
some to be an affluent, picturesque New York City suburb, boasting country clubs
and posh estates. But there is another passionate side to Harrison, that of a
proud traditional town with an oil and water mixture of Jewish and Italian
families.

The children of these two disparate cultures attend the high school, which has
long had the distinctive, dual reputation of winning hard-nosed football
championships while graduating Ivy League-bound honor students.

As a member of one of the town's minority groups, being of French-Irish descent,
my years at Harrison High were a constant challenge. To succeed in the high
school required either physical or mental toughness; ideally, a combination of
the two.

On the day before Anthony's wedding, we toured Harrison, and images that had
lain dormant for years were suddenly brought back to life.

''How do you remember all this stuff?'' Anthony asked me as we drove through the
town.

He had befriended me long ago, when we were a couple of 9 year olds, and I was
the new kid at Harrison Avenue School. Back in 1961, after years of bouncing
between addresses, my family had decided to put down roots in Harrison. Anthony
was my first pal in town, and we remained close through boyhood, right up to the
edge of adulthood. After I moved, we stayed in touch despite the years and the
miles that separated us.

When I left Harrison in '69, Anthony was like me - a slightly hyper adolescent,
coping with grades, competitive sports and the frustrations of virginity. Now he
was a relaxed, confident yuppie, a 10-year veteran of I.B.M. and a man about to
honeymoon in the Caribbean.

''Remember getting drunk and driving around in Louie's GTO trying to pick up
girls?'' I asked.

''Yeah, we were too shy to get a real date, so we thought we could be macho and
hustle girls from a car seat. Do you know how dumb we were?'' Anthony replied,
shaking his head with a slight smile.

''That's why I identify with those Billy Joel songs. You know - 'hide the bottle
when the cop goes by, talk about women and lie, lie, lie,' '' I said gazing out
the window.

As we drove on, the floodgate of memories remained wide open.

''That's where I beaned Mike Seligson in our game of running bases.''

''No, the old pizza parlor used to be in that building next to the movie
house.''

''You, me and Steve drank Colt 45 in those bushes and froze our butts off.''

''Harrison must still mean a lot to you. I've forgotten most of that stuff,''
Anthony said, interrupting my time-traveling.

I realized that Harrison held no mystery for Anthony. He hadn't been taken from
the town before he was ready to go. For him, senior year in high school had been
pretty much what was expected. For me, the year was a time of forced adjustment
brought about by my sudden relocation from New York to a ''white bread,'' upper
crust, WASPish community outside of Dayton, Ohio.

Despite the years that had passed and the obvious developments in Harrison -
corporate headquarters relocated from New York City, condos springing up
everywhere, a new high school, and stores and restaurants with changed names -
much of the town was as I remembered it during the 1960's. Our house on Coakley
Avenue looked exactly the same, and several of our old neighbors still lived on
the street.

There were other landmarks of Harrison that hadn't been altered much over the
years. The Harrison High football team continued to be one of the powerhouses in
the metro area. The coaching staff, though different from my years was still
tough as nails.

''Yeah, we had those same three-a-day practices in 90-degree heat,'' said one of
Anthony's teen-age nephews at the rehearsal dinner. He had been a Harrison Husky
just a season ago.

When I lived in Harrison, the joke used to be that the football team was so
tough that the fans not only looked at the points on the scoreboard, they also
counted the bodies of the other team that had to be carried off the field.

While many of my hometown's buildings and institutions had remained intact, the
biggest changes that had taken place, both good and bad, were in the people I
had known - friends and classmates.

Bernie, our all-league quarterback, was now a successful businessman and
restaurateur in Tampa, Fla., and others from the Harrison class of 1970 had
followed him down there.

Carmen, the onetime greaser and brawler, had straightened out, and received his
college degree, in, of all fields, law enforcement.

Mike was now driving a cab in the Bronx and dealing on the fringes of crime,
just as he had done during his high school days.

Lou had gone from a shy teen-ager in love to a bitter man who had been through
two harsh divorces by the age of 32.

Don, whom we fondly referred to as ''Maynard,'' because of his resemblance to
Maynard G. Crebbs on ''Dobie Gillis,'' was immortalized in town, but not the way
any of us wanted. His was one of the names on the veterans memorial monument
near the train station. He had been killed in Vietnam.

Anthony's wedding went off smoothly, and there was a lively reception attended
by a host of his relatives, many of whom were surprised to find out that I was
the same Mark Masse who used to wolf down pizza pies with Anthony so many years
ago when we were a couple of chubby kids. Anthony's brother Bill, who had
coached me as a Midget Football League player some 20 years earlier, looked like
he saw a ghost when he met me. And I did a double-take when I saw Bill with half
the hair and about 30 more pounds than he had way back when.

As the evening ended, I toasted Anthony and his bride and wished them well in
their new life together. Then I began thinking about the return trip to
Cleveland, my current residence. I would go back with some questions answered,
but with the big question still baiting me as it had for all these years: ''What
would have happened if I hadn't moved from Harrison when I did?''

Because of what transpired back in the summer of 1969 and the speculation that
persists to this day, Harrison will always have a mystical appeal to me, and I
will continue to consider myself its native son no matter how far I am from its
borders. It was an ironic twist of fate that my parents moved from Harrison 15
years ago hoping to find a better way of life, but never finding another place
that enriched their lives as much. Even though we lived there only about eight
years, Harrison still serves as our family's hometown, a symbolic anchor for us
who are scattered across the country. That's why when we all get together for
our holiday reunions, one of the first questions we ask is: ''Who won the
Harrison-Rye game this year?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE HIT CAMBODIA REBELS TO BAR NEW BASES BEFORE MONSOON

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 497 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 25


Vietnamese forces, apparently trying to prevent Cambodian guerrillas from
re-establishing bases before the rainy season begins, have been attacking the
guerrillas at several points along the Thai-Cambodian border in recent days.

Fighting has been reported this week at Prey Chan, formerly Nong Chan, and at
Rithisen, two non-Communist guerrilla camps in Cambodia north of the Thai border
town of Aranyprathet.

Both camps, once housing large numbers of civilians who follow the Khmer
People's National Liberation Front, were overrun by the Vietnamese at the end of
last year.

Though the civilians are now in refugee camps in Thailand, the guerrillas have
never been completely driven from the area, and they have made sporadic and
sometimes successful efforts to regain lost ground.

Pursuing Communist Force

The Vietnamese have also been pursuing Communist Khmer Rouge guerrillas into
Thailand farther south, near the Thai town of Trat. The Vietnamese have not yet
been able to dislodge the Khmer Rouge leadership, reportedly still under Pol
Pot, from their command posts in the nearby Cardamom Mountains of southwestern
Cambodia.

Thai military officials said Tuesday that they had used artillery and mortars to
turn back a Vietnamese force that had entered Chamrak village, near Trat, in
search of Cambodian guerrillas.

According to the Thai Army, Hanoi's troops are also stepping up the mining of
the border region inside Cambodia in preparation for the start of the monsoon
rains in the next few weeks. Heavy early showers in some areas have already
begun to make the terrain difficult for the heavily armored Vietnamese,
according to Thai officers.

The beginning of the monsoon will be a critical time for the three guerrilla
armies, still loosely joined against the Vietnamese and the Phnom Penh
Government of Heng Samrin, which Hanoi installed six years ago.

Lack Support Systems

Deprived of more of their bases than usual in this year's dry-season offensive
by the Vietnamese, the guerrillas now lack the civilian support systems inside
Cambodia that sustained them in previous years.

It is also more difficult to draw recruits in Cambodia, especially for the
non-Communist forces. The Khmer Rouge, with the largest army and more access to
the Cambodian countryside, is believed to be recruiting by force in villages.

The followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the guerrillas of the Khmer
People's Front, however, say they have had to rely on defections to their ranks
from inside Cambodia.

Would-be volunteers had been led out to the border through well-defined routes
also used by smugglers. While the footpaths are still open, the guerrillas and
others say, the Vietnamese are making the journey more difficult.

Non-Communist guerrilla groups say they have changed tactics in the wake of this
year's intense Vietnamese offensive. They say they have ruled out the
re-establishment of large, vulnerable camps and will fight a hit-and-run war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA ISSUE AGAIN FLARES IN U.S.

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1060 words


Ten years after the United States withdrew from Phnom Penh and the Khmer Rouge
Communists marched into the city, the issue of what Americans should do about
Cambodia is again a matter of political dispute.

Among the subjects causing controversy among some academics, relief workers,
politicians and foreign policy analysts are how to view Vietnam, whose troops
drove out the Khmer Rouge in 1979 and continue to occupy the country against
Khmer Rouge and non-Communist guerrilla forces, and whether the United States
should continue to withhold recognition from the Government that Hanoi set up.

Other issues include whether the United States should give the Cambodian
insurgents military aid and whether it should withhold civilian aid from the
majority of Cambodians living under the Vietnamese-backed Communist Government
in Phnom Penh.

Some American scholars, policy analysts and voluntary aid officials, as well as
long-committed leftist friends of Hanoi, say they are inclined to trust
Vietnam's pledge to withdraw its troops from Cambodia if the Khmer Rouge are
disarmed first and no longer threaten to kill other Cambodians and menace
Vietnam's frontiers.

Distrust of Vietnam

Others - even among those who long opposed the Vietnam War and later urged
diplomatic relations with Hanoi - have grown to distrust Vietnam and to view its
motives in Cambodia as essentially imperialistic.

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who is known for liberal
positions on foreign policy, is among those suspicious of Vietnam's intentions
in Indochina.

''There never was a Pol Pot in Laos,'' Mr. Solarz said in a recent telephone
interview, ''but there are still 50,000 Vietnamese troops there 10 years after
the war.''

He was alluding to the fact that the Khmer Rouge regime of Pol Pot that the
Vietnamese ousted has been accused of causing the deaths of two million or more
Cambodians. The excesses are sometimes cited as justification for the Vietnamese
invasion of Cambodia.

The United States Government estimates that there are 150,000 to 170,000
Vietnamese troops in Cambodia.

Mr. Solarz proposed last month that the United States channel $5 million to two
non-Communist Cambodian insurgent groups, which are loosely allied with the
Khmer Rouge guerrillas. The House Foreign Affairs Committee voted 24 to 9 in
favor of the idea, and the Reagan Administration, in a subtle but definite
change of position, has expressed a willingness to go along if the provision is
passed by Congress.

Support for a 'Third Position'

''I don't for a moment believe that the non-Communist resistance can force the
Vietnamese out of Cambodia,'' Mr. Solarz said. But he said he saw a slim chance
that military pressure might encourage Vietnam to seek an acceptable political
solution.

''From my point of view I'd rather have the Vietnamese remain than have Pol Pot
come back, but I think there's a third position,'' Mr. Solarz said. ''The best
guarantee that the Khmer Rouge will never return is to strengthen the
non-Communist resistance.''

Until recently the United States formally opposed all military solutions. With
many other nations, however, it has also voted in the United Nations to consider
Pol Pot's exiled government - which now nominally includes the two other
guerrilla groups of Son Sann and Prince Norodom Sihanouk - as Cambodia's
legitimate government.

Mr. Solarz's military aid proposal has attracted more support than he expected,
but it has also been criticized. Some conservatives and other policymakers in
the State Department and the Pentagon find the idea needless and ill-considered.
Many liberals find it bizarre in light of America's past military involvement in
Indochina. Mr. Solarz likens the Cambodian insurgents to Afghanistan's
anti-Soviet guerrillas.

Most distressing to some liberals and the left is their perception that the
United States has seen Cambodia increasingly since 1979 as a pawn in a cynical
game of global strategy.

American policy, in the view of a prominent Australian academic, David P.
Chandler, has been more interested in ''encouraging Cambodians to kill each
other, and some Vietnamese, in the name of 'freedom,' '' than in recognizing a
potentially salutary ''Vietnamese hegemony over Cambodia.''

Joel R. Charny, who for the last several years has directed Oxfam America's
relief operations in Cambodia, said from the humanitarian agency's Boston
headquarters that one result of recent American strategy has been that Western
help to the great majority of Cambodians has dried up.

The United States and most other nations that oppose the Vietnamese-backed Heng
Samrin Government in Phnom Penh no longer give food, seed or agricultural help
to one of the world's poorest countries.

''The rationale is that the Soviets should help their clients,'' Mr. Charny
said, referring to Hanoi's alliance with Moscow. ''If they're not helping,'' -
and he said the Russians were not helping much - ''then I guess we're saying,
'let the peasants suffer.' ''

Mr. Charny said he saw some agricultural hope in Phnom Penh's willingness to let
the private economy supply most markets. ''On the other hand, it's still this
sad, awful country,'' he said.

''If you could see a glimmer of hope in the political situation, that would keep
you going. But no one cares. There's just deafening silence.'' Rights Report
Criticized Some Americans who have continued to support Vietnam recently
criticized a report on Cambodia by the Lawyers' Committee for International
Human Rights. In December the Lawyers' Committee, a New York-based group that
has often criticized right-wing Latin American governments, released a
preliminary report charging widespread torture and other rights abuses by the
Heng Samrin Government.

The group explained that it had examined the current Phnom Penh Government's
record because no other rights group had done so. It added that it had wanted to
visit Phnom Penh but had never received permission. Its interviewers met with
about 100 Cambodian refugees along the border with Thailand, and spoke also with
Pol Pot's associate, Ieng Sary.

The lawyer who drafted the 20-page report, Diane F. Orentlicher, said in an
interview, ''There are segments of the left community who have made it plain
that they don't think this is an appropriate subject for close scrutiny.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AVON BOOKS TO PUBLISH HARD-COVERS NEXT YEAR

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


Avon Books, a major publisher of paperback books, will publish hardcover books
also beginning next spring. Although it plans only about a dozen hard-covers a
year, including several titles from its backlist, Avon's decision is the latest
example of the blurring of lines between traditional hard-cover and mass market
paperback publishers.

That distinction has been eroding for some time. New American Library
established a hard-cover imprint in 1980, primarily to publish Irving Wallace in
that format. Warner Books, originally Paperback Library, has had major success
publishing a handful of books in hard-cover, among them the novels of Andrew
Greeley and ''Megatrends'' by John Naisbitt. Bantam Books began publishing
hard-cover books later than the other two houses, but it has also had
spectacular success; Its ''Iacocca: An Autobiography'' by Lee Iacocca with
William Novak, is one of the fastest-selling hard-cover books ever, and ''What
They Don't Teach You at Harvard Business School'' by Mark H. McCormack has been
a best seller for eight months.

At the same time, St. Martin's Press and Stein & Day have begun publishing in
mass market. And McGraw-Hill joins the mass market paperback ranks today with
the mass market publication of ''The Kennedys: Dynasty and Disaster'' by John H.
Davis, a book it originally published in hard-cover.

A Kennedy Contest

McGraw-Hill's decision was prompted by its desire to bring the book out in mass
market before Warner Books publishes its mass market edition of ''The Kennedys:
An American Drama'' by Peter Collier and David Horowitz, scheduled for this
summer. But McGraw-Hill will also publish other mass market titles.

''Books have many different lives and many different formats, and we think we
ought to be able to put them in the format that seems most appropriate for it at
the time,'' Walter Meade, president of Avon Books, said. He acknowledged that in
this respect, Avon was following the lead of NAL, Bantam and Warner. (Pocket
Books, the oldest of the mass market paperback houses, publishes hard-cover
books under the Poseidon Press imprint.) Several other paperback houses are also
about to follow that lead. In August, for example, Pinnacle Books will publish
its first book of hard-cover fiction, ''Winters Coming, Winters Gone'' by Allen
Glick, a story of a Vietnam veteran's painful return home. And in the fall of
1986, Berkley Publishing Group, whose combined Ace and Berkley lines have been
publishing 15 science fiction and fantasy titles a month in paperback, will
launch a line of hard-cover science fiction and fantasy with about six titles a
year.

The most successful blending of paperback and hard-cover science fiction has
been achieved by Del Rey books, the eight-year-old Random House imprint that has
published many best sellers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 30, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HISTORY AND HINDSIGHT: LESSONS FROM VIETNAM

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2968 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 29


For a month the public has been immersed in a flood of retrospection and
introspection about the Vietnam War, which ended 10 years ago Tuesday. The
outpouring indicates that many people are at least as interested in revising
history as understanding it.

It has been a time for recalling battles but also for refighting them verbally
as some try to apply the lessons of Vietnam to still unsettled ideological
disputes and to current political controversies, notably in Central America.

The conflicting interpretations and re-interpretations of America's last major
war may be especially bewildering to those who were born after the start of the
United States' direct involvement in Vietnam or those who were very young at the
time. Both public opinion sampling by polltakers and empirical evidence indicate
that the origins, rationales and purposes of the American experience in Vietnam,
and the conduct of American officials and soldiers, are obscure to many people.

But some of the main outlines of what a retired general has called ''the one
clear failure'' in American military history are clear.

The war was, of course, a vast human tragedy and contributed directly to nearly
immeasurable suffer- The author of this article, who reports on military affairs
from the Washington bureau of The Times, was a correspondent in Indochina for
five years. ing after it ended. It is clearly significant to recall the postwar
genocide in neighboring Cambodia, punitive repression by the victorious
Vietnamese Communists and the sad saga of refugees from all three countries -
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos - that once were French Indochina.

But to that accounting it is also useful to add the long effort to forestall
failure that cost 58,721 American lives.

The Defense Department says that 183,528 South Vietnamese regular soldiers died
and estimates that 925,000 North Vietnamese regular troops and guerrillas were
killed. The number of civilian deaths in South Vietnam was put at 415,000 and
the civilian deaths in the North were also large, but uncertain.

Defeat cost dearly, but so did the effort to achieve victory. No one can guess
what the price would have been to continue, or to resume, the conflict in the
mid-1970's.  Forgotten Mileposts Of Vietnam War Among the sometimes forgotten
historical mileposts of the war are these:

* The United States originally sought to avoid entanglement in combat through a
plan to create a durable South Vietnamese Army and society.

* When increasing North Vietnamese infiltration caused that hope to falter,
American troops were sent in force. This was matched by North Vietnamese
escalation, in a pattern that would continue throughout the conflict.

* Domestic support for the war eroded as the cost in lives rose.

* ''Vietnamization'' of the war, a gradual turning over of the fighting to the
South Vietnamese Army, was substituted for the politically unpalatable course of
rapid, outright withdrawal by President Nixon in 1969. During the American
withdrawal, South Vietnam achieved apparent progress from 1969 to early 1972,
suppressing but never strangling the military challenge to its existence.

* In 1972, the North invaded the South directly, using more artillery than it
had ever displayed and large amounts of seldom-seen equipment such as tanks.
That ''Easter Offensive'' was beaten back with the aid of very heavy, and
effective, United States bombing.

* The ''cease-fire'' negotiated in 1973 was a strategic compromise that left
more than 100,000 North Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam, and that did not
extinguish the North's determination to fight on.

* In the end, South Vietnam was overrun in 1975 in a period of less than two
months by a greatly reinforced Northern field army. The United States did not
attempt to reverse the rout by re-entering the conflict.  Some of the Footprints
Are Now Faint There were, however, many footprints between those milestones, and
some have tended to fade with time.

Narrowly defined, direct American participation in the war began in December
1961 in a glow of innocent optimism. The Kennedy Administration faced a slowly
growing insurgency in South Vietnam by the Viet Cong, or Vietnamese Communists,
supported and prompted by North Vietnam. Many officials traced the movement to
China.

An innovative solution was sought and adopted. The United States began not with
combat but with what was called ''combat support.'' It furnished combat advisers
to even small units of the South Vietnamese Army; provided and flew helicopters
to give that army an undreamed-of mobility; expanded the prowess of South
Vietnam's air force by placing American pilots in the back seats of fighter
planes, and attempted to ''win hearts and minds'' by introducing political,
social and economic advisers who at times had a presence in every South
Vietnamese province and district.

It began, in short, as a ''proxy war'' and with the deeply held belief, to use
the idiom of those first on the ground, that ''our little tigers can beat their
little tigers.'' Those involved did not entirely lose their American sense of
mocking self-appraisal. The Vietnamese for American adviser was ''Co Van My,''
and one of the scores of parody songs by anonymous young Americans went: Oh, the
Russian Revolution Would have never come to pass, If the Co Van My had been
there To advise the ruling class. But except in official, public proclamations,
the optimism faded. Maladroit efforts by President Ngo Dinh Diem and his family
in South Vietnam to smother political dissent by the Buddhist majority - and an
ill-concealed intention to purge senior army officers suspected of disloyalty -
led to his overthrow and execution by the army in November 1963.

One of the major but most forgotten aspects of the war, which has been the
subject of domestic debate in recent years that has intensified in recent
months, is that the United States began in an advisory role and by necessity
continued in that role in many important ways until the end came in 1975. But
for deeply imbedded social and other reasons, South Vietnam stubbornly resisted
much of the advice.

The memoirs of all informed American military and civil officials agree that by
late 1964 the proxy war was being lost. A major reason was the infiltration of
South Vietnam by ever-growing numbers of regular North Vietnamese troops. The
initially mild escalation of American effort was being matched by the North
Vietnamese, and it would never end.  Johnson Decides To Bomb the North Faced
with the clear possibility of defeat, President Johnson reluctantly supplemented
combat support of the South with United States soldiers, with the bombing of
North Vietnam and with attempts to curb the flow of men and materiel into the
South.

Many senior Johnson Administration officials said air power could be made to
persuade North Vietnam to cease fighting. Some argued that Ho Chi Minh, the
North Vietnamese leader, would choose to protect his industrial base rather than
continue the war.

Subsequent Central Intelligence Agency analysis concluded that even the great
weight of bombs dropped, which did very significant damage, never seriously
slowed the flow of men and arms southward. But mindful of how the Chinese joined
in the Korean War in 1950's, American officials tailored the pressure on North
Vietnam to prevent a possible recurrence.

The American troops first sent to South Vietnam, as well as air crews operating
from Thailand and ships of the Seventh Fleet in the South China Sea, were
well-trained and aggressive. Morale remained high for several years. The combat
units were concentrated in the nothern three quarters of South Vietnam, leaving
responsibility for the fertile, populous Mekong Delta mostly to the South
Vietnamese.

Many American soldiers now believe that a strategy should have been adopted that
might have ''isolated the battlefield'' by concentrating men on blocking
infiltration routes that air power could not successfully attack. Those soldiers
say that if needed, the defense line should have been extended westward into and
perhaps across neighboring Laos. The United States chose instead to fight what
was called a ''main unit war,'' in which American forces were sent out to find
and destroy the North Vietnamese regulars and the elite Vietcong units in
sparsely populated parts of the South and to wear them down through attrition.

For this plan to work enemy soldiers had to be killed faster than they could be
replaced, and a way had to be found to sap the North Vietnamese will to continue
the war. Neither goal was ever attained.

Col. Harry G. Summers Jr. of the Army War College has said that the American
execution of battlefield tactics was, in general, excellent and that of the
North Vietnamese, who were then fighting at a serious disadvantage in their lack
of supporting firepower and little artillery and no air support, was often poor.

But he added that the North had a clear strategy, which it relentlessly pursued,
to fight as long as necessary toward a clear goal. It is instructive to recall
the somewhat fuzzy war aims of the United States as set forth in 1967 in an
''Official Report on The War In Vietnam'' by the Pacific forces commander, Adm.
Ulysses S. G. Sharp, and the Vietnam field commander, Gen. William C.
Westmoreland.  Fuzzy Goal Outlined By U.S. Command They wrote that the United
States goal was to provide a secure environment in which the South Vietnamese
could live and a legal government could function.

But if victory had not quite arrived by 1967, what came to be called ''the
victory campaign'' had been started by President Johnson and senior officers and
officials in Vietnam. General Westmoreland said he believed the ''crossover
point'' had been reached in which enemy troops were falling faster than they
could be replaced and that victory in the war was perhaps three years away.

In one of the nearly innumerable, but understandable, contradictions of Vietnam,
General Westmoreland also now recalls that he told the President that unless he
was reinforced the enemy could probably continue the war indefinitely.

In the meantime, an originally feeble but increasingly powerful antiwar protest
movement had developed in the United States. Its dogma was based on some myths
about the nature of the conflict and of the Vietnamese factions involved that
were at least as flawed as some of the myths of officials prosecuting the war.
Press Is Often Blamed For Negative Accounts It has become common to blame
pessimistic press accounts of the conduct and progress of the war for an erosion
of public support in the United States. But the fervor of the antiwar movement
does not appear to have rested on war weariness. To that movement bad news from
the battlefield was good news in that the American dissidents yearned not to win
the war but to end it.

The North Vietnamese Tet Offensive of early 1968 - the name came from the lunar
new year holiday during which the push began - was a great watershed of the war.

From many documents it now seems clear that the Communist forces expected to
cause a ''general uprising'' of the Southern population by widespread attacks on
cities and a collapse of the South Vietnamese Army and Government, forcing the
United States to pull out by this collapse rather than outright defeat.

What happened was that the Communists suffered a serious tactical military
defeat, in which much of the indigenous Vietcong guerrillas were killed. In
retrospect, though, it is not possible to call it a strategic failure since the
enemy persisted and ultimately won.

Tet was a serious shock to American domestic opinion, partly because it called
into question the optimistic official appraisals of 1967.  Bombing Is Halted;
Talks Are Begun President Johnson withdrew from the 1968 Presidential race,
ordered a nearly complete bombing halt of the North and sought to end the war
through diplomatic talks. A new cadre of Administration officials abandoned both
the goal of victory and of prolonged, indefinite American participation.

After his election, President Nixon chose to begin the withdrawl that critics of
the war had sought, but at a pace that infuriated those weary of the war.

In his latest book, Mr. Nixon contends that the United States-South Vietnamese
alliance had ''won'' the war by the time a truce was signed in 1973. But the
agreement left large North Vietnamese forces in the South and an unenforceable
formula for further negotiations aimed at ''solving'' the conflict.

In early 1975, a major North Vietnamese attack in the Central Highlands led to a
panicky retreat by South Vietnamese forces there, leaving the South severed.

American Congressional restrictions on the size of logistical support for the
South undoubtedly contributed to the surprisingly rapid South Vietnamese defeat.

North Vietnamese troops encircled Saigon closely and in shelling on April 29,
1975, closed the airport to fixed-wing aircraft, also killing two Marines who
became the last uniformed Americans to die in the war. On April 29 and 30,
helicopters evacuated 1,373 Americans and 5,595 anti-Communist Vietnamese to
American ships offshore.

About 50,000 Vietnamese had previously been evacuated by airplane; perhaps three
times that number had flown out with privately purchased tickets. About 70,000
Vietnamese escaped in the last days by small boats and ships.  Tanks From North
Roll Into Saigon By mid-day on April 30, North Vietnamese tanks entered the
South Vietnamese presidential palace grounds, and the long war was over.

In a recent book, Gen. Bruce Palmer Jr. cites the South's inabililty to make
quick strategic countermoves as an important element in the defeat. Some of the
problem was self-imposed through a sort of residential and regional character of
South Vietnamese units, who lived with and were reluctant to leave their
families, and some imposed by an unforgiving geography.

There are so many different ''causes'' of the Vietnam defeat that, as recent
analysis has shown, it is possible to be highly selective in cataloging them.

Conservatives tend to blame timidity by the press and by Congress for
undermining support for a war that might have been won with a more prolonged
effort. Others blame inherent weaknesses in the South Vietnamese proxy. Any
single thesis can be difficult, at least, to refute.

But General Palmer and some other soldiers cite a factor with which it is hard
to quarrel: ''The criticality of the time factor.'' After hard, direct combat
from 1965 to 1969, the United States had been unable to finish a bitter and
divisive war.

Present-day arguments that the United States ''won'' the conflict did not seem
plausible to much of the nation then. Some form of withdrawal seemed unavoidable
even to strong adherents of the cause, including the Nixon Administration.
Withdrawals seldom end in success.

AMERIC IN VIETNAM

United Press International Evacuation of U.S. Embassy in Saigon 1950 May 8 -
President Truman provides U.S. aid to French military in Indochina; 35 American
advisers are sent to Vietnam. 1954 July - Geneva Conference on Indochina brings
a cease-fire and temporarily divides the country. October - President Eisenhower
pledges direct American aid to the South Vietnamese Government. 1961 Nov. 16 -
President Kennedy increases number of military advisers to South Vietnam. 1964
August - American and North Vietnamese forces clash in Gulf of Tonkin. Aug. 7 -
Congress grants President Johnson authority to ''take all necessary steps to
repel armed attacks against the forces of the United States and to prevent
further aggression.'' (Gulf of Tonkin Resolution.) 1965 Feb. 8 - U.S. begins
bombing of North Vietnam. March 8 - First American ground combat troops arrive
in Vietnam. 1968 Jan. 30 - Tet offensive brings Vietcong attacks on more than
100 towns and bases. March 31 - President Johnson announces partial cessation of
bombing of North Vietnam, opening the way for talks, and says he will not seek
re-election. 1969 Jan. 25 - Paris peace talks begin in earnest. Nov. 3 -
President Nixon calls for ''Vietnamization'' of the war, orders staged
withdrawal of American troops. 1970 March 27 - U.S. troops enter Cambodia to
destroy North Vietnamese supply bases. 1971 June - July - Secret peace
negotiations with North Vietnam begun by Henry A. Kissinger, Presidential
adviser. 1972 Aug. 12 - Last U.S. ground combat troops leave South Vietnam. Dec.
30 - Christmas bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong harbor. 1973 Jan. 23 - Truce
agreement signed in Paris, cease-fire in Vietnam. March 29 - Last U.S. military
personnel leave South Vietnam. April 1 - U.S. prisoners of war released. 1975
April 30 - Fall of Saigon. Evacuation of American Embassy. America in Vietnam
America in Vietnam The Commitment The Aftermath Manpower Money Evacuation
Americans who served: 3,330,000 Americans killed: 58,721; killed in battle:
47,655 Americans wounded: 303,713 Americans taken prisoner: 839 Returned: 691
Escaped: 34 Died in captivity: 114 Americans still classified as missing: 2,477
Americans awarded the Medal of Honor: 238 American aid to South Vietnam
(1955-1975): $24 billion. Direct American expenditures for the war: $165
billion. The Evacuation Americans evacuated: 1,373 Vietnamese evacuated: 5,595
Value of U.S. military equipment seized by Communists: $5 billion Military and
civilian dead (all forces): 1,313,000 Land defoliated: 5.2 million acres
Indochinese refugees: 9,000,000 Living U.S. veterans with Vietnam service:
2,700,000 Vietnam veterans receiving Government compensation: 500,000 Disabled
U.S. Vietnam veterans: 519,000 Sources: ''The Vietnam Experience,'' Vol. 1,
c1981 Boston Publishing Company; Defense Department

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Vietnam (page A6); photo of evacuation of U.S. Embassy in Saigon
(UPI) (page A6)

TYPE: CHRONOLOGY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 30, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE TALK OF PENSACOLA;
PORT CITY WOOS BATTLESHIP SQUADRON

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: PENSACOLA, Fla.


Four centuries after the Spanish discovered there was no El Dorado hidden in the
piney hills above Pensacola, there are hopes once again that this old Gulf port
is going to hit pay dirt.

This time hopes are pinned on the Navy's plan to assign a new battleship
squadron to the Gulf of Mexico as the military bolsters its ability to meet
future tasks in this hemisphere. Pensacola, with its deepwater bay and its naval
air station, is considered a leader in the competition for designation this
spring as the home port.

If Pensacola is chosen, all or most of the squadron's nine large ships of war,
including the refitted battleship U.S.S. Wisconsin, would be based here, adding
an estimated $50 million a year to the local economy and bringing in 9,000
sailors and their dependents. The naval air station, which dates to 1914,
already has some 16,000 officers and enlisted men.

Worry About Development

But there is concern about how the squadron would affect an area already under
pressure from development.

''A lot of people are afraid that Pensacola will turn into just another Navy
town like Norfolk,'' Peter McDavid, a local lawyer, said as he sipped a drink
the other night in Trader Jon's, which for 35 years has been a home away from
home for Navy fliers.

''That many more sailors will change the tone of this city,'' Mr. McDavid said.

''So what?'' shot back his drinking companion, a lawyer and former Navy pilot
who said his name was Tom. ''I'm all for it. I live and die by the Navy. The
Navy paid for my education and taught me to fly. It's not every day you get a
$50 million shot in the arm.''

The prospect of a changing future comes as Pensacola tries to preserve its
historic past, four centuries marked by turns of high hopes and deflation. The
Spanish, who arrived here in 1559, six years before St. Augustine was founded,
despaired of making the area a profitable settlement. There were also hurricanes
that blew suddenly out of the gulf and plagues of yellow fever. Even so, the
natural port attracted other empire-builders; by the end of the Civil War
Pensacola had changed hands 13 times in three centuries.

Since then Pensacola has slumbered in uneventful obscurity, though there was a
surge of tourists at Fort Pickens on Santa Rosa Island across the bay when
Geronimo and 20 of his Apache warriors were imprisoned there in 1886.

Pensacola's economy was sustained by lumber and turpentine interests until the
yellow pine forests were exhausted, and later by the air station, which brought
Pensacola pride as the cradle of naval aviation.

''Now,'' said Norman Simons, curator of Pensacola Historical Museum, ''growth
has been so incredible in the past four or five years that we stand to lose our
national historic designation if any more new buildings are put up in the old
section on the waterfront.'' The museum is inside the 150-year-old Christ Church
in the Seville district of the city.

Once a roaring red-light district that drifted into disuse and neglect, the
Seville district has undergone extensive changes in recent years to attract
tourists and restore a taste of nightlife to the waterfront. Old wood homes now
house antiques and boutiques, and converted brick warehouses offer trendy bars,
restaurants and jazz bands.

The topless dancers have gone, but little else seems changed since Martin
Weissman, a New Yorker, opened Trader Jon's in a former brick warehouse in 1950.
He still works the bar, wearing unmatched socks, patched shorts and hats and
T-shirts sent by Navy men around the world. The juke box bangs out hits, pool
balls click sharply, and men sit at the bar on leather-covered barber chairs.

''You never know who'll show up here,'' said Tom, the lawyer and former Navy
pilot. An admiral or an astronaut might walk in, he said, or a onetime flier
showing his grandchildren his picture as a young cadet among the thousands of
smiling faces all over the walls.

Overhead, old flags and insignia are spread like tapestries. Model combat planes
hang on wires, and various reminders of cadet days at Pensacola stud the walls.

The hit movie ''An Officer and a Gentleman'' was not filmed here because
Pensacola officials thought the script portrayed aviation cadets in a bad, that
is to say oversexed, way. But the off-duty hangout in the film, ''T. J.'s,'' got
good reviews here for its packs of husband-hunters and a raunchiness redolent of
the real Trader Jon's.

When four young local people were being tried a few blocks away in the bombing
of abortion clinics, the proceedings got only derisory mention at Trader Jon's.
''It's crazy,'' Tom said. ''Hey, I used to bomb people in Vietnam, but this is
America!''

Of Fliers and Sailors

Most of the talk dwells on a 70-year-old topic: the qualitative difference
between ships and planes, and the people who run them. Mr. McDavid, the other
lawyer, worries that a battleship base here would mean conflict between the
''brown shoe'' Navy, the fliers, and the ''black shoe'' Navy, the sailors.

''How're they going to get along in one small town like Pensacola, huh?''
another bar patron asked.

To a mention of stiff competition from Corpus Christi, Tex., Tom harrumphed.
Pointing to one of the pictures on the wall, he said: ''That there's John
Lehman, Secretary of the Navy. He's a Naval aviator, class of 1965, and that's
why the battleship's coming to Pensacola, right?''

''Right!'' the others sang out, and the smiling face seemed to look down with a
special benevolence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Seaman Anthony Benavidez; photo of Martin Weissman (NYT/Gary
McCracken)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 30, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TWO HAWKS AND A DOVE: HOW THEY LOOK AT THE INDOCHINA WAR NOW

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 423 words


The passage of time has not dulled the bitterness that the former United States
Ambassador to South Vietnam, Graham A. Martin, feels over the loss of the
Vietnam War.

Now retired and living in Winston-Salem, N.C., the 72-year-old career diplomat
remains sharply critical of the roles played by peace activists, American news
organizations and the Central Intelligence Agency in the days before an
evacuation helicopter lifted him off the roof of his embassy in Saigon on April
30, 1975.

''In the end,'' he said in a recent telephone interview, ''we simply cut and
ran. The American national will had collapsed and we made it plain we would no
longer provide aid to the South Vietnamese.''

When that happened, he said, the South Vietnamese President, Nguyen Van Thieu,
''had no choice but to withdraw his troops from the highlands, and that touched
off the panic that led to the final collapse.''

'I Had No Illusions'

Asked whether the events had taken him by surprise, Mr. Martin replied:

''I'd served as Ambassador to Thailand from 1963 to 1967, and I had no illusions
about the situation in Indochina. I never believed that American troops should
get involved, because I didn't believe our country knew enough about this kind
of war to fight it effectively. For that reason, I kept the United States out of
the insurgency war in Thailand during my four years there, and Thailand has
survived to this day.

''Nevertheless,'' said Mr. Martin, who went to Saigon in 1973, ''I found the
situation in Vietnam when I arrived there infinitely better than I'd been led to
believe. The Saigon Government was effectively in control of the country. But
even though American troops had been withdrawn from the country by then - and
even though most of the prisoners of war had returned home - the peace movement
in the United States became ever more strident. McGovern and the rest kept
insisting that we pull out, and in the end, we simply discarded the agreement we
had made to maintain support for South Vietnam.''

Mr. Martin contends that the American press was largely responsible for the ebb
in American will to sustain South Vietnam.

''I began my career as a newspaper reporter,'' he said, ''and I left journalism
young enough and naive enough to believe that the press was a real profession
and that it has an obligation to tell the truth. I still have a great love for
the press, but it has not always served the American people as well as it
might.''

Saigon was Mr. Martin's last foreign post, and he retired in 1977.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Graham Martin (NYT/Donna Bise)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 30, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TWO HAWKS AND A DOVE: HOW THEY LOOK AT THE INDOCHINA WAR NOW

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 471 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 29


Dean Rusk says the lesson of the Vietnam War is that the United States should
look very carefully at the possible implications before it enters into any
security treaties.

Noting that the Southeast Asian Treaty Organization was worked out by the United
States without much discussion or debate in 1954, he said the accord turned out
to be the document that obligated Washington to come to the support of South
Vietnam.

In a recent telephone interview from Athens, Ga., where he is a professor at the
University of Georgia Law School, Mr. Rusk said one factor that led President
Kennedy to increase the American role in Vietnam was concern over how it would
look to Nikita S. Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, if he did not stand by the
Seato treaty.

''When President Kennedy made the first decision to increase significantly the
American military presence in 1962-63,'' Mr. Rusk said, ''he had in mind two
things: What would have happened if Khrushchev had not believed him in the
Berlin crisis of 1961-62, and what would have happened if Khrushchev did not
believe Kennedy in the Cuban missile crisis of 1962?''

''I have looked back on that,'' Mr. Rusk said. ''There was almost no public
debate, and it was treated very lightly in the Senate.''

''The fidelity of the United States to security treaties is not just an empty
matter,'' he said. ''It is a pillar of peace in the world.''

Served Kennedy and Johnson

Mr. Rusk, now 76, was Secretary of State from 1961 to 1969, under Presidents
Kennedy and Johnson. During the war, he never backed away from expressing the
need for the United States to hold firm until the North Vietnamese were willing
to negotiate a settlement.

Some critics today assert that the United States should have used much greater
military power, rather than undertake gradual escalation. But Mr. Rusk says,
''We took the situation very seriously in order to prevent the war from
expanding into a war with the Soviet Union or China, sliding into World War III.

''I think we made a mistake in concluding that the Chinese would probably not
intervene in the Korean War in 1950,'' he said, and that influenced the American
decision not to invade North Vietnam. ''The military said they did not think
China would come in, but if it did, it would lead to nuclear war,'' he said,
''and that decided that.''

He said American public opinion stayed with the Vietnam War for a long time. The
''turning point,'' he said came in 1968 when it became clear that no one could
say when the war would end. That is when, he said, the public became determined
to bring the war to an end.

In 1968, the North Vietnamese carried out a major offensive during the Tet
holiday that, while a military setback to them, had the psychological effect of
indicating to Americans that the war could not be easily ended.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dean Rusk (Alan S. Weiner)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 30, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TWO HAWKS AND A DOVE: HOW THEY LOOK AT THE INDOCHINA WAR NOW

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 374 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 29


When J. William Fulbright was asked one recent day what he had learned from the
Vietnam experience, he replied, ''Not to trust Government statements.''

''I try not to think about Vietnam,'' he said. ''It was one of the worst periods
in our country's history.'' Mr. Fulbright was a Democratic Senator from Arkansas
and chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee during the American involvement
in the war.

He changed during that period from a supporter of President Johnson's foreign
policy to one of his most outspoken critics.

The Fulbright committee hearings produced some of the highest drama in
Washington in those years as the Senator and Administration witnesses squared
off on war issues.

Mr. Fulbright, who still lives in Washington, turned 80 earlier this month. He
remains what he became then: a major dissenter from American foreign policy.

'Biggest Lesson I Learned'

''The biggest lesson I learned from Vietnam,'' he said, ''is not to trust
Government statements. I had no idea until then that you could not rely on
Government statements.''

Mr. Fulbright's disillusion with Mr. Johnson's policies began in 1965 after the
President sent American troops to the Dominican Republic. The Senator began to
believe, as the result of his committee's hearings, that Mr. Johnson had
deceived the public about his reasons for sending the troops. That led Mr.
Fulbright to raise questions about the justification for American soldiers in
Vietnam.

In an interview, Mr. Fulbright did not seem interested in discussing Vietnam so
much as the current situation in Central America. He contended that, while he
had no solid information, the Reagan Administration was hiding the facts about
what is happening there.

''The American people don't have any idea of what is going on in Central
America,'' Mr. Fulbright said. He said he had also been convinced by a book he
had just read that the South Korean airliner that was shot down in September
1983 by the Soviet Union was on a spy mission, even though that view is not
widely shared.

''They fit the facts to fit the policy,'' he said of officials' statements on
Vietnam and Central America. ''We made a great mistake in Vietnam and are making
another one in Central America.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of J. William Fulbright (NYT/George Tames)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 30, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MODEL OF SHRINE GETS SHOWING IN NEW YORK

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 163 words


A full-sclae of a part of the New York Vietnam Veterans Memorial was exhibited
yesterday in a ceremony at the Municiapl Art Society.

The memorial, designed by Wormser & Fellows Architects and erected at a cost of
$900,000 is a 66-foot-long structure composed of glass blocks and granite
mantles. The translucent glass is etched with passages from letters home written
by soldiers fighting in Vietnam and excerpts from speeches and news dispatches
from the period.

The memorial is situated at Vietnam Veteran's Plaza, adjacent to 565 Water
Street in Lower Manhattan. It will be formally dedicated by Mayor Koch next
Mondat at 9:30 p.m., and there will be a ticker-tape parade next Tuesday in
honor of some of the 250,000 vietnam Veterans from New York.

An exhibition displaying models of the monument and explaining its history and
construction will be open to the public beginning today through June 1st at the
Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue, at 51st Street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 30, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


TUESDAY, APRIL 30, 1985



International

The President said it's morally right to visit a German war cemetery and said
the purpose of his visit to Bitburg was to symbolize ''the great
reconciliation'' between the United States and Germany. On the eve of his
departure for a 10-day European trip, Mr. Reagan declared firmly that he would
visit the cemetery where the dead include 49 Waffen SS soldiers. [Page A1,
Column 2.]

West Germany rejected warnings that its plans for President Reagan's state visit
would profoundly damage relations with Washington and said that Mr. Reagan would
lay a wreath at the war cemetery in Bitburg on Sunday as scheduled. [A10:3-6.]

Israeli forces pulled out of Tyre, the last major Lebanese city under Israeli
military occupation. The pullout completed the second phase of Israel's
three-stage withdrawal from Lebanon. [A1:3.]

Moscow pledged aid for Nicaragua at a Kremlin meeting between Mikhail S.
Gorbachev and the Nicaraguan President, Daniel Ortega Saavedra. Reporting the
meeting, the Soviet press agency Tass, as is customary, gave no indication of
the amount or type of aid. [A3:4-6.]

Reflection on the Vietnam War, which ended 10 years ago today, has been
widespread for more than a month. The voluminous outpouring indicates that many
people are at least as interested in revising history as in understanding it.
[A1:4-5.]

National

Efforts to end hiring quotas that were intended to help women, blacks and
Hispanic people get jobs in local governments are being pressed by the Justice
Department. An early target is the City of Indianapolis, where the department
filed a motion to modify the affirmative-action program now used by the city's
police and fire departments. [A1:6.]

The Challenger rocketed into orbit with seven astronauts aboard to devote a week
of scientific inquiry to the mysteries of inner man and outer space. The
astronauts successfully launched one satellite but failed to deploy a second
one, a small Navy communications satellite. [A1:1-2.]

Atlantic Richfield moved boldly in response to changes sweeping the nation's oil
industry. The company, the nation's sixth-largest oil company, will abandon the
retail gasoline market east of the Mississippi, sell or dispose of 2,000 gas
stations in 12 states and the District of Columbia and close its refinery in
Philadelphia. While reducing its size, Arco will spend substantial sums to
increase the price of its stock. [A1:2-3.]

Many wildlife refuges are threatened by water contaminated by farm chemicals and
other substances, according to Interior Department documents. Updated reports
prepared by managers of the 428 national wildlife refuges show that 121 of them
face some degree of threat from contaminated water. [A16:1-2.]

Amtrak should go into bankruptcy, according to David A. Stockman, the Federal
budget director. He declared the railroad an ''irredeemable'' money-losing
enterprise and urged a Senate panel to shut off the railroad's Federal subsidy.
[A27:4-6.]

Bits of 30 gases threaten to warm the earth's atmosphere even more rapidly over
the next 50 years than carbon dioxide will, according to a study by a team of
atmospheric scientists. Scientists are increasingly convinced that the rare
trace gases, many of them industrial byproducts, are playing a leading role in
the global ''greenhouse effect.'' [C1:3-4.]

Nonmedical psychotherapy has become far more common than psychotherapy by
psychiatrists. As a result, psychiatrists find themselves increasingly limited
to the most severe mental disorders. [C1:3-4.]

Metropolitan

New York City will pay off virtually all of its Federally guaranteed debt next
month, ending a chapter of the municipal fiscal crisis of the 1970's, city
officials announced. Under the plan, the city will refinance $555 million in
Federally guaranteed debt with regular New York City bonds at lower interest
rates and payable over a longer time. [A1:1.]

Four gunmen stole nearly $8 million in unmarked cash from a Wells Fargo depot in
Manhattan's lower West Side, according to the police. The Chief of Detectives,
Richard J. Nicastro, said the masked robbers entered the depot by breaking
through a wall from an adjacent building and surprising four employees as they
arrived for work in a robbery that indicated the gunmen might have had inside
information. [B3:3-5.]

A police shake-up is expanding in New York City in a scandal arising from
charges that suspects were tortured in a Queens station house, according to
police officials. They said that the abrupt retirement of the commander of all
uniformed officers would be announced today and that the retirement of three
other officials, all commanders in Queens, would also be announced. [A1:4-6.]

An officer was indicted in the death of a 20-year-old man whose neck was broken
when the police tried to subdue him early on Dec. 17. The indictment of Officer
Alexander Forbes on a charge of criminally negligent homicide in the death of
Jose Llopis-Perez was announced by District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of
Manhattan. [B1:1.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 30, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION;
SAGA OF CITY COLLEGE

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


WHEN I meet an alumnus of the City College of New York during my travels, the
first question is usually something like: ''What's happened to City?'' The tone
suggests that terrible things must have happened. The implication is that open
admission, introduced in 1970, let a mass of unworthy students in and drove
quality out.

The question is asked in distant places because so many 1930's, 1940's and
1950's graduates of City, as alumni call the college, chose academic careers.
They are now professors and deans on campuses from coast to coast; many others
are successful business executives. They attribute their success to the rigor of
City's admissions process - the opposite of open admission - that allowed them
to enter the then tuition-free institution.

The old grads' suspicion of open admission is not unique to City. It is directed
at open admission everywhere, primarily at many state universities and virtually
all community colleges. A newly completed study of recent City College graduates
is therefore of more than parochial interest. The college's recent experience
reflects the history of public higher education as it continually absorbed new
generations of youths - the first in their families whom college led into
mainstream America. Children of yesterday's City alumni are today's Yuppies.

The first answer to the question of what happened to City is that it went
through several dramatic changes. In September 1970 it was inundated by 2,742
freshmen, 1,000 more than the previous year. The flood has long since receded as
word got around that admission was followed by hard work; the number of freshmen
is 1,470 this year, or about 300 fewer than before open admission.

Within two years after open admission the enrollment, which had been 77 percent
white, changed to 50 percent black, Hispanic and Asian. Always a haven for the
children of immigrants, City's entering classes today are composed of students
born in more than 80 countries.

The new generation, reflecting national trends, is not likely to produce as many
humanities Ph.D.'s; student interest has shifted to engineering, business, the
sciences, health and legal professions.

To find out what has happened to City, the study looked at a sample of what
happened to students graduated from 1975 to 1980.

Of the total of 1,000 respondents, 93 percent are employed. Of those who were
unemployed each year after graduation, always fewer than 10 percent, the
majority were either continuing their education full time or raising a family.
More than half the respondents were married, but most of them had no children at
the time they graduated. Almost 80 percent said their work was at least somewhat
related to their studies, and more than 70 percent reported that their jobs
required a bachelor's degree.

In one respect, the lives of today's students have changed little from those of
the old graduates: More than 70 percent found it necessary to work at least part
time in order to support themselves in college, a far cry from the currently
fashionable view of students' easy lives.

''Altogether,'' the report concludes, ''the study portrays a group of graduates
of whom any college could be proud.''

Dr. Bernard W. Harleston, City's president, said the most gratifying surprise
was the number of recent graduates who had chalked up notable achievements,
along with new opportunities for minorities. For example, he said, the school of
engineering graduates more black and Hispanic students than any other college in
the country.

Chi Luu, one of Vietnam's ''boat people'' who came to this country in 1979
speaking only a few words of English, was last year's valedictorian after
completing his electrical engineering major with a perfect 4.0 grade point
average. He enrolled in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for advanced
studies after being accepted by five leading graduate schools.

Ron Coleman, who is black, was the 1983 valedictorian with a grade point average
of 3.999. He is a consultant to American Telephone and Telegraph Information
Systems while continuing graduate computer studies.

And so, ''What's happened to City?'' can be answered in two ways.

First, yes, the college has changed - with the times. Fewer students than 30
years ago come from families who, though poor, had long traditions of
scholarship. Since fewer today come from the top of their high school classes,
the dropout rate has risen, from 20 percent before open admissions to 45 percent
now, which is also the national average.

Throughout the college's history, the ethnic background of its academic elite
has changed with shifts in the population: In the 1930's, Jewish students
replaced the Irish and Italians as academic stars. Today, Asians have taken
their place.

The second answer to the question of what happened to City is that its mission
has remained constant: to open opportunities to each generation of the poor. Not
unlike their predecessors, more than one-third of today's students come from
homes where the language spoken is not English. As an engine of upward mobility,
City is part of a string of institutions nationally represented by land-grant
and state colleges. Like them, it has changed. For better or worse?

Institutions should be judged by the changing needs of each era. For today's
first-generation college student, pure scholarship holds less promise than
technology and science. While City is no longer Harvard on the Subway, it has
new strengths. For example, its prestigious School of Engineering enrolls 3,600
undergraduates and 750 graduate students. Perhaps, 20 years from now, board
chairmen of engineering firms will frown and ask: ''What's happened to City?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 1, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOLDIERS, TANKS AND ROCK 'N' ROLL IN PARADE MARKING FALL OF SAIGON

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1669 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, April 30


The sun had just risen behind the twin-spired city cathedral today when
high-stepping troops and rumbling Soviet tanks began their parade down the
Street of April 30 to mark a decade of Communism in what was once known as the
Republic of South Vietnam.

The procession started almost exactly at 7:52 A.M., the hour 10 years ago when a
helicopter carrying the last American and South Vietnamese evacuees rose from
the roof of the United States Embassy when this city was called Saigon.

Today, as jets flew overhead and the ranks of soldiers, sailors, militiawomen,
militiamen, factory workers and students passed by, the scene at first suggested
a strictly Kremlin-inspired occasion. Nine members of the ruling Politburo,
including Prime Minister Pham Van Dong and Le Duan, the Communist Party leader,
sat on the reviewing stand among military officers and foreign Communist or
fraternal delegations.

But then a local band on the sidelines broke into Vietnamese rock and down the
street came roller skaters and a motorcycle club, strutting children and a small
sea of women in the brightly colored traditional tunics called ao dais.

''We don't have this kind of parade in Hanoi,'' a Government official here for
the occasion remarked. ''This is South Vietnamese.''

For Ho Chi Minh City, as it is now known,the 10th anniversary of its fall to
North Vietnam has also provided an occasion to celebrate itself. Floats bore the
industrial and agricultural products of the South as well as reminders of its
culture. A few Buddhist monks and Roman Catholic priests sat in the reviewing
stand as honored guests.

The anniversary has also given the city the chance to outline the future of its
metropolitan area of 3.5 million people, where the spirit of free enterprise,
encouraged during the ''American'' years has not been subdued.

Finally, the event has allowed outsiders in this very secretive country glimpses
into the security measures taken in the sometimes recalcitrant South, where
dozens of people have recently been tried, and several executed, for subversion.


Crowds Large but Quiet

Crowds were large but quiet today around the reviewing stands near the former
presidential palace. City officials said the audience included 50,000
''organized watchers'' brought in by local party committees.

They said they had no reliable estimate of how many others had come on their
own. The ranks were swelled by hundreds of street urchins looking for something
exciting to watch while doing a little panhandling on the side.

It was difficult to judge reactions. There were no cheers or applause except
from the invited guests. A man in the crowd who talked with a Western reporter
was hauled off by the police. Contact with foreigners is against the law.

Few Americans accepted Hanoi's invitation to attend the celebrations this week
as friends of the country. David Dellinger, one of the Chicago Seven who
demonstrated outside the 1968 Democratic National Convention, is here. So is
John McAuliff, the head of the Indochina Reconciliation Project, a program of
the American Friends Service Committee that campaigns for improved ties between
Hanoi and Washington.

Antiwar Activists Absent

Jane Fonda, the actress, Cora Weiss, a peace activist, and the Rev. William
Sloane Coffin, pastor of the Riverside Church in Manhattan, who were all
prominent antiwar activists, were reported to have turned down invitations.

The more than 150 Western reporters, most of them American, here attract great
interest but no apparent hostility from residents. The journalists' reasons for
coming baffle some residents. ''Why would you want to come for the anniversary
of an occupation?'' an elderly shopowner asked a reporter.

Conversations with Government officials and city residents who were willing to
talk indicate that the unfinished business of absorbing the private businesses
of Ho Chi Minh City into the Socialist state will dominate local efforts for
some time to come.

Mai Chi Tho, who as chairman of the Ho Chi Minh City Peoples Committee functions
as the Mayor, said in a news conference Sunday that the local government's main
objective was to turn the city from a consumer society spoiled by the false
economy of the past to a producer society contributing in very large part to the
development of the country. Vietnam is one of the world's poorest nations.

Very Gradual Change

Within that context, he said, family businesses remain important, at least
during the transition period, which he said would likely go on until the year
2000. After that, Mr. Tho said collectivization of production, technology and
culture, would be completed.

Local shopkeepers say they are under great pressure to turn over their
businesses to the state. One shopowner said a new round of takeovers was coming
next month and that his family had only a few weeks to decide what to do.
Refusing a partnership with Government means unemployment, the shopkeeper said.
He said his family would leave the country if it did not have members still in
prison camps.

Reporters here heard frequent complaints that it seems economically unsound to
continue to squeeze local private enterprise, which has given this city
considerably more vitality than Hanoi appears to have. Asked about this concern,
a Government official gave the often-heard reply: ''Transforming the South into
a Socialist society will always be our first objective.''

''Socialism cannot work unless everyone participates,'' Mr. Tho said.

Corruption Remains a Problem

Corruption is said to be worse than ever here, a situation related to economic
hardship and common even in more prosperous Asian cities. Two Government
employees were executed recently for siphoning and reselling Government
gasoline. Such sentences do not seem to deter others, residents say.

Educated professionals, denied the right to work or practice because of their
middle-class backgrounds and suspected or real connections to the previous
regime, talk about having ''right-'' and ''left-'' hand professions, the one
they were trained for, and the one they have to engage in to survive in a city
where a cup of coffee can cost two days' pay. The relative abundance of consumer
goods indicates the money is found somewhere.

Mr. Tho, 62 years old, a brother of Le Duc Tho and a man often mentioned as a
candidate for the next generation of leadership, was candid about the city's
problems. Ho Chi Minh City, he said, is short of electricity. There is high
unemployment coupled with a population growth rate of 2 percent a year, which
will mean five million people in the city by the end of the century.

On the other hand, a paper released by Mr. Tho to coincide with the anniversary
listed as achievements by the city the promotion of a climate of ''innovative
working methods,'' the ''promotion of small industries,'' particularly
traditional handicrafts, and a growth in foreign trade. He says the city is a
leader in Vietnam in industry, technology, international communications and
culture.

Proud of the Police

Mr. Tho, an internal security expert, is also proud of the city's police. He
told reporters Sunday, ''Here we have no demonstrations like you do in the West,
and no guerrilla groups like they have in the Philippines, Malaysia or
Thailand.''

While Vietnamese offficials and Western diplomats in Hanoi say there is no
serious resistence movement operating in the South, surveillance here is said to
be intense. A resident said he recently saw 16 longhaired plainclothesmen
materialize within seconds to seize a man who was shouting on the street. There
are occasional Government admissions and trial records that suggest some
dissidence does exist.

On Monday when officials took reporters to meet several ''re-education camp''
inmates north of the city, one of the prisoners said he had been arrested in
1982 for joining a ''counterrevolutionary militia.'' He said he had been forced
to join by former officers of the South Vietnamese Army.

A former professional now unemployed in Ho Chi Minh City for refusing to accept
''political direction,'' said that something more widespread than open dissent
was ''passive noncooperation'' with Government policies.

''In this cause of national reconciliation'' an army officer at the city's
military command said, ''we know many people are happy, but there are others who
are not.'' ---- U.S. to Press Efforts on Missing WASHINGTON, April 30 (UPI) -
President Reagan promised stepped-up efforts today to press the countries of
Southeast Asia to account for all Americans killed in the Vietnam War.

''The key to resolution of this issue lies in obtaining the full cooperation of
the Governments of Vietnam and Laos,'' Mr. Reagan said in a report to Congress
on the 2,477 Americans still missing or unaccounted for in Southeast Asia.

While progress has been made in obtaining fuller cooperation from both
countries, Mr. Reagan said, the United States ''should not be regarded in any
way as satisfied with the current situation or the progress we have made.''

''Cooperation has been much too slow,'' he said, ''and we must continue to
pursue every possible avenue to reach a level which offers maximum potential for
results.''

Mr. Reagan said his Administration had ''vigorously pursued'' a full accounting
through high-level visits by American officials to Vietnam and Laos, upgraded
intelligence efforts, a campaign to focus public attention on missing soldiers
and close coordination with the National League of Families of American
Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia.

Among the positive diplomatic steps cited by Mr. Reagan were agreements by
Vietnam to increase bilateral meetings on the issue to six from four and to
consider the missing Americans separately from other matters.

Vietnam turned over the remains of eight Americans in 1984 and six on March 20
of this year, including - for the first time - two men said by the Vietnamese to
have died while being held as prisoners of war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of soldiers marching (AP) (page A6); photo of Prime Minister Pham
Van Dong and Secretary General Le Duan watching parade (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 1, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LATINS PREFER THE VIETNAM SYNDROME

BYLINE: By Carlos Andres Perez; Carlos Andres Perez, President of Venezuela from
1974 to 1979, is now a member of the Venezuelan Senate.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 686 words


On the 10th anniversary of the fall of Saigon, Americans are pondering the
lessons of the United States' tragic involvement in Indochina. It is vital that
they do so, particularly given the ominous parallels between the war in
Southeast Asia and what is happening today in Central America.

Unfortunately, Vietnam seems to have had few clear-cut lessons for United States
policy makers: controversy continues to swirl over what it means for United
States credibility, the use of force in third world conflicts and the
appropriate roles for Congress, the executive and public opinion in shaping
foreign policy. For us in Latin America, the meaning seems much clearer.

For a short period, United States leaders seemed to draw strength from the
public opposition that helped to end the Vietnam War. They introduced new
ethical considerations into national security policy and resisted the
temptations of unilateral military force. They seemed to recognize both the
limits of United States power and the dangers of viewing third world conflicts
strictly through the prism of East-West relations. Finally, they seemed to
understand the necessity of seeking democratic solutions to the problems of
political instability in developing countries.

The new United States foreign policy was a great success in Latin America. It
led to the Panama Canal treaties, the promotion of human rights, support for
democracy as the antidote to Communism and a lessening of the intolerable
paternalism that has traditionally marked the United States' dealings with its
Latin neighbors. For an all too brief period, Latin Americans and North
Americans shared a vision that our common enemies are poverty, hunger,
oppression and the use of military force.

Then came the Iranian hostage crisis, the invasion of Afghanistan and the civil
war in Nicaragua - and almost before we noticed the United States had reverted
to the ill-fated attitudes of the Vietnam period. The several years since have
brought a militarization of policy. Once again, Washington is overly preoccupied
with the East-West struggle, the ''Evil Empire,'' Communism and ''falling
dominoes.'' It also seems to believe, disastrously, that it can impose political
stability through force.

Once again, then, despite the opposition of its people, the United States is
assuming a bellicose approach to foreign problems. In Latin America, this
attitude has produced the absurd British-Argentine war over the Malvinas, or
Falkland Islands (the United States was not directly involved, but the war could
have been averted through its diplomacy and leadership), the invasion of
Grenada, the re-establishment of Communism as the supposed chief cause of
turbulence in Latin America and the escalating war in Central America.

What this means is that the Contadora countries (Colombia, Mexico, Panama and
Venezuela), which are attempting to negotiate a peaceful solution to the Central
American conflicts, are confronted by a hostile United States Government. The
Reagan Administration offers rhetorical support for the Contadora process but in
reality seeks to win a military victory and overthrow the Sandinista Government.
With this, it risks widening the war, pushing the Sandinista leadership deeper
into the Soviet-Cuban camp and poisoning relations with its democratic allies in
Latin America.

Apparently, Washington doesn't understand that there will be no peace in Central
America until it unequivocally supports the Contadora process. Instead, as in
Vietnam, the United States Government is pursuing a foreign policy inconsistent
with its own belief in national sovereignty and nonintervention - a foreign
policy that does not enjoy the support of the American public.

For Latin Americans, at least, the lessons of Vietnam are crystal-clear - that
the United States is strongest when it acts for social justice and democratic
change, that it is most effective when it acts multilaterally, and most
successful when it deals with its neighbors as equals dedicated to peace,
freedom and democracy.

We only wish the United States could see this as clearly as we do.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 1, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REMEMBERING VIETNAM IN REGRET AND GRATITUDE

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 892 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 30


Ten years ago today, Washington was a shaken city absorbing the nightmarish
spectacle of the fall of Saigon and the failure of two decades of American
military involvement in Vietnam. The scale and finality of the debacle gave
pause that day at news conferences and expense-account restaurants all about the
capital.

''It was a tiny little nation,'' Senator Jeremiah Denton of Alabama, speaking
today at one of the few commemorative events, said in summarizing the continuing
puzzlement and agony left by that longest war in American history. ''It had
maybe one-ten-thousandth of the power of the United States.''

''I was confused,'' said Hung Nguyen, recalling his family's anxious flight from
Vietnam a decade ago when he was a 7-year-old. ''I knew we were going to
America. I didn't know what it was.''

''We left in a hurry,'' said Le Xuan Khoa, who was a philosophy professor at the
University of Saigon when the Vietcong took the city. ''We didn't really think
we could lose the city so quick.''

Gone from Washington 10 years afterward on this sunny, breezy, peaceful day was
the awful vicariousness of Saigon's fall: the pictures of refugees clawing in
frenzy at departing American helicopters; the ''state of abeyance'' in South
Vietnamese relations gravely proclaimed by Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger; the hurried shifting of military logistics from war to relocating the
first of what would be a quarter-million Vietnam refugees to this nation.

''I was lucky,'' said young Mr. Nguyen, tending his parents' busy grocery store,
Vietnam Market, this afternoon in the Washington suburb of Arlington. ''I got
here. Look at the others who didn't.''

''The story of the Paralyzed Giant,'' said Senator Denton, a former combat pilot
and prisoner of war, who contended that the war so entrenched the news media's
power of criticism that all Presidents since then have been unfairly limited in
their exercise of office. ''You're sinking the country that I believe you
love,'' the Senator boomed at news reporters covering a symposium on ''The
Lessons of Vietnam'' that was attended by little more than 100 people at the
Dirksen office building.

Out in the corridors, the small talk was more likely of Bitburg, West Germany,
than of Saigon, and by the third hour of the daylong seminar the crowd had
thinned to about 60. Westward along the capital Mall, a small group of
children-become-adults, offspring of some of the nearly 2,500 Americans listed
as missing in the war, stopped at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial to leave a
wreath and listen to taps.

''For me, the war is not over,'' said Patricia O'Grady Aloot, who last heard
from her father, John, an Air Force pilot, 18 years ago when she was 13. ''I
cannot put it behind me because my father has not been brought home.'' An 'Orgy'
of Recollection?The black granite memorial wall was being used as a backdrop for
numerous television reports on what critics at the seminar denounced as an
''orgy'' of recollection and national self-criticism. One woman politely
answered a reporter's question about the war with her own question: ''Well,
didn't they finally decide it was a good thing?'' This evening the veteran who
guided the creation of the memorial, Jan C. Scruggs, held a reception to
publicize his book on the memorial, ''To Heal a Nation.''

Professor Khoa, an official of the Indo-Chinese Resource Action Center on 16th
Street, went with friends to a commemorative ceremony in Georgetown. In an
interview, he looked back 10 years from dual points of gratitude. The first
involved the memory of his takeoff from Saigon airport just before its runway
was bombed shut. The other involved the whirlwind of labor since then in which
25,000 refugees from Indochina have settled in the Washington area with
considerable success.

''I see in Saigon they invited Americans back to celebrate the victory of the
Vietcong,'' he said. ''Well, we think the Federal Government here should
designate a Recognition Day to celebrate another kind of victory by all the
refugees who are successfully mainstreaming as a positive, viable community in
this pluralistic society.''

There was no such ceremony on today's anniversary agenda. The main political
event was the seminar that featured Senator Denton and a number of others who
criticized a ''liberal'' legacy of risky hestitation from the Vietnam War.
Several speakers said this was most discernible lately in resistance toward
Reagan Administration policies on Nicaragua.

''There's only one way to win a war, and that's to have guys with guns who are
willing to defeat other guys with guns,'' Representative John McCain of Arizona
said in recalling Vietnam. The Congressman, who also was a war prisoner of the
North Vietnamese, criticized the Government's ''failure to understand'' the
enemy and the effect of daily television reports on the war's bloody encounters
and mistakes, ''so gruesome, but they are a part of war.''

''It's a scar,'' Professor Khoa, a naturalized citizen, said of the war's legacy
within this nation.

''It's there, but it's becoming time not to suffer the past and to turn it to a
positive way,'' he said, recalling the tumult of a decade ago when Marines
fought off throngs of civilians trying to go along with the retreating
Americans. ''The refugees were victims, but now they are part of America.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing; photo of visitors at memorial (UPI)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 1, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MONSANTO WINS DIOXIN LAWSUIT FILED BY SEVEN

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 718 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, W. Va., April 30


A Federal jury found today that the Monsanto Company was not responsible for the
illness of seven retired employees who said they had been poisoned on the job by
dioxin. The jury did allow the damage claim of one of the seven whose illness
was linked to another chemical.

The seven men had contended that their lingering medical problems, including
skin cancer, bladder cancer and a variety of nervous disorders, stemmed from
exposure to dioxin and five other chemicals at the company's plant at Nitro,
where they had worked an average of 35 years. They had sued the company for $4
million each in compensatory and punitive damages.

The jury awarded $200,000 to one of the plaintiffs, John Hein, who was diagnosed
as having bladder cancer in the course of the 10-month trial in Federal District
Court. The jury concluded after five days of deliberations that Mr. Hein's
illness was linked to his exposure to para-aminobiphenol, or PAB, a rubber
additive produced from 1951 to 1953 at the Nitro plant. Medical experts
testified that dioxin had been linked to cancer and other ailments and that PAB
had been linked to bladder cancer.

An attorney for the workers, Stuart Calwell, said he would appeal the jury's
verdict to in the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. Mr.
Calwell asserted that Federal District Judge John T. Copenhaver Jr. had
influenced the six-member jury in his instructions. 140 Other Cases Pending He
said he did not think the verdict would have an impact on the remaining 140
claims of work-related illness that workers and former workers have filed
against Monsanto.

An attorney for Monsanto, David F. Snively, said: ''Our actions were clearly
consistent with the rest of the industry at the time in protecting our
employees' health and safety. We certainly view this as a victory for Monsanto's
position after a long and arduous trial.''

Mr. Snively said that Monsanto would appeal the one verdict against it, adding,
''The first thing we will do is ask the judge to set aside the jury's finding,
which we feel is not consistent with the weight of evidence presented.''

Although it found in favor of Monsanto in six out of seven cases, the jury
issued a statement with the verdict, which Judge Copenhaver read:

''A preponderence of the evidence showed dioxin causes or contributed to some of
the health effects the plaintiffs now exhibit. Although Monsanto did not show a
willful, wanton and reckless attitude toward its workers' health and safety, it
did, in fact, not pursue a diligent course of action in trying to determine the
full impact of dioxin on the health of its workers.

''Based on the testimony of many expert witnesses, it's clear that dioxin,
although not directly life threatening, has nevertheless a definite effect on
humans, usually involving the skin, nervous systems and general fatigue.

''Monsanto bears the major burden of maintaining the health and safety of its
workers. The workers must exercise reasonable judgment in insuring good health
and safety by asking questions when a health problem becomes commonly
recognized.''

Six Chemicals Named

The suit originally charged that the men suffered from their exposure to six
toxic chemicals, but earlier this month Judge Copenhaver eliminated four of the
chemicals, aniline, carbon disulfide, hydrogen sulfide and chlorine.

From 1948 to 1969 the Monsanto plant produced the herbicide 2,4,5-T, which
contained dioxin as an unwanted contaminant. The herbicide was used in Agent
Orange, a defoliant used in the Vietnam War.

In the trial, the longest Federal court proceeding in West Virginia history,
attorneys for the workers sought to prove that the plaintiffs' medical problems
were caused by the chemicals and that Monsanto knew of the potential danger.

Lawyers for the company tried to show that Monsanto did everything it could to
provide a clean, safe workplace. Witnesses for the company testified that the
men suffered from health problems common to others in their age group and that
the problems were not a result of their exposure to the chemicals.

In his instructions to the jury, which began its deliberations Wednesday
afternoon, Judge Copenhaver said, ''The plaintiffs must prove that Monsanto knew
that its actions would cause a high risk of serious harm.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 1, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

KISSINGER AND LE DUC THO MEET AGAIN, AND BITTERNESS SHOWS

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 952 words


It had been more than a decade since Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho sat
together in Paris, negotiating an uneasy settlement to an unpopular war. But the
bitterness over the end of the Vietnam War is still close to the surface for Mr.
Kissinger, whose temper flared Monday night when the former antagonists appeared
on the ABC News program ''Nightline.''

Because of the intensity of the long-distance debate, with Mr. Kissinger in New
York and Mr. Tho in Ho Chi Minh City, producers let the program run 11 minutes
longer than scheduled to give the former Secretary of State a chance to respond
to extensive remarks by the Vietnamese official.

Mr. Kissinger leveled his strongest criticism at the American press, which he
criticized for offering - then and now - a sympathetic forum for Vietnamese
Communist leaders.

He said that ''probably in retrospect, the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations
that first started us into Vietnam bit off more than they could chew,'' and that
''the Nixon Administration, in which I served, could have brought matters to a
head - one way or the other - earlier.''

'A Never-Ending Campaign'

But he said the United States ''certainly cannot fight a prolonged war with an
inconclusive outcome against an opponent who uses part of the media and many
well-meaning people in a never-ending campaign to undermine our psychology.''

Mr. Kissinger, who has a contract with ABC as a consultant, went on, ''I must
say that the disproportion in this program between the American point of view
and the Vietnamese point of view and the absolutely one-sided account of the
correspondents is one of the explanations of how we got to where we are.''

The three major television networks have been broadcasting extensively from
Vietnam this week on the 10th anniversary of the Communist takeover of Saigon,
now Ho Chi Minh City.

Last week on the NBC News program ''Today,'' Bryant Gumbel introduced an
interview with Mr. Tho, a senior member of the Vietnamese Communist Party
Politburo, by calling him ''the man who outsmarted Henry Kissinger at the Paris
peace talks.''

When the ''Nightline'' host, Ted Koppel, speaking from Ho Chi Minh City, asked
Mr. Kissinger in New York about the ''remarkable lack of acrimony'' on the part
of the Vietnamese toward the United States, Mr. Kissinger said:

''I think there's something demeaning about having the three networks cover a
victory parade over the United States in the city of the country where the
victory was achieved. So I don't consider it a great achievement that there's no
particular animosity.''

Discussion of Ground Rules

Twice during the program, Mr. Kissinger took the unusual step of discussing the
ground rules set up for his appearance, reminding his interviewers that he had
said he would not refight the war, but then going on to talk about what he saw
as the role of news organizations in hurting the United States Government during
the war.

The Vietnamese leaders interviewed appeared pleased to have the opportunity to
review what they called their ''total victory.''

Between Mr. Kissinger's two appearances on the program, Mr. Tho gave his version
of the Paris peace negotiations and the Communist takeover of Saigon. ''We
wrested total victory,'' he concluded, speaking through an interpreter. ''This
is a failure of the Vietnamization of the war.''

He offered thanks to the American public ''for their support and contributions
to our present victory'' and urge future cooperation between the two countries.

''We hope American wives and mothers will never again allow their husbands and
sons to go to die in another Vietnam War anywhere in the world,'' Mr. Tho said.
Interview With Foreign Minister In addition to his live interview with Mr. Tho,
which was fraught with technical problems that enabled the Vietnamese leader to
talk over Mr. Koppel steadily, Mr. Koppel showed a taped interview with Nguyen
Co Thach, Vietnam's Foreign Minister.

Mr. Thach laughingly talked of how the North Vietnamese had easily bested the
Central Intelligence Agency in intelligence gathering, and how guerrillas were
able ''to fool the B-52 pilots and reconnaissance planes'' by lighting fires
deep in the jungles that caused the fliers to drop bombs ''on a vacuum.''

''They wasted the ammunition of the U.S.,'' he said. ''When the U.S. was here,
they have failed. How can they succeed?''

At one point during the program, transmission to Mr. Koppel in Vietnam failed
completely and Charles Gibson, a Washington correspondent for ABC, returned to
Mr. Kissinger.

''What we saw,'' Mr. Kissinger said, ''is a defeat which we inflicted upon
ourselves.''

Mr. Kissinger said he did not see the point of ''engaging in a debate for two
minutes,'' and Mr. Gibson suggested that the program be extended to allow Mr.
Kissinger to continue.

'A Certain Cynicism'

When Mr. Gibson commented on Mr. Tho's ''cynicism'' in thanking the American
public for its support, Mr. Kissinger said: ''There's also a certain cynicism in
correspondents who discuss Thieu in such despicable terms while they are playing
up the North Vietnamese victors who violated all of the agreements and led to
this situation.'' He was referring to Nguyen Van Thieu, the South Vietnamese
President from 1967 to 1975.

''Le Duc Tho is what he is,'' he continued, citing his ''great courage'' and
singlemindedness. But Mr. Tho ''used the American divisions to play on us,'' Mr.
Kissinger said, and ''would drop cryptic remarks to correspondents who would
then accuse their Government of not seizing the opportunity for peace.''

The North Vietnamese, he said, ''were working on psychology even more than they
were working on a military solution.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 1, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 28 words


''Transforming the South into a Socialist society will always be our first
objective.'' - Mai Chi Tho, chairman of the Ho Chi Minh City Peoples Committee.
[A6:2.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 1, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 875 words


WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1985



International

An embargo on U.S.-Nicaragua trade will be ordered by President Reagan,
Administration and Congressional sources said. They said he had told Congress
the decision was motivated by what he called the Sandinista Government's
''aggressive activities.'' [Page A1, Columns 4-6.]

President Reagan headed for Bonn to attend a seven-nation economic summit
meeting and to celebrate 40 years of peace and reconciliation in Western Europe
in the aftermath of World War II. But as he prepared to leave, the House of
Representatives, joining the Senate, voted a nonbinding resolution, 390 to 26,
urging Mr. Reagan to reconsider his planned visit Sunday to a German war
cemetery where 49 SS soldiers are buried. [A1:4.]

Jewish groups urged demonstrations Sunday at the German war cemetery that
President Reagan plans to visit. In Jerusalem, Kalman Sultanik, an American who
is vice president of the World Jewish Congress, told the German news agency that
demonstrators would also seek to prevent Mr. Reagan from entering the
Bergen-Belsen camp site, which he is also scheduled to visit on Sunday. [A14:3.]

U.S. missiles are vulnerable to terrorist attacks in West Germany and need to be
fortified, according to the Pentagon. For the first time since delivery of the
Pershing 2 nuclear missiles began 17 months ago, the Army has asked Congress for
money to begin a four-stage project that will eventually secure the medium-range
missiles in concrete sheds behind camouflage fences. [A1:5-6.]

$1.5 billion more U.S. aid for Israel is set for approval, according to Reagan
Administration officials. They said the additional economic assistance would be
authorized in response to an urgent request from Prime Minister Shimon Peres.
[A3:1-3.]

Moslem militias advanced again in Christian sectors in southern Lebanon. The
militiamen attacked the town of Kfar Falous, a Christian stronghold in the hills
east of Sidon, and reports about the town's fate were conflicting. [A3:4-6.]

A parade in Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, marked the tenth anniversary of
its fall to North Vietnam. As military units marched by, a local band on the
sidelines broke into Vietnamese rock-and-roll and down the street came a
motorcycle club and roller skaters, prompting a visiting Government official to
remark, ''We don't have this kind of parade in Hanoi.'' [A1:2-3.]

National

The Senate approved the budget plan proposed by the White House, 50 to 49,
giving President Reagan a symbolic victory as he left Washington for the
economic summit meeting. However, it became clear that the package might face
significant changes before the Republican leadership could get it through the
Senate. [A1:1.]

A disputed House race in Indiana continued to divert representatives' attention
from other issues. After an angry and partisan debate, the House voted 229 to
200 to reject a Republican proposal for a special election to decide the
contested race in Indiana's Eighth Congressional District. A House-supervised
recount showed Frank McCloskey, a Democrat, leading by a four-vote margin, the
closest House race in this century. [A22:1-2.]

A key index suggested a cooling in the nation's economic growth. The
Government's main bellwether for predicting changes in economic trends
registered a small but unexpected decline in March of two-tenths of 1 percent,
the Commerce Department reported. [A1:5.]

Cattle ranchers have the troubles that beset grain farmers, experiencing five
years of surplus supplies, declining demand and high interest rates. Throughout
the Rockies and in the Southwest Plains, ranchers are reducing herd sizes to try
to stay in business while others, their credit exhausted, are getting out.
[A1:2-4.]

Monsanto won a Dioxin suit filed by seven of its retired employees. A Federal
jury in Charleston, W.Va., ruled that the chemical company could not be held
responsible for the possible effects of the toxic chemical on the seven, whose
medical problems include skin and bladder cancer and nervous disorders. They had
sought $4 million in damages. But the jury awarded $200,000 to one claimant,
John Hein, whose bladder cancer was linked to another chemical. [A20:6.]

Astronauts saw the northern lights at close hand. The Challenger's crew soared
through what was described as spectacular rainbows of charged electrons
thousands of miles long. Later, the space shuttle astronauts showed television
pictures of gigantic arcs of light undulating over the Pacific. [A21:2-4.]

Metropolitan

Seat belts have reduced auto deaths in New York State, according to the State
Motor Vehicles Commissioner, John A. Passidomo. He said the number of drivers
and passengers killed in motor-vehicle accidents declined by 27 percent in the
first three months after the state mandated the wearing of belts. [A1:3-5.]

Donald J. Trump lost a tax challenge in the New York State Court of Appeals. Mr.
Trump, the developer, protested the state tax on million-dollar real-estate
deals that was levied on his Trump Tower skyscraper on Fifth Avenue in
Manhattan. The court, the state's highest, ruled 4 to 1 that the tax was
constitutional. [B3:3-5.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 1, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words


FISKADORO. By Denis Johnson. 221 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $14.95.

DENIS JOHNSON'S ''Fiskadoro'' is not the easiest novel to describe. It's the
sort of book that a young Herman Melville might have written had he lived today
and studied such disparate works as the Bible, ''The Waste Land,'' ''Fahrenheit
451'' and ''Dog Soldiers,'' screened ''Star Wars'' and ''Apocalypse Now''
several times, dropped a lot of acid and listened to hours of Jimi Hendrix and
the Rolling Stones. It's a wildly ambitious book, ''Fiskadoro'' - full of
mythology and philosophical speculation about the nature of time and memory and
the endurance of language and art. At times it's beautifully poetic, at times
insanely rhetorical, but its strange, hallucinatory vision of America and modern
history is never less than compelling.

Although it's set in the near future (about 80 years from now), ''Fiskadoro''
creates a portrait of America that mirrors the one in ''Angels,'' Mr. Johnson's
one previous novel - a portrait of America as a cultural and spiritual
wasteland, peopled by drifters, con men and disaffected poets; a hot, violent
land, eager for salvation, susceptible to madness and tottering on the edge of
apocalypse.

In ''Fiskadoro,'' that apocalypse has already occurred; World War III or some
form of nuclear disaster has wiped out most of civilization, leaving the
survivors of ''the Quarantine'' to live in a primitive, pre-machine-age world.
Yet if these people seem to have lost their historical memory - they can neither
recall the former world of ''ferris wheels, elevators, boxing matches, mining
operations,'' nor remember what brought about its end - they nonetheless suffer
from the same feelings of loss, alienation and impending doom that afflicted
previous generations of Americans. They, too, live in a strangely disembodied
dream state, unable to distinguish between what is real, imagined and
remembered; and they, too, are waiting for the time when ''everything we have,
all we are, will meet its end, will be overcome, taken up, washed away.''

It is one of Mr. Johnson's achievements in ''Fiskadoro'' that he makes the brave
new world of the Quarantine thoroughly palpable, through his acute ear for
language - most of the people in this book speak a resonant patois of English
and Spanish that lends their words a certain mythic dimension - and his gift for
visually precise description. He has chosen as his setting the sullen, exotic
terrain of the Florida Keys, but he has reassembled this favorite fictional
landscape like so many pieces of a shattered mirror, turning it into a place at
once familiar and disturbingly unreal.

Key West has been renamed Twicetown, in honor of the two dud bombs that crashed
there during the war, and its motley residents now conduct provisional lives
amid the wreckage of earlier cultures: automobile seats, broken Xerox machines
and moldy church pews dot the landscape, lyrics to old rock-and-roll songs buzz
on the radio at night, and would-be messiahs go by such names as Bob Marley,
Jake Barnes and Cassius Clay Sugar Ray. There is much talk of magic abroad in
the land, and people seek deliverance in talismans and charms. Pirates, trading
in contaminated goods, prowl the waters close to shore, and on the beach, gangs
of pinheads, ''the sightless and deaf, and creatures obliged to cover up their
faces'' wander in search of a home.

Nearly everyone in Twicetown, in fact, suffers from some kind of incompleteness,
some kind of longing for a past they can't recover. Mr. Cheung, the pot-bellied
manager of the so-called Miami Symphony Orchestra, believes in ''the importance
of remembering'' - he practices reciting the names of the 50 states in
alphabetical order - and as a devout member of the Society for Science, he tries
to make sense of history, connect the future with the past. His efforts to find
a ''text that would explain the End of the World,'' however, are continually
thwarted; his one real link to earlier cultures remains the music he plays on
his clarinet.

Mr. Cheung's grandmother, Marie, who is at least 100 years old, is certainly old
enough to remember the apocalypse - in her opinion, things started to fall apart
with the fall of Saigon, which she witnessed as a young girl - but she is
incapable of speech, unable to articulate her memories to her grandson, or even
distinguish, in the blur of consciousness, between the real and imagined past.
All she really knows is that she somehow managed to survive both the war in
Vietnam and the subsequent atomic cataclysm, and that she survived only through
blind luck and a willingness to ''abandon everything'' - her family, her will,
her past.

Fiskadoro, the 14-year-old hero of Mr. Johnson's epic tale, will also learn that
the price of survival - or salvation - may well be memory and a sense of self.
Certainly his name, which comes from pescador (meaning fisherman) and fisgador
(harpooner), invokes associations with Christ, the fisher of souls; and
Fiskadoro will in fact be heralded, in Twicetown, as a sort of new man - someone
who promises to redeem the wasteland, or at least usher it into another age.
Before he can assume that role, however, he must undergo a series of classic
initiation rites that will leave him ''all cleaned out inside like a baby'': he
will lose his father and his mother, as well as his manhood and his power to
remember; he will descend to purgatory and return ''not like other men.''

The ritual ordeals that Fiskadoro experiences - like the scenes of Marie's
escape from Saigon - are described in heightened, surreal terms. Toward the end
of the novel, these hallucinatory riffs become longer and longer, the prose
increasingly windy (''Since the death of his mother, Belinda, Fiskadoro was
confused. If everyone in this world around him had died once, as he himself had
died, then where had Belinda gone when she died the second time? How many worlds
were there?''). The reader is inclined, at moments, to say ''enough,'' but these
moments are rare. Such is the power of the narrative that one can only finish
''Fiskadoro'' with admiration for Mr. Johnson's ambition - and a keen
appreciation of his prodigal imagination.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Denis Johnson

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 2, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN, DECLARING 'THREAT,' FORBIDS NICARAGUAN TRADE AND CUTS AIR AND SEA LINKS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1152 words

DATELINE: BONN, May 1


President Reagan ordered an embargo on trade with Nicaragua today, telling
Congress that the policies and actions of the Sandinistas constituted a threat
to United States security.

Mr. Reagan also banned Nicaraguan aircraft and ships from the United States.

The announcement came in the form of an executive order and an accompanying
letter to Congress. Both were made public only hours after Mr. Reagan arrived in
West Germany for the 11th annual economic conference of seven major industrial
nations. The three-day meeting opens Thursday in Bonn.

Pressure on the Sandinistas

Administration officials said the embargo was meant to tighten United States
pressure on the Government of Nicaragua and marked a new turn in the
Administration's efforts to weaken the Sandinistas.

But other officials said they thought the effect on the Nicaraguans would be
more symbolic than substantive. They said the measures were aimed chiefly at
sending a message of resolve to Latin America. They also hoped to show
Presidential assertiveness after the Congressional defeat of financing for
Nicaraguan rebels and the furor over Mr. Reagan's scheduled visit to a German
military cemetery at Bitburg.

A White House spokesman said the measures had been ordered because of
''Nicaragua's continuing efforts to subvert its neighbors, its rapid and
destabilizing military buildup, its close military and security ties to Cuba and
to the Soviet Union and its imposition of Communist, totalitarian internal
rule.''

National Emergency Declared

Tne executive order included the declaration by the President of a state of
national emergency. Under the terms of the International Emergency Economic
Powers Act, a President may invoke trade sanctions only under emergency
conditions.

The White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, denied in response to questions that
the embargo was intended to divert attention from Mr. Reagan's planned visit
Sunday to the German military cemetery, where 49 soldiers of the Waffen SS are
buried. Mr. Speakes said that the embargo was discussed in recent days with
''other governments'' and with legislators and that Mr. Reagan had decided to
make the announcement after he received a report on consultations with Congress
while on the way to Bonn.

The executive order said in part: ''I, Ronald Reagan, President of the United
States, find that the policies and actions of the Government of Nicaragua
constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and
foreign policy of the United States, and hereby declare a national emergency to
deal with that threat.''

'Aggressive Activities' Noted

Mr. Reagan said he was ordering the embargo ''in response to the emergency
situation created by the Nicaraguan Government's aggressive activities in
Central America.''

Facing a reluctant Congress over Nicaragua, the Administration suffered a
serious setback last week when the House of Representatives rejected all aid for
Nicaraguan rebels. As a consequence, White House officials said, the
Administration chose a trade embargo, which does not need Congressional
approval, to step up pressure on Nicaragua.

The letter to Congress signed by Mr. Reagan said:

''U.S. application of these sanctions should be seen by the Government of
Nicaragua, and by those who abet it, as unmistakable evidence that we take
seriously the obligation to protect our security interests and those of our
friends.''

What Is Affected

Mr. Reagan's order barred ''all imports into the United States of goods and
services of Nicaraguan origin; all exports from the United States of goods to or
destined for Nicaragua, except those relating to the democratic resistence.''

The order also prohibited ''Nicaraguan air carriers from engaging in air
transportation to or from points in the United States'' and barred Nicaraguan
vessels from entering American ports.

Mr. Speakes said Mr. Reagan was also ending a 27-year-old United
States-Nicaraguan Friendship Treaty. He said the President's order was designed
to ''bring pressure to bear on them to mend their ways.''

Embassy Gets Note

In Washington, the Nicaraguan Embassy said it had received a note from the
Administration today notifying the Managua Government that Washington intended
to terminate the treaty ''effective one year from the date of the note,'' May 1.
The treaty says the signers can end it with one year's notice. Manuel Cordero,
the deputy chief of mission, said the note came from the State Department,
bearing the initials NSS but no signature.

Mr. Speakes said the President was imposing the trade embargo in view of ''the
new ties between Nicaragua and the Soviet Union.'' Specifically, he cited
accounts in Tass, the Soviet press agency, of these ''new ties'' in connection
with the current visit to Moscow and Eastern Europe of the Nicaraguan President,
Daniel Ortega Saavedra.

Arrest of Seven Noted

Mr. Speakes also cited the ''recent apprehension in Honduras of seven agents of
the Nicaraguan state security service,'' who he asserted had ''admitted that
they have traveled to Honduras from Nicaragua in order to aid and assist
Honduran insurgents.''

In addition, Mr. Speakes, discussing the purported threat posed to United States
national security, pointed to the delivery of Soviet and East German military
equipment to Nicaragua and the Sandinista Government's rejection of
church-mediated talks.

''We do regard it as an emergency,'' Mr. Speakes said. ''We think the steps by
Congress in declining to fund the democratic opposition there, and the fact that
Nicaragua is taking new and bolder steps in moving toward the Soviet Union, does
constitute a threat.''

Mr. Reagan and his wife, Nancy, arrived at Bonn-Cologne Airport this morning as
a soft drizzle fell. After they were welcomed by Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich
Genscher, they boarded a United States military helicopter for the flight to
Castle Gymnich, the official Government guest house on the outskirts of Bonn.

The Reagans spent most of the day resting before Mr. Reagan confers Thursday
with Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of
Britain and Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone of Japan. After the three-day
summit meeting ends Saturday, Mr. Reagan begins an official visit to West
Germany.

In recent years such nations as Iran, Poland, Libya, Cuba and North Vietnam have
faced United States sanctions, but the ultimate effects of these measures remain
uncertain.

This morning Donald T. Regan, the chief of staff and former Treasury Secretary,
sought to explain the embargo in part. Appearing on the NBC News ''Today''
program, he said Nicaragua was now receiving weapons from Iran and the Soviet
Union.

''It's from all kinds of sources,'' Mr. Regan. ''They're really arming
themselves and yet they're a debtor nation. Why should we be supporting the
rearmament of Nicaragua?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President and Nancy Reagan with Hans-Dietrich Genscher (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 2, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
ON LOOKING STRONG

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Draft of a speech to be delivered by President Reagan:

''My fellow Americans: The attitude of the Sandinistas has become intolerable.
We will not be humiliated. We will not react merely by plaintive diplomatic
protests. If we did, the credibility of the United States would be destroyed.

''If when the chips are down the United States acts like a pitiful helpless
giant, the forces of totalitarianism and anarchy will threaten free nations and
free institutions throughout the world. It is not our power but our will and
character that is being tested. . . .''

The rhetoric is of course Richard Nixon's, not Ronald Reagan's. It is taken from
Mr. Nixon's speech of April 30, 1970, announcing the invasion of Cambodia.

But Mr. Reagan seems to be gripped these days by a Nixonian fear of looking
weak. There have been increasing signs, lately, of the machismo that obsessed
the White House in the days of Mr. Nixon and Henry Kissinger: the belief that a
President must show resolve regardless of the facts.

President Reagan's insistence on going ahead with his visit to Bitburg is a
disastrous example. When he learned that the German military cemetery there held
the graves of 49 SS men, he could easily have changed his plans, with no damage
to U.S.-German relations. Instead he has become more rigid by the day, insisting
finally that it was ''morally right'' for him to go.

The reason is plain. Mr. Reagan thinks it would look irresolute - weak - to
change his mind. He has been encouraged in this view by Mr. Nixon and Mr.
Kissinger themselves. ''The credibility of future negotiations is at stake,''
Mr. Nixon reportedly advised White House aides.

Now Richard Nixon was a President of notorious personal insecurity. In his
speeches on Vietnam he harped on the need to avoid ''humiliation.'' When he
fulfilled his need for a self-image of strength by going into Cambodia, he
wounded American society and furthered a process of disintegration in Cambodia
that ended in the murderous years of the Khmer Rouge.

But Ronald Reagan has always seemed a secure person. And he has been quite ready
to change political course, in the past, when a policy was not working. Yet now
he is rigidly fixed on the course to Bitburg - with all its terrible
consequences for historical memory and for recognition of evil.

Nicaragua is another example. Mr. Reagan's decision to block all trade and
transport connections with Nicaragua rings of the same obsession with projecting
''resolve.'' And once again a price will be paid in reality for an ideological
abstraction.

What exactly have the Sandinistas done to justify such an extraordinary action?
Why should the United States be using its enormous economic power against a
shattered little country with a population of three million? Externally,
President Reagan says, Nicaragua is guilty of ''aggressive activities in Central
America.'' Yet over years of talk about the Sandinistas fueling other
revolutions in the region, the Reagan Administration has not produced a groat's
worth of proof. Internally, the President says, the Sandinistas are using
''Stalinist'' tactics. Yet there is voluble opposition, in business and the
church and Parliament, of a kind unknown in the Soviet Union or its satellites.

The only threats that could imaginably justify the Reagan actions against
Nicaragua are of Soviet bases there and military aggression across Nicaragua's
borders. But the means to deal with those possibilities are at hand - and will
be damaged by the Reagan tactics.

The Contadora countries - Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela - have made
significant progress in negotiating a settlement of the Central American
tension. Their plan would bar foreign bases and forces in the region.

But Mr. Reagan has effectively stymied the Contadora process, preferring
unilateral efforts to overthrow the Sandinista Government. Former President
Carlos Andres Perez of Venezuela, writing in The New York Times on the day the
economic embargo was imposed, said the Reagan policy was ''poisoning relations''
with America's Latin allies and ''pushing the Sandinista leadership deeper into
the Soviet-Cuban camp.'' The embargo will further those unhappy trends.

On Nicaragua, some Democrats apparently think they must match Mr. Reagan's show
of ''resolve.'' Even Representative Stephen Solarz of New York, who knows
better, spoke of the embargo as an ''appropriate'' technique consonant with
''American values.'' So it may be a bipartisan policy: all muscle, no head.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 2, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S POWER WIDE UNDER EMERGENCY LAW

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 1


In ordering economic sanctions against Nicaragua today, President Reagan acted
under the broad powers conferred on him by the International Emergency Economic
Powers Act of 1977, which is part of a pattern of deference by Congress and the
courts to the executive branch in military and foreign policy matters.

A lawyer representing Nicaragua asserted today that the trade embargo and other
sanctions violated international law and perhaps also the domestic law of the
United States.

But most experts doubted that a legal challenge to the sanctions could succeed
in this country, especially after a series of recent statements in which the
Supreme Court stressed its reluctance to challenge the executive branch in the
sphere of foreign policy.

Mr. Reagan's declaration of a national emergency to deal with what he called
''an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign
policy of the United States'' by Nicaragua was a premise legally required for
the sanctions.

Emergency Declaration Required

The 1977 law requires a President to declare such a national emergency before he
imposes trade embargoes, regulates foreign commerce, freezes foreign assets and
uses an array of other sweeping powers to deal with a foreign crisis, as
President Carter did during the Iran hostage crisis.

Aside from the emergency declared during that crisis and the one declared today,
the only other use of the 1977 emergency powers law came in 1983 and 1984, when
Mr. Reagan declared a national emergency as a basis for maintaining restrictions
on foreign sales of militarily sensitive technology after the Export
Administration Act had temporarily expired.

The 1977 law amended a broader statute, the Trading With the Enemy Act of 1917,
which was the basis for the continuing trade embargoes of Cuba, North Korea,
Vietnam and Cambodia and the embargo of China, which was lifted in 1971. Since
1977, new use of this act has been restricted to wartime situations.

International Law Cited

Mr. Reagan's premise that Nicaragua threatens the security of the United States
is widely disputed as a matter of fact. But no United States court is likely to
challenge it as a matter of law.

However, Paul S. Reichler, Nicaragua's Washington lawyer, and some other experts
said the sanctions may violate international law, both under a 1958 treaty
between Nicaragua and the United States and under the Charter of the
Organization of American States.

The O.A.S. Charter provides that ''no state may use or encourage the use of
coercive measures of an economic or political character in order to force the
sovereign will of another state and obtain from it advantages of any kind.''

The Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation Between the United States and
Nicaragua ordinarily prohibits either country from restricting trade with the
other and guarantees ''freedom of commerce and navigation'' between the two.

Termination of Treaty

The Administration served notice today on Nicaragua that it would terminate the
treaty, but acknowledged that under its terms the termination would not take
effect for one year.

Michael Kozak, Deputy Legal Adviser in the State Department, said that both the
treaty and the O.A.S. Charter explicitly authorized parties to take actions that
would otherwise be prohibited, in order to protect their national security.

But Mr. Reichler, Nicaragua's lawyer, said, ''There's no question but that the
sanctions are illegal as a matter of international law.''

He said Nicaragua, which already has a lawsuit in the International Court of
Justice at The Hague accusing the United States of illegally sponsoring military
attacks, might ask the same court to rule on the economic sanctions.

The Administration says the World Court had no jurisdiction to decide the
military attacks case. After losing several preliminary motions and predicting
privately that the World Court would ultimately uphold Nicaragua's suit,
Administration officials said last year that the United States would no longer
participate in the case.

Mr. Reichler also said it was possible that the sanctions could be challenged in
United States courts on the ground that an assertion that Nicaragua''constitutes
a threat to the United States is dishonest and a complete distortion of fact.''

But other experts, noting that the Supreme Court has repeatedly stressed the
primacy of the President in matters of security and foreign policy, doubted that
any United States court would second-guess a Presidential declaration of a
national emergency.

The International Emergency Economic Powers Act provides that, when a President
has declared an emergency, he has authority to ''investigate, regulate or
prohibit'' foreign exchange transactions, payments involving foreign interests,
and movements of currency and securities. The President may also ''investigate,
regulate, direct and compel, nullify, void, prevent or prohibit, any
acquisition, holding, withholding, use, transfer, withdrawal, transportation,
importation or exportation of, or dealing in,'' or any other transactions,
involving ''any property in which any foreign country or a national thereof has
any interest.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 2, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI SEEMS SPLIT ON LINKS WITH U.S.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, May 1


Ten years after the fall of the American-backed Government of South Vietnam,
Hanoi's leadership appears divided over how to improve relations with Washington
and whether the moment is right to make the effort.

At a news conference today Le Duc Tho, the 74-year-old Politburo member thought
to be the most likely successor to the Communist Party Secretary General, Le
Duan, took a sharply critical line toward Washington. Criticizing the United
States for imposing conditions to the setting up of diplomatic relations and for
refusing to allow more cultural and scientific exchanges, Mr. Tho said, ''I can
see no possibility of normalization in the immediate future.''

His statements followed comments in an interview last week in Hanoi with Reuters
in which Mr. Tho seemed to rule out once and for all the release of prisoners
from Vietnamese re-education camps for resettlement in the United States. He
said there were 10,000 such prisoners. Government spokesmen here have been
giving a figure of 7,000.

On Sunday Le Mai, the 44-year-old Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs who
often acts as spokesman for Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, took a more
conciliatory line toward Washington in a meeting here with five Western
reporters.

'Better Exchange of Views'

''Contacts between us are more frequent,'' he said. ''We have a better exchange
of views and have achieved some kind of mutual understanding.''

Both Mr. Tho and Mr. Mai said the time was right for talks on Cambodia. Mr. Mai
said he thought the majority of interested nations now agreed on the outlines of
a political solution and that a way had to be found to open discussions on how
to bring it about. Both he and Mr. Tho repeated the Vietnamese belief that if
there were no talks, the situation would solve itself militarily with no
political concessions.

At his news conference today Mr. Tho criticized former Secretary of State Henry
A. Kissinger, with whom the Vietnamese leader negotiated the 1973 Paris peace
agreement that led to the withdrawal of American troops from South Vietnam. Both
men were later jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.

Mr. Tho said if news reports he had heard were correct, Mr. Kissinger was guilty
of ''gross slanders'' about the numbers of political prisoners in Vietnam or the
size of casualty figures in the wake of Hanoi's conquest of South Vietnam.

''Because he smarted under the blow of defeat,'' Mr. Tho said of Mr. Kissinger,
''he is now showing himself as rather aggressive. He is trying to evade the
facts.'' [Attempts to reach Mr. Kissinger for reaction, at his home and his
office in Washington, were unsuccessful.] Mr. Tho called on the United States to
allow more people-to-people exchanges with Vietnam.

''Over one hundred Americans a year are allowed into Vietnam - military,
diplomatic, Congressional, scientific,'' he said. '

From Mr. Mai's perspective exchanges with American delegations have have been
fruitful and promising. Mr. Mai, who spent four years on the Vietnamese
negotiating team in Paris and has been involved in setting up the Orderly
Departure Program, which allows Vietnamese to emigrate legally to the United
States, has also been involved in regular discussions on Americans missing in
action since the Vietnam War. Meetings on this issue have recently been
increased from four to six a year. Last month Hanoi announced that the first
joint American-Vietnamese inspection of a wartime crash site would take place in
June.

''There has been quite a lot of progress on M.I.A.'s,'' Mr. Mai said. ''At first
our meetings of experts were not very useful but now we are working together
better.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 2, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SORTING OUT COVERAGE OF HANOI'S CELEBRATION

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 976 words


IS Vietnam manipulating American television? Are the networks being used? Henry
A.

Kissinger raised the questions, at least peripherally, Tuesday night on ABC's
''Nightline.'' He criticized the ''absolutely one-sided account of the
correspondents.'' He also said there was ''something demeaning about having the
three networks cover a victory parade over the United States.'' In fact, Mr.
Kissinger was onto something: the recent television coverage has served
Vietnamese interests.

It is not that the networks pursue a Communist, or even particularly liberal,
agenda; it is more that they pursue their own agenda. It is not that coverage is
dishonest; it is more that it is thoughtless. Television has no memory. What
exists is what exists now.

Thus the predominant image in the recent coverage has been a peasant planting a
field or an ox pulling a plow. Vietnam looks peaceful and bucolic.
Correspondents, burdened by the need to appear omniscient, do not mention that
they must hire transportation from the Vietnamese Government, and that access is
controlled. Meanwhile, contact between Vietnamese and foreigners is prohibited
by law. It is absurd to think that we see, or hear, very much that is not
officially sanctioned.

Mr. Kissinger was distressed, in part, by remarks by Le Duc Tho. Mr. Tho, who
was once Vietnam's chief negotiator at the Paris peace talks and is now a member
of the Politburo, also appeared on ''Nightline.'' Among other things, he thanked
the American people ''for their support and contributions to our present
victory.'' Then he urged cooperation between Vietnam and the United States.

Nonetheless, when Ted Koppel, the ''Nightline'' moderator, asked Mr. Tho why the
United States should cooperate and what it would gain, Mr. Tho did not answer.
It is possible he did not need to. Television coverage has suggested we have
nothing to lose by cooperation, and that humanity may even demand it.

Consider, for example, three consecutive Vietnam segments on the ''CBS Evening
News'' last week. Bob Simon interviewed Ngo Ba Thanh, a kindly looking Deputy in
the National Assembly. ''Now the economy, it's a complete mess,'' she said
cheerfully. ''The West completely boycott, you know.''

Go now to a group of young men, doing exercises in Hanoi. ''Everyone is still
vigilant and mobilized,'' Mr. Simon commented, ''but they don't seem to mean
it.'' Presumably this was because the young men were smiling.

The next night, we saw Phan Thi Kim Phuc. In 1972, at the age of 10, she was the
victim of a misplaced napalm strike by South Vietnamese planes. A photograph
memorialized her, running down a road in agony. The picture became the most
enduring antiwar image of Vietnam.

Thirteen years later, Miss Phan is still in pain. ''I still suffer from the
burns,'' she told Mr. Simon. ''I am sad. I don't have strength to study like the
others.''

And indeed, Miss Phan is a victim, deserving of help and pity. At the same time,
it's ingenuous not to recognize that she's also a propaganda symbol. Like her
country, Mr. Simon said, she's been wounded, but she's trying to recover. ''To
survive is to forgive in the world of Kim Phuc,'' he declared. ''What she really
wants to do is to study one day in the United States.''

The next night, Mr. Simon was in Cam Ne, scene of a famous television report by
Morley Safer in 1965. CBS rebroadcast part of the report: a Marine ignited the
roof of a thatched hut with a cigarette lighter. Mr. Simon spoke: ''Of the many
new weapons tried out in Vietnam, the most memorable may have been the Zippo
lighter.''

Then we heard Mr. Safer in 1965. ''The women and old men who remained will never
forget that August afternoon,'' he said. Twenty years later, Mr. Simon agreed.
He said the villagers would ''never forget, and they still don't understand.''

The implication was that the Marines were wanton, acting on whim. A moment
later, however, Mr. Simon buoyantly produced ''the man the Marines were looking
for year after year - the district commander of the Vietcong.'' And where had he
been hiding?  ''Right here,'' the old Viet Cong said. ''People kept me in their
homes and gave me food. I was in the village the whole time.''

It was eerie. Were the Marines wrong in attacking the village, as Mr. Safer and
Mr. Simon had suggested 20 years apart? Didn't the Viet Cong ever kill anyone?
What was the old V.C. doing in the village, anyway, and why were the villagers
still puzzled?

Thus television coverage blurs distinctions. Everything washes out. In the
absence of a countervailing voice, or reminders of the subsequent disasters in
Southeaast Asia, the coverage has favored Vietnam, but even so it's been
muddled. Sometimes we may choose what we please.

There was something like an apotheosis of this on Tuesday night. Mr. Kissinger
was wrong when he said the networks were celebrating the victory parade in Ho
Chi Minh City. The networks were unclear about what they were doing; they only
knew they were there.

On the ''CBS Evening News,'' Liz Trotta summed up the parade this way:

''The Hanoi Government has said several times it wants better relationships with
the United States, but one would never guess it from the anti-American rhetoric
at today's victory parade. Communist party offiials lambasted the United States,
describing it as bellicose and stubborn.''

Minutes later, we heard Garrick Utley on the ''NBC Nightly News'' - same place,
same parade, same officials.

''This celebration commemorated the defeat of the United States,'' he said,
''but neither in official statement nor in the personal attitudes of the people
was there any indication of anti-Americanism. Vietnam now wants better
relationships with the United States.''

We are clear here only about Vietnam wanting better relationships. The
television message is that the rest doesn't matter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter Cronkite and Rep. John McCain

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET CALLS REAGAN'S EMBARGO 'PATHOLOGICAL'

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 2


The Soviet Government's press agency said today that President Reagan was
venting a ''pathological hatred for the Sandinista revolution'' in imposing a
trade embargo on Nicaragua.

''To attain its hegemonistic ambitions, the Reagan Administration is not averse
to the use of any, even the dirtiest, means,'' the Tass press agency said in a
commentary.

In another commentary, on Wednesday, Tass noted, without comment, a statement by
the Reagan Administration that Nicaragua had become a ''pillar for the Soviet
presence.''

The two commentaries compared United States actions in Nicaragua with what it
called interference in Chile, Grenada and Vietnam.

New Stage in 'Undeclared War'

The agency said that Mr. Reagan's decision to impose the embargo had not come as
a surprise.

''It is simply another stage in the undeclared war the United States is waging
against Nicaragua,'' Tass said. ''In that war, the Washington Administration is
not beyond using any methods.''

Tass mentioned American support for the former Government of Anastasio Somoza
Debayle, the mining of Nicaraguan harbors and United States military maneuvers
in Honduras.

''Now, apart from military and political pressure, the U.S. Administration is
launching a massive offensive against Nicaragua on the economic front,'' Tass
said. ''It is directed above all against the Nicaraguan people in a bid to break
their will by hunger and privation.''

Mr. Reagan's message to Congress on the embargo referred to the recent Moscow
visit of President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua as a basis for concern.
The Soviet leaders promised him continued economic aid. There was no public
mention of any military aid. ---- Muted Displeasure By JOSEPH BERGER Reaction to
President Reagan's embargo decision was muted yesterday in Western Europe and
Latin America, though what reaction there was suggested displeasure.

In Britain, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's deputy in the House of Commons,
Speaker John Biffen, appeared to question the boycott's wisdom when he said, in
response to a question, that ''trade sanctions are not particularly effective.''

A French Government official indicated that France would soon express its
disapproval.

''For us,'' he said, ''the causes of the conflict are economic and social and
they need to be treated with social and economic aid, which is aimed at keeping
the country from orienting itself with the East.''

French See 'Cuban Scenario'

The newspaper Le Monde, in a front-page editorial, asked whether the ''Cuban
scenario'' would repeat itself.

''During the 1960's,'' it said, ''the measures aimed at squeezing Cuba
economically no doubt contributed toward pushing Havana into the arms of
Moscow.''

In Bonn, where Chancellor Helmut Kohl was playing host to President Reagan for
the economic conference of seven non-Communist industrial nations, Hans-Jurgen
Wischnewski, treasurer of the opposition Social Democrats, said he saw irony in
the fact that a conference intended to encourage free trade was beginning with
the imposition of an embargo.

Another party official said President Reagan's announcement of the embargo in
Bonn, without having informed the West German Government, had violated
diplomatic custom.

Move Closer to Soviet Likely

Helmut Schafer, the foreign policy spokesman for the Free Democrats, said that
Nicaragua would be forced to move closer to the Soviet Union. He urged Western
Europe to ignore the embargo and to support efforts of the so-called Contadora
group of Latin American nations trying to forge a national unity government in
Nicaragua.

In Spain, an editorial in the newspaper El Pais recalled American sanctions
against Cuba and said: ''It seems as if Washington is completely blind to the
lessons of history.''

In South America, Foreign Minister Augusto Ramirez Ocampo of Colombia said: ''We
had kept alive the hope that initiatives linked to Contadora, such as talks
between the United States and Nicaragua, would help the peace process. Now we
will have to navigate alone with the Contadora group.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ART PEOPLE

BYLINE: By Douglas C. MCGill

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 768 words


PETER WORMSER and William Fellows are in a most enviable position for two young
architects just beginning their own firm: New York's most recent public monument
- the Vietnam Veterans War Memorial, erected just last week at 55 Water Street -
is designed by them.

Although the reception from architectural critics and the public is not yet
known, the selection of the monument itself signals a high level of achievement.
The design was chosen over 1,150 entrants from 45 states by a panel of
distinguished art world professionals, including the architect M. Paul
Friedberg, the sculptor Ursula von Rydingsvard and the president of Cooper
Union, William Lacy.

Following a concept that provided for the participation of veterans in every
stage of the design process, the panel's choice was later confirmed by the New
York Vietnam Veterans Commission. It will be dedicated by Mayor Koch at an
invitation-only ceremony Monday at 9:30 P.M., followed by a half-hour fireworks
display visible from Lower Manhattan and the Brooklyn Promenade, beginning at 10
P.M.

In many ways, the monument is one of the city's most unusual war memorials.
Instead of a single statement of postwar patriotism - a figurative grouping,
say, of soldiers in combat - it presents a powerful testament to ambiguity of
feeling and fact.

Situated at the base of an amphitheater in the former Jeannette Park, now to be
called the Vietnam Veterans Plaza, the memorial is a 66-foot-long wall of
translucent green glass, into which are etched passages from letters written by
Vietnam soldiers during the war.

The letters were chosen for their clarity and descriptive power from more than
3,000 letters by Messrs. Wormser and Fellows and several Vietnam veterans, with
special help from Joseph Ferrandino, a writer and veteran. The chosen passages
reflect the widest possible range of feeling and observation about the war.

Most of the letters begin ''Dear Mom,'' or ''Dear Mom and Dad,'' and the words
that follow describe feelings ranging from patriotism to shame, from spiritual
exhilaration and hope to moral disgust and fear.

Many of the letters - especially those in which young soldiers describe their
hopes for life after the war - were followed by notes that the soldiers had been
killed in action, and are crushingly powerful.

''There are so many issues about Vietnam, that to try to resolve them with a
single gesture would have been impossible,'' explained Mr. Fellows. ''We tried
to develop a more dynamic environmental piece.''

''A shining figure or an obelisk just wouldn't tell the whole story,'' Mr.
Wormser added. ''A collage of feelings is the whole story. Because it is so
unresolved, we decided that the best way to tell it was to use the words and
letters of the people who were there.''

The idea for the design began with an earlier proposal that the two young
architects made for the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington. In their earlier
design, the names of the dead were inscribed on the surface of walls; in the
design that won the New York City competition, the architects sought a way to
give voice - beyond the simple recitation of names - to both those who died and
those who survived the war.

While the final design appears unorthodox, it was in fact inspired by many
architectural precedents, from tombstone epitaphs to the Wailing Wall in
Jerusalem. The idea of using translucent green glass was mainly derived from a
1964 proposal by the architect Louis Kahn for a Jewish Martyrs Memorial in
Battery Park that was never built.

Mr. Wormser and Mr. Fellows, who are both 32 years old, were students during the
1960's and early 70's, and their experience of the war consisted mainly of
occasional marching in demonstrations and watching television newscasts of
combat. Reading the 3,000 letters of the veterans, they said, significantly
added to their experience of the war.

''In the letters,'' Mr. Fellows said, ''you get beyond body counts and
statistical troop movements, and you're left with real people. You so seldom see
any reason for anything that happened in a combat zone. The overriding thing I
saw was the struggle of people trying to maintain their sanity in a situation
that was insane.''

QUICK SKETCHES: The latest attempt to take stock of the rampant growth of the
East Village art scene is ''Eastvillage '85 - A Guide, A Documentary,''
published by Pelham Press. A useful compendium of photographs and essays that
documents the latest ''who's with whom'' and doing what, the book looks and
reads like the yearbook of an exceptionally strange but energetic high school
senior class .

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POP/JAZZ;
LEONARD COHEN BRINGS BACK HIS 'BLUES'

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 988 words


WHEN Leonard Cohen, the Montreal-based poet, songwriter, and novelist, takes the
stage of Carnegie Hall Sunday evening, it will be the first North American
appearance in 10 years by the composer of ''Suzanne,'' ''Bird on a Wire,''
''Famous Blue Raincoat'' and a dozen other cult classics. With their haunting
long-lined melodies sung in a sorrowful, softly penetrating drone, they belong
to a genre that the 50-year-old Mr. Cohen likes to call ''the Jewish blues.''

Mr. Cohen's appearance coincides with the release of a wonderful new album,
''Various Positions,'' a collection of nine new song-poems that is his first
recording since the critically acclaimed ''Recent Songs'' in 1979. Like the 1979
album, ''Various Positions'' crossbreeds a modal gypsy-flavored folk music with
the melodic simplicity of country and western music. The arrangements interweave
Mr. Cohen's voice with fiddle, pedal steel guitar and a female backup ensemble
that includes the gifted Los Angeles pop singer Jennifer Warnes. The dialectical
implications of vocal interplay that Mr. Cohen calls ''plus and minus, male and
female'' have been a deliberate and recurring echo in Mr. Cohen's records for
years. And the new album's most ambitious songs have the power of Old Testament
fables secularized as troubadour song-poetry.

Like many other North American singer-songwriters whose careers reached their
peak in the late 60's and early 70's, Mr. Cohen has remained a much bigger star
in Europe, where he recently picked up several ''gold'' albums. ''I think that
in Europe you have more of a tradition of people who want to hear the voice of
the man who can't sing,'' Mr. Cohen observed sardonically last week. ''And like
country and western audiences in America, European audiences tend to be very
loyal over a long period.''

A Hero to Solidarity

On his recent European tour, the singer was particularly surprised to discover
himself a hero of the Polish Solidarity movement. ''We played four Polish
cities, including Warsaw,'' Mr. Cohen said. ''I had no idea I had any place in
the Polish culture, but my songs have been closely identified with Solidarity. I
received a note from Lech Walesa when I arrived, and my translators are members
of Solidarity. Because there are few records in Poland, the lyrics are
translated and circulated in mimeographed pamphlets. I found myself in a
difficult situation, because the people in Solidarity wanted me to make
statements that would compromise the Government. It was tricky because I was a
guest of the country, and the atmosphere is very oppressive. Although my heart
was completely with the resistance movement, the musicians and technicians on
the tour convinced me not to say anything that might compromise our chances of
leaving the country. I didn't have the chance to test my courage.''

From the release of his first album, ''The Songs of Leonard Cohen,'' in 1967,
Mr. Cohen's songs have used ritualistic imagery and a flowing formal poetic
diction to evoke life as a series of tests and ritualistic passages. The most
substantial songs on ''Various Positions'' are dark, tangled fables of love and
combat informed by the poet's meditations on Vietnam, the Holocaust and the
Middle East.

In ''The Captain,'' a dying Army officer says to a young soldier: ''There is no
decent place to stand In a massacre; But if a woman take your hand Go and stand
with her.'' The song seems to express Mr. Cohen's vision of war as a tragic,
unavoidable condition of masculinity, and he acknowledged that it was
''antipacifist.''

Equally evocative is ''The Night Comes On,'' a Freudian allegory of a young
man's growing up, having to leave the security of his mother's protection and
learn to ''hide in the world.''

''Songwriting is a long process of uncovering and binding,'' Mr. Cohen said. ''A
chord change will suggest a few words. It's mostly instinctual. People have said
I don't know anything about music, but you have to have some tools. Some of the
songs on my last two records have a minor Eastern European feeling, because I
grew up with that kind of music - my mother sang those Russian songs around the
house. The 'Jewish Blues' are really a combination of country and western music
and synagogue liturgy.

Started in a Country Band

''I love country music. My first musical job was in a country band when I was
about 17 and played the electric guitar in a group called the Buckskin Boys.
Later, in 1969 and '70, I lived outside of Nashville, which is where I recorded
my second and third albums.''

In addition to completing ''Various Positions'' recently, Mr. Cohen has been
involved in ambitious film and video projects. Using the interlocking nine-line
verse form called the Spenserian stanza, he wrote 300 lines of lyric verse for
the movie ''The Merry Go-Man,'' starring Carol Laure and Nick Mancus, with music
by Lewis Furey. Mr. Cohen described the filmed cabaret opera about a broken-down
Montreal singer who has his wishes granted as ''a combination of Brecht and
Disney.'' The movie will be shown noncompetitively at Cannes in the category of
invited films. Mr. Cohen also completed a half-hour video, ''I Am a Hotel,''
that has won several awards.

If Mr. Cohen's high seriousness has necessarily precluded big popularity, his
seductive drone and mordantly romantic lyrics have made their mark on
contemporary pop, particularly in Europe, where British groups like the Smiths,
Echo and the Bunnymen, and Joy Division have acknowleged his influence, and one
group, Sisters of Mercy, even took its name from one of his best-known songs.

''As they say in the Talmud,'' Mr. Cohen reflected, ''there's good wine in every
generation. I really do feel as though the tradition continues, and that I'm
somehow a part of it.''

Showtime on Sunday is 8 P.M. Tickets are $15.50 to $20 and are available at the
Carnegie Hall box offfice (247-7800), and Ticketron outlets.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Leonard Cohen (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 4, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
THE RED BANANA MENACE

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 748 words


What has 58,000 telephones, almost as many people as Houston, Tex., and
threatens the security of the United States? 239.2,0,276,2,165.6,0
,276,2,276,0>As every student of the World Almanac knew immediately after
reading the first two clues, the answer is Nicaragua. Those same students know
that when the count was last taken the United States had only 191 million
telephones to match against Nicaragua's 58,000.

The arithmetic is ominous: for every 58 telephones with which Nicaragua can hit
us, the United States has only 191,000 telephones with which to retaliate.

Closet Stalinists and America-haters will say that American superiority on this
scale proves President Reagan overrated Nicaraguan power when he ordered a trade
embargo to shield the United States against an avalanche of Marxist-grown
bananas. Don't be deceived.

If superiority of 191,000 to 58 looks impressive, consider the population
figures. What soft-headed liberals overlook is that while our telephones must
support a nation of 234.2 million people, Nicaragua's have only 2.8 million
people to serve.

You won't hear it from the left-leaning soreheads who can never forgive
President Reagan for being unbeatable in photo opportunities, but a
191,000-to-58 superiority in telephones shrinks alarmingly when factored into
the abovementioned population figures. For example:

Has it occurred to you that 234.2 million people with 191 million telephones do
not have enough of these vital machines to equip every citizen with a phone?
Simple arithmetic reveals why the Pentagon is deeply alarmed.

Fact: With 234.2 million people and 191 million telephones, we have a desperate
shortage - one phone for each eight-tenths (0.8) of a citizen.

More Fact: With their 58,000 telephones the Nicaraguans have one phone for every
48 people.

Doesn't this put them at a disadvantage? Hah! To believe that is to fall for the
drivel spread by the so-called Neo-Old New Deal Big Governniks.

Consider how many Nicaraguans yearn to be free of their Red masters so they can
live under a new government freely chosen by the United States Central
Intelligence Agency. Would you guess that 47 of every 48 Nicaraguans, given the
blessed opportunity offered by a telephone, would hesitate for an instant to
call the White House and say ''Uncle,'' as President Reagan has politely asked
their insolent Government to do?

That would be a highly conservative guess, unless you doubt indubitable White
House sources, as do so many notorious left-wingers, who are basically the same
people who prevented us from using a few more bombings to turn Vietnam into
another Hawaii.

Why are these 47 of every 48 Nicaraguans not calling the White House already? It
is obvious: In a country with one telephone for every 48 people, the 47 who want
to get rid of the Government are going to have a hard time getting a telephone
installed.

To get a telephone in these straits, it is probably necessary to cotton up to
the powerful Marxists who run things and promise to collaborate in their schemes
for putting Red bananas on the breakfast cereal of unsuspecting North Americans.

These hard facts demonstrate why people who really care about America are in
favor of the President's huge new ''Banana Wars'' budget.

If we can provide two telephones for every living American - excepting only the
handful of surviving big-government liberals who can't stand it that the
President has a fantastic smile - Nicaragua's chances of getting its
Marxist-Leninist bananas into the innocent North American stomach via the
oatmeal could be virtually eliminated.

This is the assumption behind the multibillion-dollar ''Banana Wars'' project.
It would provide every United States citizen with the telephone wherewithal to
call three other citizens immediately upon rising and caution them to make sure
their bananas are not Red Nicaraguan bananas before slicing them onto the
cereal.

On the Central American front, the C.I.A. would be authorized to slip thousands
of heavily equipped guerrilla telephone installers (the ''phontras'') into the
Nicaraguan countryside to install telephones in the huts of all who are willing
to use them to dial Washington and call for an end to big government, except at
the Pentagon.

Interested sources say Nicaraguans refusing to let the ''phontras'' install
phones definitely will not be shot, provided they have a reasonable excuse, such
as having teen-agers who would drive them crazy if there was a phone in the hut.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 4, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 690 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 50. 1. This smile signals the start of another new term. Explain. 2.
President Reagan declared a state of national emergency to deal with what he
called ''an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and
foreign policy of the United States.'' To what was he referring and what was the
reason for the declaration? 3. An orchestra that holds two world's records, for
the largest audience at a classical music concert (400,000 people) and for the
most recordings sold (50 million), celebrated its 100th year. What orchestra is
it? 4. In a dramatic demonstration of partisan animosity, Republican Congressman
marched out of the House chamber to protest a close call. What was at issue? 5.
The number of drivers and passengers killed in motor vehicle accidents in New
York State (declined/ rose/stayed basically unchanged) in the first three months
after the state required the wearing of seat belts, according to the
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles. 6. As soldiers paraded in Ho Chi Minh City to
mark the 10th anniversary of the fall of Saigon, the air was filled with sounds
of a distinctly unmartial kind. What kind of music was being played? 7. Half the
population growth in the nation since the 1960 census has occurred in just three
states - one in the West, one in the Southwest, and one in the South. Identify
them. 8. The assembly line at the A. J. Canfield Company in Chicago cannot keep
up with the demand for one of its products, a substance that satisfies two of
America's deepest and most contradictory cravings - for chocolate and for
slimness. What product is it? 9. ''What ought to be done to the man who invented
the celebrating of anniversaries? Mere killing would be too light.'' This was
written by a famous American author who might be dismayed that his 150th
anniversary is being widely celebrated this year. Identify him. 10. A dispute
erupted between White House aides and West German officials on a remark
attributed to President Reagan. What was the President supposed to have said?
11. The crew aboard the space shuttle Challenger saw red and yellow and green
and pink. What were they looking at? 12. Former Gov. Hugh L. Carey said: ''It
was memorable to be there when the money was borrowed. It is better to be there
for the burning of the mortgage.'' To what was he referring? 13. One of the
nation's largest brokerage concerns pleaded guilty to an elaborate fraud that
let it use as much as $250 million a day of bank funds without paying interest.
What concern is it? 14. The Senate approved the White House budget package,
giving President Reagan a victory that was considered largely symbolic. Why was
it viewed this way? 15. Israel pulled its troops out of the southern port city
of Tyre, completing the (first/second/final) phase of its three-stage withdrawal
from Lebanon. 16. An author who was a member of Vassar College class of '33
presented her Alma Mater with more than 6,500 of her papers, a treasure trove
for those who take their literature and their gossip seriously. Who is she? 17.
Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward transferred the jurisdiction for investigating
allegations of excessive force or police brutality to the Internal Affairs
Division from the area that had previously been responsible for looking into
such charges. What area was it? 18. Toasts were raised to the end of an era in
22 Oklahoma counties, but not in 7 others. Explain. 19. In Texas, some students
are dropping out of bands and choruses, and track and football teams are losing
members, as a result of a new state law. What law is it? 20. A sport normally
associated with fall will be back in season. Explain. 21. According to the
Pentagon's inspector general, the highly publicized assertions by the Defense
Department about cracking down on overcharging and abuse by military contractors
are (accurate/exaggerated). 22. The Federal Communications Commission ruled that
radio stations may be denied a broadcast license for airing programs that
advocate racial hatred and disregard for the Government. True or false?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of smile relating to question no. 1

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 4, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY PLANS FOR 'WHAT IF' LATIN WAR

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 3


The Army has begun a study to determine the military and civic actions that
would be necessary if American troops were ordered into a hostile situation in
Central America, officers said today.

President Reagan and senior Administration officials have repeatedly said they
have no intention of deploying combat forces to Central America except for
periodic maneuvers, such as those coming to a close in Honduras.

But Administration officials have also said the United States must be prepared,
under the Rio Pact of 1947, to dispatch military forces to the region if the
security of the Western Hemisphere is threatened and if members of the pact
agree to collective action.

What the Study Will Examine

Officers said these were among the kinds of questions the study would seek to
answer:

* What kind of artillery training will be necessary to prevent gunners from
causing what the Army calls ''collateral'' damage, which means killing
civilians? In massed warfare, artillerymen are trained to lay down barrages; in
a low-intensity conflict, they may be required to fire one accurate shot at a
time.

* What kinds of small-unit tactics are best suited to anti-guerrilla operations?

* How do Americans build intelligence networks so that immediate tactical
information can be gathered? In the Lebanon and Grenada operations, the lack of
good intelligence has been singled out as a critical failure.

* In civic action, how do American soldiers help the citizens of the nation
being assisted in a way that the United States does not take over tasks that the
government of that nation should be doing for itself?

The officers said that, in addition, the results of the study could be used to
train younger officers who have been commissioned since the end of the Vietnam
War. Most majors and all captains and lieutenants came into the Army after
Vietnam.

The Army officers acknowledged the Administration's policy on the use of combat
forces in Central America but said they must be prepared in the event that
policy is changed. ''We have to be able to answer the question 'what if?' '' one
officer said.

''We didn't adapt too well to Vietnam,'' the officer said, ''and we've got to do
better next time.''

The results of the inquiry, the first of which are expected by the beginning of
next year, will be primarily used to train troops for what the Army calls
''low-intensity conflict,'' which includes counterinsurgency.

The lessons from the inquiry would also help formulate doctrine and plans for
the Army's new light-infantry divisions, other divisions such as the 82d
Airborne, and Rangers and Special Forces, in addition to logistic units to
support them if they are sent to Central America, the officers said.

The inquiry was recommended by Gen. Wallace H. Nutting, who formerly commanded
United States forces in Latin America from a headquarters in Panama and who now
heads the Readiness Command, with headquarters in Tampa, Fla., which is
responsible for preparing forces for use overseas.

The project has just been approved by the Chief of Staff of the Army, Gen. John
A. Wickham Jr., who has invited the Air Force, the Navy and the Marine Corps to
take part and who plans to invite the State Department, the Agency for
International Development, the Central Intelligence Agency and other interested
departments to take part, the officers said.

The exercises that are winding down in Honduras now include Big Pine 3, which
had 4,500 American troops there at its peak, and Universal Trek, which had 6,000
Americans both in Honduras and aboard ships.

In addition, the United States maintains 1,000 to 1,500 administrative, supply
and engineering personnel in Honduras at airfields and bases at Palmerola, San
Lorenzo and La Ceiba, in addition to a small contingent at a training center
near Trujillo. An infantry brigade of 4,000 soldiers is also on duty in Panama.

When General Nutting testified before Congress last winter, he said that meeting
low-intensity threats required coordinated action. ''As a nation,'' he said,
''we seem not to well understand this form of conflict, nor are we well
organized to cope with it.''

'Central Strategic Issue'

''In my opinion,'' the general said, ''this is the central strategic issue
facing the United States today.''

Officers familiar with General Nutting's suggestion said much of the Army's
thinking and training today was oriented toward large-scale, armored and
artillery warfare in Europe or the ultimate in high-intensity warfare - nuclear
war.

The officers said a group of about 20 officers specializing in Latin American
matters, guerrilla warfare and civic action like psychological warfare and
medical care would do the study.

They said the first task would be to sift through the historical information
about the insurgent phase of the war in Vietnam to pull out the relevant
tactical lessons. ''We don't want to reinvent the wheel,'' one officer said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SURVIVORS OF VIETNAM LOOK BACK

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 42, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 412 words


For Lindsey Parker, it was an antidote to loneliness. For Jose Baez, it was a
chance to feel pride. And for Michael Applewhaite, it was a time for feeling
good - because he returned safely from Vietnam.

The mood was pleasure mingled with chagrin as 70 American veterans of the
Vietnam War, many wearing ribbons and medals and parts of their old uniforms,
gathered yesterday at a Vietnam Veterans of America reunion at Cadman Plaza Park
in Brooklyn.

There was beer-drinking and back-slapping - and quiet contemplation of a poster
that called for the return of missing Americans from Vietnam with the slogan
''Wanted, Dead or Alive.''

Mr. Parker, a lanky carpenter from Keene, N.H., who was a paratrooper in
Vietnam, voiced approval of the American role in the war - and anguish at some
fearful memories.

'It Wasn't for a Lost Cause'

''I feel that the people that didn't make it back, it wasn't for a lost cause,''
he said, but he recalled the isolation he had felt for years before he began
meeting with other veterans.

''I thought the reasons I couldn't sleep was my own problem,'' he said. ''Then I
found out I wasn't alone.'' He was a machine gunner and squad leader in the 173d
Airborne Brigade in 1967 and 1968. He escaped being wounded, he said with a wry
grin, because he was ''too scared'' to get hurt.

But Officer Baez, a bridge and tunnel officer for the Triborough Bridge and
Tunnel Authority, took a more upbeat view. He looked at the men around him and
said softly: ''Being here makes me feel that we're all proud of what we did;
it's like a brotherhood.''

Officer Baez of the Bronx was a squad leader in the Third Marine Division in
1966 and 1967. He was wounded in the ankle and later in the cheek.

He told the story of how a helicopter rescued him, when he was first wounded, to
Mr. Applewhaite, also of the Third Marine Division, who lives in Westbury, L.I.,
and is a corrections officer for the Sheriff's Department in Nassau County.

Mr. Applewhaite and other veterans said they were pleased and proud that New
York City has commissioned a memorial at the Vietnam Veterans Plaza, formerly
Jeanette Park, at 55 Water Street between Coenties Slip and South Street. Mayor
Koch is to attend a ceremony at the memorial at 9:30 P.M. Monday. A fireworks
display is also planned for Monday evening with a parade Tuesday morning.

''It's great,'' Mr. Applewhaite said. ''Finally we're getting some recognition
for the fact that we're veterans.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnam veteran (NYT/John Sotomayor)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REFUGEE'S HOPES LIE WITH HIS CHILDREN

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words

DATELINE: PEARLAND, Tex., May 1


In the spring of 1975 a soothsayer in Vietnam assured Nguyen Dinh Tri that he
would enjoy 10 more years of wealth as long as he kept his moustache. Mr. Tri
kept his moustache. And within weeks he lost everything and became a refugee.

Now, 10 years after arriving in the United States and starting an agonizing
resettlement process, Mr. Tri is thinner, grayer, more stooped and less
optimistic. He has pretty much given up hope of ever regaining his former
comfortable affluence with his own company and a house on the ocean.

Mr. Tri is happy not to be in a Communist Vietnam and he is delighted with his
new American citizenship. But he regrets having had to leave his homeland. He
would like to return somehow, someday.

The Tri family was happy to be alive and free 3,636 days ago. A series of
articles in The New York Times over the months following the fall of Saigon
detailed the Tris' progress through the initial refugee crush and the difficult
resettlement process that would become a common experience for 725,000
Indochinese refugees in the United States. Within a week of clearing immigration
in Los Angeles, an ambitious Mr. Tri had made a down payment on a used car and
had found jobs at a wool mill for himself, his wife and oldest son.

Difficulties Over 10 Years

Now, however, an aging Mr. Tri must face a grim reality. He has been through
several jobs and entrepreneurial schemes. He has seen his new house destroyed by
a hurricane. And he has been told that his youngest brother was killed in
Cambodia on a third attempt to escape from Vietnam.

Several months ago Mr. Tri watched as a gas can near a fire exploded, spewing
flaming liquid all over his legs. Now largely confined to his home, facing
$34,000 in medical bills, the 64-year-old former contractor, a Buddhist, prays
several hours a day, thinks more of his next life and talks mainly of the life
he hopes his eight children can build ''in our new country.''

''Now,'' he says, ''I have only one ambition. I am wishing each child to be
healthy and happy and nice people.''

When the Tri family arrived in the United States, the children helped care for
the twins of the Tris' American sponsors, Jim and Colleen Collins, of Camas,
Wash. Thrice a week the whole family, including Mr. Tri's 85-year-old father,
Le, trooped off to English lessons. And neighbors often stopped by to drop off
''extra'' food or ''old'' clothes, many of which had new price tags attached.

Plans to Build New Life

Mr. Tri outlined his plans then: ''Get job. Work hard. Save money. Buy land.
Build.'' The Tris did all of that. They worked hard, rising each morning by 5
A.M. First, they lived with Mr. Collins. Then they rented a house from him. They
saved money and bought their own house in Vancouver, Wash.

There were some adjustments. The women had to get used to kitchen counters; they
preferred to squat on the floor to prepare foods. The youngsters always deferred
their eyes from elders, a sign of respect in Asia sometimes misread in America
as a symptom of shiftiness.

And after the first day of American classes at the age of 11, Mr. Tri's son Hao
boarded one of many school buses lined up in the drive for the ride home and got
lost. It was not until the driver returned to the garage two hours later that he
noticed one lone, silent youngster, Hao, still sitting in the back of bus,
patiently waiting. He thought all buses went by his house.

That day the driver made a special trip to the Tri house on Northwest Ash, three
blocks from school, and Hao disembarked to the cheers of the neighborhood.

A Third College Graduate

Hao says he does not remember much about that day. Now an electrical engineering
student at the University of Houston, he should be the next Tri to graduate from
college. Two other brothers, Trung, a forester, and Chinh, an electrical
engineer, have gone out into the job market. Sadly to their father, however,
they did not stay close to home. Chinh is in Arizona and Trung stayed in
Washington state, there not being many forests to tend in the suburbs here south
of Houston.

Trung also defied his father's wishes, choosing to marry an American girl
instead of a Vietnamese. But all will be forgiven next week when Trung and his
wife, Sally, arrive to introduce the Tri family to their month-old daughter,
Vienna My, My being the Vietnamese word for America.

''I hope they all stay home now,'' Mr. Tri says. All the younger children are in
schools studying such careers as nursing and accounting. All have chores at home
and each works elsewhere too, either for money or tuition. Like millions of
immigrant children, they speak their native tongue at home and English at
school.

Adjustments to Two Cultures

They follow their father's vegetarian diet, at least at home. But when an
American guest comes, they prepare a varied Vietnamese meal of meat and
vegetables or sit down to their own favorite supper, spaghetti.

Their father has mellowed over the decade. No longer are all children banished
from adult conversations in the living room. Now, curling up on couches, they
join in the talk, sometimes even gently correcting their father's English.
Nguyen Ghi Hieu, Mr. Tri's wife, is also less reluctant to speak in her
husband's presence.

Mr. Tri traces his change to the adversities he has encountered and to being a
born-again Buddhist. ''There is difference,'' he says, ''between praying
religion and practicing religion. I make many mistakes in life. I not understand
what means love before. Now, in America with Buddha I love my children more. I
more tempered. Is better.''

Ten years ago Mr. Tri's job in the wool mill did not last long. As the oldest
brother, he lost face doing manual labor after his younger brothers arrived,
fresh from Government indoctrination on the many perquisites of American
citizenship. They went on welfare rolls, which brought in nearly as much money
as their brother got for oiling carding machines, but it left them free to study
English and seek better-paying work.

Several Jobs and a Move

Mr. Tri went through a series of jobs, often serving as an interpreter or
counselor for later-arriving refugees. His father died in 1980. And then one
group of refugees suggested a fishing boat partnership here in Texas, where the
Tris moved three years ago. However, just before buying the boat, someone burned
it.

There followed two jobs managing a liquor store and a 24-hour convenience store,
with family members sharing shifts. However, Mr. Tri quit that job after being
locked in a warehouse during the eighth armed robbery in 12 months.

A Federal loan enabled them to rebuild their home after it was demolished by
Hurricane Alicia. One daughter works in a bakery shop now. Mrs. Tri is a
dietitian in a nursing home. And Mr. Tri returned to interpreting until Oct. 26
last year.

That day he was home alone burning trash when the flames spread toward a can of
gasoline. Fearing a second destruction of his home, Mr. Tri went to move the
can, which burst, burning his legs. A passerby summoned a medical helicopter.

Nineteen days later the uninsured Mr. Tri came home with raw red wounds on his
legs, body and face and a huge medical bill. ''I tell them,'' he says, massaging
the massive purple welts that will hurt for many more months, ''I have not
$34,000. But I say I pay doctor $20 month and hospital $30 month for rest of
life.''

'We Must Help Pay This Country'

Since he can only stand for a minute or so before the pain becomes too great,
Mr. Tri has also had to abandon his idea of raising chickens and fish or perhaps
going back to construction contracting as he did in Vietnam for so long. ''I
know now that not real dream,'' he says.

Mr. Tri hopes instead to return to volunteer interpreting in the fall when he is
eligible for Social Security. ''We must help pay this country somehow,'' he
says.

He thinks his children will contribute much to America. ''I teach them to be
good citizens, to work hard,'' he says. Few of the children remember much
specific about Vietnam, so their mother keeps plastic bags full of photographs
and family mementos for occasional scanning.

Sitting in their shorts and slogan-covered T-shirts, the young Tris giggle at
the Oriental scenes and photographss of relatives in ao dais, the flowing garb
women wear in Vietnam. They remember Vietnam as a fun place with beautiful
beaches. They think the decade has flown by. Mrs. Tri says simply, ''The 10
years is a very long time to me.''

Mr. Tri agrees with his wife. So he has a new plan. The gasoline fire burned off
his moustache last fall. Now he routinely shaves his upper lip. ''I think,'' he
says, ''I try next 10 years without.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Tri family (NYT/Bob Straus and David Falconer)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINESE FIND IT HARD TO SAY NICE THINGS ABOUT THEIR FORMER ALLY HANOI

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words

DATELINE: KUNMING, China


For a quarter of a century until 1975, this city in southwest China was a major
transshipment point for the weapons and materiel that enabled Vietnamese
Communist troops to drive French and American forces from Vietnam.

As Hanoi marks the 10th anniversary of the capture of Saigon, Chinese generals
here continue to look southward. But instead of joining their Vietnamese
counterparts at parades commemorating the victory, the officers pass their days
poring over maps of the mountains that divide the two countries, planning new
moves against an ally that became a bitter foe.

Kunming was the terminus for the American airlift over the Himalayas that helped
prevent the Japanese from overrunning all of China during World War II, and it
is still a hub of military activity. From the headquarters of the Kunming
Military Region, army officers direct the activities of tens of thousands of
Chinese troops who are fighting an undeclared border war with Vietnam.

In February 1979 the cross-border shelling and infantry skirmishing escalated
into a full-scale conflict as the Chinese poured across the border to ''teach
Vietnam a lesson,'' as the action was described by Deng Xiaoping, the
pre-eminent leader in Peking.

Dead Reported at 10,000

But as matters turned out, it was at least as much a lesson for Peking as for
Hanoi, and the Chinese divisions withdrew after a mauling that reportedly cost
them at least 10,000 dead.

Now border tensions are as high as they have been at any time since the
withdrawal, with clashes almost daily along the 750-mile frontier that separates
Vietnam from the Chinese provinces of Yunnan and Guangxi.

Earlier this year, at the height of the five-month dry season, Chinese officials
spoke openly of teaching Vietnam ''a second lesson,'' and diplomats in Peking
went on the alert for signs of another full-scale war.

Like most Western visitors here, a group of Peking-based reporters on a Foreign
Ministry tour were kept well away from the border, which at its closest point
runs 200 miles from Kunming. But a briefing by a Chinese general and
conversations with local people with relatives in the frontier zone added some
insights to the sketchy picture of the conflict.

The Cambodia Connection

The fighting along the frontier is rooted in another conflict, the one pitting
Vietnamese forces against guerrilla factions in Cambodia.

The most important of the Cambodian insurgent groups, the Khmer Rouge, used
Chinese arms to fight their way to power in Phnom Penh in 1975. When the
Vietnamese invaded and overthrew the brutal Khmer Rouge regime in 1978, Peking
came to the Khmer Rouge's aid by applying military pressure along Vietnam's
''back door,'' its border with China.

At a meeting in a Government guesthouse here, Gen. Zhang Xiuming, deputy chief
of staff of the Kunming Military Region, followed the established pattern by
attributing the border fighting to Vietnamese ''provocations'' against China.
Since the 1979 war ended, he said, Hanoi's troops had launched 3,400 attacks
against targets in Yunnan, firing 300,000 shells and killing 1,000 villagers and
soldiers.

The general, 52 years old, said Vietnamese ''aggression'' had reached a new
intensity in the dry season that began in November. Vietnamese activities, he
said, had focused on the Laoshan region, site of one of the principal mountain
passes connecting the two countries, and Vietnamese actions there in the first
three months of this year had included 30 actions ''on the company, battalion or
regiment'' level, with the firing of 130,000 shells.

Aid to Vietnam Put at $20 Billion

Throughout the briefing, in a room decorated with potted cactus flowers, the
general stuck closely to a written text. But there was an edge of rancor in his
voice as he spoke of the efforts China had made before 1975 to assist Vietnam.

He said that despite its own poverty, China had ''tightened its belt'' after the
Communist takeover in 1949 to help Ho Chi Minh, offering military and other
assistance worth $20 billion between 1950 and 1975.

He said that after the United States began heavy bombing of North Vietnam in the
late 1960's, China had allowed the Hanoi regime to relocate ''schools, factories
and warehouses'' inside China, beyond the reach of the American attacks.

This had made for a border of ''peace, tranquillity and friendship,'' he said,
that the Vietnamese had broken when they followed their victory in 1975 by
increasing their involvement in Laos and Cambodia.

Similar resentments surfaced in conversations with Kunming residents with
knowledge of the situation along the frontier, either directly or through
accounts relayed by relatives.

'People Hate the Vietnamese'

One woman said her sister, visiting from the Laoshan area, had told her that her
entire village had been evacuated to temporary accommodations beyond the range
of Vietnamese shelling and that agriculture and other economic pursuits in the
region had virtually come to a standstill.

''People here hate the Vietnamese,'' the woman said. ''When they needed our
help, we gave it, even though we were poor ourselves. Is this any way to repay
us?''

As further evidence of Vietnam's determination to heighten tensions, General
Zhang gave a breakdown of Vietnamese troop deployments that he said showed that
the ''spearhead'' of Hanoi's forces was arrayed against China. He said Hanoi had
a total of one million men under arms in 53 divisions, with 32 deployed in the
north, near the Chinese border, 12 in Cambodia, 6 in southern Vietnam and 3 in
Laos.

The general evaded questions about China's troop strength in the border area. He
contended that the figures he had given on the Vietnamese deployments were
enough to show that ''the Vietnamese Army is continuing to make the border
situation tense.''

'We Stick to Mao's Teaching'

''We stick to Chairman Mao's teaching: 'We will not attack unless attacked, but
if attacked we will certainly counterattack,' '' the general said.

Chinese assertions that it is the innocent party in the border fighting are
viewed with skepticism among Western military attaches in Peking, who say they
believe that China's concern to blunt Vietnamese aggressiveness in Cambodia
provides the most compelling motive for the border strife.

Although General Zhang refuted this, the conditions he gave for peace along the
frontier tied Chinese actions directly to the situation in Cambodia.

''We cannot sit down and negotiate a peaceful settlement until the Vietnamese
have stopped all provocations against us, halted all border incursions onto our
side and withdrawn their occupation troops from Cambodia in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations,'' he said.

At the same time, the general appeared to confirm Western assessments that the
Chinese leadership, despite its warnings, has resolved not to provoke a fresh
war with Vietnam, at least for now.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of China showing location of Kunming

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

O'NEILL DECISION SPURS STAMPEDE FOR HIS SEAT

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1139 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, May 4


Over almost half a century only three men have represented the Eighth
Congressional District in Massachusetts.

First there was James Michael Curley, nearing his ''last hurrah,'' then a young
politician named John F. Kennedy, and since 1953, when Dwight D. Eisenhower
replaced Harry S. Truman in the White House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. In other
words, there is a certain pedigree in the Eighth, which embraces Cambridge,
parts of Boston and the working-class suburbs of Somerville and Watertown.

But now Mr. O'Neill, Speaker of the House of Representatives, has announced he
will not seek re-election next year, and his withdrawal has touched off a
stampede among local Democratic politicians, of which there is no scarcity.

Active Campaigns Already

So far, with the election 18 months away, a State Senator, three State
Representatives and an antinuclear activist have begun active campaigns for Mr.
O'Neill's duchy. At least seven other people say they are seriously considering
running, including two Mayors, a black State Representative who received an
honorary degree from Harvard University after leading protests against the
school's expansion into her poor neighborhood, and Melvin H. King, the black
community leader who ran a strong race for Mayor of Boston two years ago.

''It seems like everyone with 10 friends is giving it some thought,'' said
George Bachrach, a maverick liberal State Senator who is one of the early
front-runners.

But the most intriguing speculation centers on two other possible candidates:
Edward M. Kennedy Jr., the 23-year-old son of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, and
James Roosevelt Jr., a Boston lawyer and state Democratic Party activist whose
grandfather was Franklin D. Roosevelt and whose father was a six-term
Congressman from California. Could there be a Kennedy-versus-Roosevelt race?

The younger Mr. Kennedy, who lost his right leg to cancer when he was 12 years
old, recently moved from Virginia to an apartment in Somerville. He is also in
the process of opening an office in Boston where he plans to run a foundation
for what he terms the ''physically challenged,'' according to friends.

Charting His Prospects

For the moment, his friends and family members insist, he has not made up his
mind whether to run. ''But he's moving around, as they say,'' one close relative
said, charting his prospects.

With his name, the Kennedy family's popularity in Massachusetts and his access
to wealthy fund-raisers, Mr. Kennedy would be a formidable candidate, his
possible opponents concede. Furthermore, he is likable and admired, they say,
and few of his rivals begrudge his possible candidacy.

Mr. O'Neill has not been seriously opposed in years, so the Democratic primary
in the fall of 1986 may produce the most pyrotechnics since Mr. Curley's time.

At a rally in the 1942 Democratic primary, Mr. Curley recounted in his
autobiography, ''I'd Do It Again,'' he told his audience he wanted to introduce
his opponent. But before his rival, J. Ralph Granara, could mount the rostrum,
Mr. Curley grabbed a black air raid warden and introduced him as Mr. Granara.
''The crowd went wild, and so did Granara, who made an effort to haul me into
court,'' Mr. Curley wrote.

In the general election, when his Republican opponent was Tom Eliot, son of a
Unitarian minister, Mr. Curley told an audience that the Unitarians ''are a
curious sect who seem to believe that Our Lord Jesus was a young man with
whiskers who went around in His underwear.''

Reagan Got 36% of Votes

Today the Eighth District is one of the most liberal seats in the country.

About 62 percent of its 522,000 registered voters are Democrats, with only 9
percent Republicans. Last fall the district gave President Reagan only 36
percent of its vote, one of the lowest figures he received outside some
predominantly black areas in Chicago and Philadelphia.

''This district is so liberal most Americans wouldn't recognize it,'' said one
contender, Thomas J. Vallely, a State Representative from Boston's affluent Back
Bay.

Almost two-thirds of the district's residents are tenants, and 15 percent are
college students, one of the highest rates in America. Harvard, the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston College, Boston University and
Brandeis all lie within its boundaries.

''The voters all know who the contras in Nicaragua are, and you had better be
able to talk about South Africa and the Philippines,'' said Mr. Vallely, a
35-year-old of Irish descent who won a Silver Star as a Marine infantryman in
Vietnam and later earned a master's degree from Harvard's Kennedy School of
Government.

''They all drive 1968 Volvos and wear old suits, but it's not a greedy Yuppie
district,'' he added. ''They put their value in things they care about, not
money.''

'A Left-Handed Group'

One result is that almost all the possible Democratic candidates are drawn from
the party's liberal wing. ''This is a left-handed group of people,'' Mr. Vallely
observed.

Mr. Vallely contends he is ''the least left of the group,'' although he
sponsored a homosexual rights bill, is a Roman Catholic who favors abortion and
received a 95 percent rating from the Americans for Democratic Action last year.

Farthest to the left is Thomas M. Gallagher, a 36-year-old South Bronx native
who graduated from Boston College and was an antiwar and tenants' rights
activist before becoming a State Representative. The Boston Phoenix, a weekly
newspaper, refers to him as an ''income redistributor,'' some State House
colleagues as ''Tommy the Commie.'' Mr. Gallagher scoffs at these labels,
preferring to focus on issues like more worker ownership of American industry.

This week he was the lone dissenter when the State House voted for a tax refund.
He argued that the money would be better spent helping the needy.

A Debate on the Party

Mr. Roosevelt, who considers himself in the middle of the group, thinks the
campaign may provide a chance to debate in microcosm the future of the
Democratic Party. ''What we have to emphasize,'' he said, ''is that our
policies, like Social Security and student loans, are not just for special
interests, but to help Americans as a whole.''

Who will win? John Marttila, a political consultant, says the political
differences among the candidates may be too subtle for voters to grasp. He
thinks the better question, so far before the vote, is ''which of these people
will provide the more compelling personal story.''

Mr. O'Neill has become something of a forgotten man. He is not backing any
candidate, and so far only Mr. Roosevelt has openly praised the Speaker, saying,
''I disagree with the notion that Tip is what's wrong with the Democrats.''

But then Mr. Roosevelt has known Mr. O'Neill a long time. His father's House
office was next to Mr. O'Neill's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KENT STATE DEATHS REMEMBERED:

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 51 words


Marianne Nicholson of Lorain, Ohio, pauses at the site where a Kent State
University student was killed by gunfire from National Guardsmen 15 years ago.
At her feet are candles left by other visitors. Four students died while
protesting United States bombing in Cambodia.

United Press International

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 ISSUES IN MADRID AWAITING REAGAN

BYLINE: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 826 words

DATELINE: MADRID, May 4


President Reagan is scheduled to arrive here Monday in what was to be a friendly
visit, but in recent days the trip has become complicated by his trade embargo
against Nicaragua and by demands by some here to cut American troops based in
Spain.

Spanish officials in the Socialist Government of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez
said they still expected Mr. Reagan's three-day stay to be essentially a
friendly visit that would underline growing Spanish-American ties.

But they said the troop and embargo issues were likely to feed expected
anti-American and pacifist protests in the streets and create some divisions in
the official meetings.

The Spanish Government issued a communique Friday night expressing its ''acute
concern'' over the American trade embargo against Nicaragua, which the
Government said presented a ''difficult obstacle'' for peace efforts in Central
America.

Concern on Central America

The communique, released after a meeting between Foreign Minister Fernando Moran
and the American Ambassador, Thomas O. Enders, said the embargo and other recent
events - apparently an allusion to a visit by President Daniel Ortega Saavedra
of Nicaragua to Moscow - could impose East-West rivalries over already difficult
internal problems in Central America.

The issue of the more than 12,000 American armed forces personnel based in
Spain, always a tender topic here, moved to the forefront unexpectedly last
weekend.

In what seemed to be spontaneous criticism of remarks by Richard Burt, Assistant
Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs, Mr. Moran demanded that
talks for cuts in military personnel begin before a referendum on Spanish
membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Alliance scheduled early next year.

Mr. Burt said in a televised interview that the Reagan Administration was not
prepared to negotiate during Mr. Reagan's visit, which Spanish officials took to
mean the Administration would not negotiate at all. The officials later
acknowledged they were mistaken.

But the issue exploded in the Spanish press. Polls have repeatedly shown that
nearly two-thirds of those responding oppose American military forces here. Last
October, Mr. Gonzalez called for a gradual reduction, but he specified no goals
or dates.

Will Wait for End of Treaty

Mr. Gonzalez, in an interview Monday, backed his Foreign Minister, but said the
Government would not push for cuts until the bilateral treaty governing the
troops expires in 1988.

Mr. Gonzalez, who met with Mr. Reagan at the White House in 1983, said he did
not plan to hold substantive talks about the troop issue with him during his
visit here.

But Mr. Moran and Secretary of State George P. Schultz were already scheduled to
meet separately under the auspices of the treaty, making the issue difficult to
avoid, Spanish and American officials said.

The military personnel are mostly Air Force crews at bases in Zaragoza and
Torrejon and sailors at Rota. The Americans have opposed any cuts.

Carter Visited in '80

Mr. Reagan will be the fifth American President to visit Spain since World War
II. The last was Jimmy Carter in 1980, and the issue of the American bases and
Spain's military role on the southern flank of NATO dominated then.

Mr. Reagan, while Governor of California, visited Spain in 1972 as a
representive traveling through Europe for President Nixon. He was then promoting
America's Vietnam policy and met with the Spanish dictator, Generalissimo
Francisco Franco.

Franco died in 1975, and Spain, under an elected conservative goverment joined
the alliance in 1982, several months before Mr. Gonzalez and the Socialists
overwhelmingly swept into office. Mr. Gonzalez froze Spain's military
integration into the alliance and called the referendum. He now openly supports
full Spanish membership and has said that the Government will not be bound by
the results of the vote.

American officials said this Reagan visit was mostly designed to show American
support for Spain's young democracy. The Americans especially want to avoid
emphasis on military matters, to not appear to be pressuring Spain about NATO.

Franco Part of Background

The sensitivity over NATO and the American bases comes largely from a Spanish
perception that the 1953 treaty establishing the bases broke Franco's
international isolation and saved his regime from falling.

In February, the expulsion of two American diplomats here accused of spying and
the disclosure of continguency plans to store nuclear weapons in Spain added
salt to the historical wounds.

''The psychological factors here are much more important because we weren't
liberated in World War II,'' Mr. Gonzalez said in the interview. The Communist
Party of Spain has declared Mr. Reagan as not welcome and pacifists refer to him
as ''the emperor of NATO.''

Though anti-Americanism is not felt in the streets here, even the governing
Socialists are divided over Mr. Reagan's visit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM FETE: A WHO'S WHO OF THE MISSING

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, May 2


Somewhere about midway through a week crowded with events to mark the 10th
anniversary of the Communist takeover of Saigon, people started noticing the
things that were missing.

Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, the architect of Vietnam's military defeat of two foreign
armies, was not on the reviewing stand at the parade Tuesday, or at any other
celebrations in the south. Government officials did not explain why.

Nguyen Thi Binh, the woman who was Foreign Minister of the Provisional
Revolutionary Government, the political party of the Vietcong, was due to be
present at the opening of a new museum of women's history.

Mrs. Binh did not show up. The museum opening had, in any case, been postponed.
There were optimistic responses to requests for interviews with Mrs. Binh, who
became familiar to Westerners during the Paris peace talks. But then reporters
were told, without elaboration, that Mrs. Binh, now Hanoi's Education Minister,
was ''out of the country.'' Explanations were in short supply.

Then there were the missing Russians. After the reception given by Prime
Minister Pham Van Dong for invited foreign guests - members of friendship
associations in non-Communist countries and fraternal party delegations from the
Communist world - Europeans and Americans in attendance reported that if there
were any Soviet representatives present they could not be seen among the Cubans
and Eastern Europeans.

Many of Vietnam's American friends were absent. Though accounts are conflicting
- and there was no official list available - it appears that most of the invited
antiwar activists in the United States had sent their regrets. ''Americans have
moved on to Nicaragua,'' a European suggested.

On the streets of the city, there were also almost no Amerasian children, the
offspring of Vietnamese mothers and American fathers. City officials said they
had been sent away so Western visitors would not be annoyed by them.

Some of Ho Chi Minh City's street names were among the missing. An official of
the city's press center said that 100 of them had been renamed over the last
week to clear away some remaining vestiges of colonialism. On new city maps,
there is also a mysterious fading of the ink marking Saigon's famous pagodas and
churches, of which there are many in fine condition still used by thousands of
Vietnamese.

But the event of the week that may be remembered longest by many journalists for
its omissions was a visit to a re-education camp on Monday.

At least 10,000 Vietnamese, whom the Government considers ''war criminals,''
remain in prison camps around the country a decade after the takeover of the
south.

Reporters who traveled to the K-4 camp at Xuan Loc, in Long Nai Province, about
50 miles northeast of the city, met two former South Vietnamese Army officers in
their early 40's who were being retrained as carpenters. Both Chung Trung Chien
and Nguyen Hoang Anh had been rearrested after having served previous sentences.
Mr. Chien said he had tried to flee the country. Mr. Anh had joined a
''counterrevolutionary militia'' in 1982.

The prisoners said they were not allowed to describe their living conditions or
their daily routines. They had been brought to meet the press near what appeared
to be a public park.

Le Nhan, the camp director, said the rules prohibited him from discussing the
prisoners' crimes.

He said prisoners could earn from 300 to 2,000 Vietnamese dong a month - $3 to
$20 at official exchange rates; or about 90 cents to $6 at black market rates.
He said that more than 3,000 former inmates liked the area so much they asked to
stay on after release, but that only 100 requests could be granted because of
lack of space.

Reporters were never shown the prisoners' quarters, except for a distant glimpse
of a dozen or two men playing volleyball and listening to music in a small
compound of huts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

YALE ADDING KENT STATE WEAPONS TO ARCHIVES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 55, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 592 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN, May 4


Yale University is about to receive two weapons used in the shootings that
killed four antiwar protesters at Kent State University in Ohio 15 years ago.

A Federal judge in Cleveland recently ruled that the Ohio National Guard must
turn over to Yale an M-1 rifle, a .45-caliber pistol and a gas mask that
guardsmen used in the May 4, 1970, incident.

The Yale archives already have more than 25 file-drawer-sized boxes filled with
material. Included are manuscripts of books and articles written about the
shootings, interviews with lawyers, witnesses, victims and their families; legal
documents from some of the court cases that grew out of the shootings, letters
to the families of the victims and a model of the scene of the shooting used at
one of the trials.

Yale's collection was started with the donation of the papers of Peter Davies,
who wrote a book about the shootings.

Offered to Kent State

Mr. Davies said he had initially offered his papers to the Kent State archives
during the 1970's. But because lawsuits surrounding the shootings were still
unresolved, Ohio authorities could not assure him that the papers would not be
used in the litigation, he said.

''In a sense I'm sorry it is not Kent State University,'' he said. ''But in the
temper of the time, there could be no guarantees about security.''

Paul Keane, a student at Kent State in 1970 who later studied at the Yale
Divinity School, suggested that Mr. Davies give his papers to Yale.

Sanford J. Rosen of San Francisco, who served as a lawyer for the families of
the students who were killed and for the nine students who were wounded, said he
plans to give his legal papers to Yale and to arrange to have all the other
court documents from Ohio shipped to New Haven.

Federal Documents Sought

Mr. Rosen said he had asked that the documents from Kent State be preserved for
historical use. The guns, gas mask and model of the shooting were all used as
exhibits in court.

''By keeping alive our memory of something like Kent State, we prevent it from
happening again,'' Mr. Rosen said.

After nine years, in 1979, the families and the students who were wounded were
awarded a total of $675,000 to be paid by the State of Ohio.

Mr. Rosen estimated that he has almost five file cabinets full of documents and
that there are four to five times that amount in Columbus, where the trial was
held. He added that there are an additional 70,000 pages of material held by the
United States Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation that
he thought would be sent to Yale soon under a Freedom of Information request
that he had filed seven years ago.

A Revealing Commentary

Steven R. Keller, a lawyer in Columbus who assisted Mr. Rosen on the case, said
that some of the documents now being cleared for public release provide an
interesting social commentary on the times, particularly the investigations
conducted by the Ohio National Guard and the Ohio Highway Patrol.

''They were distrustful of the students; they were distrustful of the
professors,'' he said.

According to Katharine Morton, head librarian of manuscripts and archives at
Yale, the Kent State papers are part of a collection that focuses on American
history.

She said that Yale plans to file the weapons from the Kent State trial in boxes
along with the documents and other items.

The Kent State collection is one of about 1,200 manuscript collections owned by
the library. The collections are available to students and other scholars for
research, Mrs. Morton said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

An article on May 5 about Yale University's acquisition of some weapons used in
the killing of four Kent State University students in 1970 incorrectly described
some of the victims. Only two, not all, of those slain by Ohio National
Guardsmen were reported to be at an antiwar rally before the shooting started.
They were Jeffrey G. Miller and Allison Krause. A third student, Sandra Lee
Scheuer, was on her way to class, and the fourth, William K. Schroeder, was
walking toward the scene when he was shot.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT THE CHARTS SAY ABOUT THE HEALTH OF POP MUSIC

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Desk

LENGTH: 1580 words


Pop music is in the throes of a new boom cycle, both economically and
artistically.

The robust health of the record industry, which was seriously ailing just three
years ago, is symbolized by USA For Africa, one of the most spectacular displays
of charity in show business history. ''We Are the World,'' the ''supersingle''
for African famine relief, has already sold 5.5 million copies and remains first
on Billboard's pop singles chart. Written by Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie
and sung by an all-star chorus of 45, the exhortatory pop-gospel anthem more
than matches in inspirational power such musical prototypes as George Harrison's
''My Sweet Lord'' and the Edwin Hawkins Singers' ''Oh Happy Day.''

The ''We Are the World'' album, which was released just over a month ago and now
tops Billboard's album chart, is fast approaching the four million mark in
sales. Besides the title tune, the album includes ''Tears Are Not Enough,'' a
softer, more amorphous chorale recorded by a 53-voice coalition of Canadian pop
stars calling itself Northern Lights. Also included are eight cuts donated by
individual acts. By far the most impressive are a version of Jimmy Cliff's
''Trapped,'' recorded live in concert last August by Bruce Springsteen and the E
Street Band, and Tina Turner's ''Total Control,'' a rock ballad written by
Martha Davis and Jeff Jourard of the Motels. Both songs convey with almost
operatic force a mood of compressed, smoldering obsession .

As it happens, Mr. Springsteen and Miss Turner also have albums in Billboard's
Top 10 that attest to the artistic maturity of the best 80's rock. Both records
are nearly a year old, yet they continue to spawn hit after hit. Mr.
Springsteen's ''Born in the U.S.A.'' employs a traditional rock and roll
vocabulary, modernized with jagged jackhammer rhythms and flavored with
synthesizer. His songs, mostly despairing dramatic monologues by blue-collar
workers who have lost touch with the American dream, portray the dissolution of
hope and community experienced by working-class America in a postindustrial age.
Miss Turner's ''Private Dancer'' expresses much the same spirit of embattled
self-sufficiency in songs that blend American rock and soul with a moody
synthesizer music. Mr. Springsteen and Miss Turner emerge on these albums as
heroic popular symbols of resilience and passion.

The oddest contribution to the ''We Are the World'' album is Prince's ''4 the
Tears in Your Eyes,'' whose unambiguous Christian message (''He died for the
tears in your eyes''), reveals a new facet of American pop's most
self-consciously mercurial personality. With slick, glitteringly produced
contributions by Chicago, the Pointer Sisters, Steve Perry and Kenny Rogers,
''We Are the World'' also serves as a showcase for the latest in Hollywood
production styles.

Besides raising millions of dollars for a worthy cause - USA For Africa and its
related merchandising have already netted more than $35 million - ''We Are the
World'' has solidified the changing relationship of pop music to American mass
culture in general. After coming into its own in the late 60's as the music of
''revolution,'' rock in the 70's remained at least superficially opposed to
establishment values. But how can you resist the establishment when, like the
artists, managers and producers who put together USA For Africa, you are the
establishment?

The coalescence of a new pop establishment was largely achieved by MTV. By
bringing 24-hour pop, including a ''We Are the World'' promotional blitz, into
millions of homes, MTV has given pop music a national center of consciousness.
The latest demonstration of MTV's extraordinary power has been its impact on
heavy metal rock. The cable channel's recent decision to cut back sharply on its
programming of heavy metal videos has pushed a once-flourishing genre virtually
out of the top 50 albums. At the same time, the proliferation of movie
soundtracks based on pop records (''Beverly Hills Cop'' and ''Vision Quest''
were respectively 4 and 11 on Billboard's album chart last week), continues.
Records, video and movies have become interdependent components in an
increasingly monolithic entertainment consortium.

''We Are the World'' symbolizes the corporate mentality of this multimedia
edifice. It is an unashamed celebration of managerial clout and collective star
power in the service of a noncontroversial humanitarian movement rather than a
partisan political cause. USA For Africa triumphantly cuts across the
demographic boundaries of pop. In the single, Quincy Jones's stately production,
with its rolling gospel rhythm and elegant synthesized texture, finds a common
aural ground for voices as dissimilar as those of Ray Charles, Willie Nelson,
Bob Dylan, Cyndi Lauper, Bruce Springsteen and Diana Ross to express themselves
with total freedom. Instead of promoting a musical generation gap, the record
emphasizes artistic lines of descent that span three decades - from Harry
Belafonte to Lionel Richie, from Ray Charles to Stevie Wonder to Michael
Jackson, from Bette Midler to Cyndi Lauper, from Bob Dylan to Bruce Springsteen.

Most significantly, ''We Are the World'' underscores the fundamental role of
black music in American pop. Four of the top five stars of American pop -
Michael Jackson, Prince, Lionel Richie and Stevie Wonder - are black, as is pop
music's most successful and admired producer, Quincy Jones. Addressing the
National Association of Record Manufacturers last month, Mr. Jones called for
the dissolution of the demographic categories of music - pop, black, country,
etc. - enthusiastically proclaiming that ''the music is truly color-blind now.''

Further examination of last week's album chart in Billboard bears out Mr.
Jones's contention. Even mainstream English pop is thoroughly infused with
American pop-soul and funk influences. The enigmatic art-rock songs on Phil
Collins's ''No Jacket Required'' (second place) are grounded in contemporary
black dance grooves inspired by Prince and Motown. Motown, the early-60's
girl-group productions of Phil Spector, and the blue-eyed soul of the Bee Gees
are also primary influences on Wham!, the British pop duo whose album, ''Make It
Big,'' was 10 in Billboard. The duo's simple, bouncy synthesizer pop, composed
and produced by the 22-year-old teen-age heartthrob George Michael, is the
1980's equivalent of the clean-cut pop of 25 years ago by the likes of Cliff
Richard and Paul Anka. Madonna, with her teen-age magazine sex appeal and
tough-cookie singing style, is the female American equivalent of Wham! The music
on her second album, ''Like a Virgin,'' is assertive, glistening post-disco pop
sung in a voice that knowingly echoes 1960's girl groups like the Angels and the
Supremes.

The year's most impressive debut album, ''Diamond Life'' (sixth place), by the
24-year-old British/Nigerian singer Sade, also has its roots in American
pop-soul, and particularly in the sultry, layered Caribbean-flavored idiom of
Marvin Gaye's ''What's Goin' On.'' Sade, whose real name is Helen Folsade Adu,
sings with a vibratoless alto whose cool, seductive insouciance recalls the
young Astrud Gilberto and, in its lower register, the dark, ruminative quality
of Betty Carter. ''Smooth Operator,'' a haunting pop-jazz song that coldly
assesses the life of a high-rolling playboy, is the first major hit from an
album that seems destined to have a long life near the top of the charts.
''Sally,'' the record's artistic centerpiece, is a bitter tale of prostitution
and drug addiction that recalls the mordant pop-jazz vignettes of Steely Dan.

Bruce Springsteen's and Tina Turner's albums aren't the only albums in the top
10 to use rock as the springboard for serious explorations of the American
psyche. The finest rock album to be released so far this year, ''Southern
Accents,'' by Tom Petty & the Heartbreakers, is a sequence of dramatic
monologues by a young working man - a symbol of the New South - who combines a
fierce regional pride along with a streak of restless self-destruction. ''It's
just something in our blood. . .we're just dogs on the run,'' observes the
narrator of the down-and-dirty blues song, ''Dogs on the Run.'' An almost
Faulknerian sense of the intoxicating intensity of the landscape informs the
songs and their richly atmsopheric arrangements, which run from bluesy folk-rock
to Memphis-style soul to a stately title song reminiscent of Stephen Foster.

John Fogerty's ''Centerfield'' (seventh place) offers dyed-in-the-wool American
rock and roll of a more traditional sort. Mr. Fogerty's blues-based songs, which
remain close in flavor to Chuck Berry, Little Richard and Elvis Presley's early
hits, paint a rock and roll cartoon mythology of American culture. Along with
explicit references to classic rock and roll tunes, the songs introduce shadowy
bogeyman symbols with names like ''Mr. Greed'' and ''The Old Man Down the
Road.'' ''I Saw It on TV,'' the album's most biting song, is a capsule video
history of modern America, from ''coonskin caps and Yankee bats'' through the
Vietnam war, in which, it turns out, the song's narrator has lost a son.

The success of so many serious mainstream albums suggests a large and
still-growing mass audience for popular music that is quite discriminating in
its tastes. With ''We Are the World'' setting the pace, mid-80's pop is a
diverse grab bag of compassionate exhortation, pungent social commentary and
pure fun.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bruce Springsteen; Photo of Tina Turner; Photo of Lionel
Riche; Photo of Madonna

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOW VIETNAM DEALS FROM STRENGTH

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


Fresh from its string of military successes against rebel forces in Cambodia,
Vietnam last week was again self-confidently calling for political discussions
on the future of its neighbor.

Vietnamese leaders appeared unconcerned about reports that the United States is
considering changing its policy and giving small amounts of military aid to
non-Communist Cambodian guerrillas led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann.
At a news conference during celebrations of the 10th anniversary of the fall of
Saigon, Le Duc Tho, a leading Vietnamese Politburo member, warned that unless
the regional and world powers seize the moment and begin talks on a political
solution for Cambodia, ''the thing will solve itself militarily.''

In that case there would be no political concessions, suggested Le Mai, an
Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs. Last week, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations was exploring with the Soviet Union and others the idea of
''proximity talks'' in which representatives of the Cambodian rebel groups would
sit in one room while officials of the Heng Samrin Government that was installed
by Hanoi sat in another.

The countries in the Asean pact - Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, Singapore, the
Philippines and Brunei - are aware that Hanoi's position in Cambodia is stronger
than at any time since Vietnam toppled the Khmer Rouge Communists in 1979. They
want to bring Hanoi to the table while there is still something left to
negotiate.

The non-Communist Cambodians, the nearby countries and, at times, the Vietnamese
have all called for a bigger American diplomatic role. Asean leaders say that
Washington could offer Hanoi diplomatic recognition and unlock badly needed
Western and Japanese aid. The Americans might also persuade Peking to live with
a neutral Cambodian regime acceptable to Hanoi - the most, regional leaders say,
they can now hope to achieve.

''If there is any one country with leverage over China now, it is the United
States,'' Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, Indonesia's Foreign Minister, said recently in
Jakarta. Vietnam's negotiating position has become clearer after visits to Hanoi
by Mr. Mochtar and other officials, including Foreign Minister Bill Hayden of
Australia; the Secretary General of the United Nations, Javier Perez de Cuellar,
and Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the New York Democrat who heads the House
Foreign Affairs subcommittee on East Asia (and has proposed giving military aid
to the non-Communist Cambodian rebels).

Conflict Over Timing

Hanoi outlined its aims in January after a meeting in Ho Chi Minh City of the
Foreign Ministers of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. As translated by the Vietnamese
Foreign Ministry, its objectives included:

* ''The withdrawal of Vietnamese volunteer forces from Kampuchea (Cambodia)
paired with the exclusion of the genocidal Pol Pot clique.'' Both sides want Pol
Pot, the Khmer Rouge leader, barred from a political role in Cambodia, but they
differ on the timing. The Asean countries want a Vietnamese withdrawal as a
prerequisite to political agreement. Vietnam makes the elimination of Pol Pot
its first goal, which Cambodian rebel leaders say would be tantamount to giving
up the game before it begins. After Vietnam's recent sweep of opposition camps,
only the Khmer Rouge headquarters, in Cambodia's Cardomom Mountains, remains
intact. And there have been reports of recent Khmer Rouge strikes deep inside
Cambodia.

* ''Respect for the Kampuchean people's right to self-determination - first and
foremost the right to come back to a life free from the threat of genocide.''
Vietnamese and Cambodian officials have indicated that self-determination must
fall within the framework of treaty agreements that give Vietnam the right to
return to Cambodia in time of crisis. Diplomats in Hanoi say Vietnam would not
tolerate in Phnom Penh a Government that it could not influence.

* ''The holding by the Kampuchean people of free, general elections with the
presence of foreign observers.'' Cambodia's Prime Minister Hun Sen told Mr.
Hayden, the Australian Foreign Minister, that no opposition political
organization could participate. Former rebels including the Khmer Rouge, with
the exception of Pol Pot and his lieutenant, Ieng Sary, could run as independent
candidates if they renounced armed opposition. Prince Sihanouk, a popular figure
in Cambodia, would be welcomed back, Mr. Hun Sen told Mr. Solarz and
Representative Robert G. Torricelli in December, but as part of the existing
regime. Prince Sihanouk was used in similar fashion by the Khmer Rouge after
they seized control in 1975. They kept him powerless and under virtual house
arrest until 1979 Vietnamese invasion, when they sent him to the United Nations
to seek help.

* ''Respect by all external states of the national rights of Southeast Asian
countries.'' Mr. Mochtar believes this refers to China, which backs the Khmer
Rouge and has invaded Vietnam more than once.

* ''The establishment of an international form of guarantee and supervision for
the implementation of the agreement.'' Mr. Mochtar thinks the Vietnamese want an
international control commission similar to the one set up after the 1954 Geneva
agreement on Indochina, in the belief that this would leave intact the present
power structure in Cambodia, as it did in Vietnam 30 years ago. Asean wants an
international peacekeeping force to replace withdrawing Vietnamese troops. Mr.
Mochtar said that in the January statement Hanoi was in effect asking the region
to accept a situation in Cambodia that the communique called ''irreversible,''
an unacceptable demand. ''This,'' he said, ''is something we never have done and
will never do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnamese troops (Photoreporters/Billy Ford)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE DECLINE OF HISTORY

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 25, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 756 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


History has been in fashion here for a few days. We have been wallowing in the
anniversaries of the wars we failed to avoid, but most of the time, even in
Washington, history is a parade of forgotten memories.

The new Secretary of Education, William J. Bennett, has recently been deploring
this national absentmindedness. He notes that the study of history, as distinct
from ''social studies,'' is no longer required in most high schools, and that in
many states even the teachers of history have little or no serious training in
the subject.

''Thus,'' he told a conference on civic virtue and academic excellence the other
day, ''the present decline in the status of history in our schools is very
serious. To put the matter plainly, to be ignorant of history is to be, in a
very fundamental way, intellectually defenseless, unable to understand the
workings either of our own society or of other societies.'' This is not a new
idea, as Secretary Bennett recognizes, for he collects more quotations than
anybody since Bartlett and Stevenson, and stuns his listeners with the findings
of every student of education from Jefferson to Pat Moynihan. But at least he's
arguing that ''we cannot hope that our students will know why the world got into
its present situation - or even what that situation is - if they know so little
of the events that came before them.''

What Mr. Bennett did not say is that if we neglect to teach history in the high
schools and, in addition, turn our universities into employment agencies, we
shouldn't be surprised if the people elect members of the Congress and even
Presidents who share their shaky knowledge or even ignorance of the history of
the world.

It is not only our children but our politicians who, without historical memory,
are left ''intellectually defenseless.'' The evidence is clear in the newspaper
headlines and television news of the last few days that President Reagan
couldn't possibly have blundered into the cemeteries of Germany, with the best
of intentions and the hope of ''reconciliation,'' unless he was ignorant of the
brutal and tragic facts of the last world war.

He is not the first or the worst of recent Presidents who have neglected
history. Hedley Donovan, the former editor of Time magazine, has written an
excellent book on his days in the White House under Jimmy Carter, when as he
says, ''I was offered almost unlimited access.'' He reports on this experience
with the utmost candor.

Mr. Donovan obviously respects

Mr. Carter, and thinks the historians of the future will be more generous than
the journalists about his Administration. But he makes an interesting
observation about Mr. Carter's ''odd lack of a sense of history.

''In Carter's immense storehouse of information,'' Mr. Donovan reflects,
''plenty of history must have been packed away, yet it never seemed a steady
presence in his thinking.''

I think the links between education, history and politics are vital to the
security of the nation, the defense of freedom and a decent order in the world.
But I don't think these relationships are clear or, despite Secretary Bennett's
efforts, getting the attention they deserve.

It may be that the disappointments and tragedies of U.S. foreign policy since
the last world war were not military or strategic, but misjudgments of history
and philosophy.

We fought the Korean and Vietnam

Wars on the assumption that Russia and China had composed their ancient quarrels
and had formed a military alliance that would dominate the Asian-European
continent from the Sea of Japan to the Ruhr, the Rhine and the North Sea. But
history told in the end; the two fell apart, and the United States now has
better relations with both Moscow and Peking than they have with one another
(which is not saying much). Now the Chinese are trying to decide between the new
sweetened Coke and Pepsi, and even taking up golf.

So what? First, I think it's a bum idea to introduce golf into China. The game's
a punishment for man's sins.

Missionaries tried to introduce it in the l8th and l9th centuries and it didn't
work.

Second, I think Secretary Bennett should insist on teaching languages as well as
history. We are sitting around in our Toyotas and listening on our Sonys about
the trade gap, because every child in Japan is taught to speak English, and most
of us, even at I.B.M., can't say ''howdy'' in Japanese.

Even so, as everybody agrees, something should be done about the innocence of
history in the schools and the politics of America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM IN AMERICA

SECTION: Section 6; Page 118, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 140 words


As exemplified by the articles in ''Vietnam in America,'' Americans continue to
re-evaluate their answers to questions posed about the Vietnam War. This process
is important and necessary, and we must not ignore the answer that the Vietnam
War gave us. That answer is that human lives were lost needlessly, not because
fighting for convictions or beliefs is wrong, but rather because the stage for
these confrontations was wrong. We must abandon the battlefield in favor of the
bargaining table. Only then will names such as that of Alan H. Zimmerman, which
graces the Vietnam War Memorial as well as a street and a memorial auditorium in
his hometown of Midland Park, N.J. (which suffered the highest per capita loss
in the war), serve to recall the great strides mankind can take - if it chooses.
HERMAN SCHAPER Midland Park, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM IN AMERICA

SECTION: Section 6; Page 118, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 70 words


What I find most hopeful about ''The War and the Arts'' (by Samuel G. Freedman)
is the current phase of explanation of that war focused on the American soldier.
The works of veterans for veterans look and feel and sound like survival guides
for those who sense that Vietnam will always be the central experience of their
lives - the touchstone by which all other events will be measured. ALBERTO
IBARGUEN Hartford

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM IN AMERICA

SECTION: Section 6; Page 118, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 150 words


Regarding Joseph Lelyveld's otherwise excellent article on Vietnam, ''The
Enduring Legacy,'' Democrat John F. Kerry, the new Senator from Massachusetts,
did not have ''a landslide of his own last November in the midst of the Reagan
avalanche.'' Indeed, he defeated Republican Ray Shamie by only about 1.4 million
votes to 1.1 million votes.

The suggestion that Senator Kerry's antiwar activities (he was a leader of
Vietnam Veterans Against the War) contributed to this ''landslide'' is even more
startling. If anything, it was an obstacle he had to overcome, especially among
veterans. Ray Shamie was flooded with endorsements from the state's veterans'
groups.

The phenomenon was so remarkable that newspapers wrote editorials about it. The
headline on the editorial page of The Boston Herald on Oct. 16, 1984, said it
all: ''Veterans Side With Shamie.'' JEFF JACOBY Brookline, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM IN AMERICA

SECTION: Section 6; Page 118, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 183 words


The editor's preface to the retrospective on the Vietnam experience twice
referred to it as a ''defeat.'' That is a tendentious way to describe what was
admittedly an inglorious experience; for we could have exterminated our enemies
in Vietnam had we been willing to pay the price. Their readiness to accept pain
simply exceeded our readiness to inflict it.

I have other reservations about your conclusion that our countrymen are now
readier to support a big military stick than they were in 1974. One is that 1974
was an atypical year; anti-interventionism was probably stronger in 1974 than at
any time in the last 35 years. The other is that the desire for a big stick is
not the same as readiness to swing it. Our withdrawal from Lebanon reveals a
Pentagon and White House wary of entrapment in uncontrollable situations. The
continuing celebration of Grenada, on the other hand, illustrates respect for
what Macbeth whispered to himself when contemplating the murder of Duncan: ''
'twere well it were done quickly.'' LAURENCE RADWAY Professor of Government
Dartmouth College Hanover, N.H.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM IN AMERICA

SECTION: Section 6; Page 118, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 149 words


I read the special issue on Vietnam with unrelinquished interest. As a Vietnam
veteran, I am relieved to see that America is finally describing the soldier of
the 1960's and 70's with words like ''honor, valor and sacrifice.'' It is a
rewarding feeling to see that the ''forgotten veteran'' is beginning to be
included in the sanctuary of our historical heritage. Let us not forget,
however, what ''honor'' meant to all Americans during the Vietnam conflict.

Honor was the word most commonly used by our leaders to justify our presence in
Vietnam. It was the cry of the ''hard hat'' as he clobbered the ''longhair.'' It
was the reason why we remained in Vietnam so long. Honor, valor and heroism are
words that pierce the flesh, words that maim and kill the young. And, instead of
using these words to reward the past, let them be reminders for the future. PAUL
O. DALY Saddle River, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam In America

SECTION: Section 6; Page 118, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 163 words


I was very interested in your special issue, ''Vietnam in America: Ten Years
After the Fall of Saigon,'' (March 31). I'm 27, have only vague memories of the
war and no direct connections to it through family or friends. The articles
answered some of my questions and confirmed my feeling that, for other
questions, there will never be any firm answers.

I'm from Washington, D.C., and I often sightsee when I go home. About two years
ago, I saw the Vietnam Veterans Memorial for the first time. I was impressed
with the strength of its V shape, which pulls one's eyes along to its only
corner, where the walls meet. Right there, in the corner, was a small, fragile
and obviously homemade cross with a card tacked to it. The names of half a dozen
women were signed to it, ''In loving memory of . . . who died in Vietnam. . . .
This would have been his 46th birthday. . . . From his mother and sisters. . .
.'' Here was the war made real to me. ANN MACGREGOR GIBB New York City

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of 2 Vets (NYT/Sara Krulwich)

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NEW WAVE FROM RUSSIA

BYLINE: By Louis Menashe; Louis Menashe, professor of history at the Polytechnic
Institute of New York, writes frequently on Soviet affairs.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 58, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4642 words


I OFFER SOCIAL SCIENCES 121, the ''History of the Soviet Union,'' every spring
at the Polytechnic Institute of New York, a small, predominantly engineering
university in downtown Brooklyn. During the 1970's, the period of detente,
students were curious about the Soviet Union and S.S. 121 always had a large
enrollment. So many students signed up for the course, in fact, that I developed
a little ice-breaking routine.

''This class is too big,'' I would announce. ''I'm afraid I'll have to limit the
course to only those who can read and write Russian. Will all those who do so,
please stand.'' No one stood. Just a little joke, I reassured the class.

I did it again in the spring of 1980. Only this time a lanky young man with
reddish-brown curly hair stood up - a little cockily, I thought. At that moment
I realized two things: first, I would have to abandon that routine; second, the
Russians were coming.

It was Leonid who stood up. I remember him vividly, as I do the scores of Igors,
Mischas and Irinas who have turned up in my classes since then. (Reports of
classroom and other school conversations do not normally appear in print. I have
used real names only with permission. Students who could not be reached - many
have graduated - or who prefer anonymity are only identified with a fictitious
first name.) These students are part of the ''Third Emigration'' - recent
arrivals from the Soviet Union now living in Brooklyn's Brighton Beach (''Little
Odessa by the Sea''), near Ocean Parkway (''Russian Parkway''), and in other
parts of New York (''Moscow on the Hudson'').

Like other generations of immigrants and children of immigrants before them and
in our own day, they look to the engineering degree as a sure ticket to a
comfortable corner of the American dream. En route to that degree, by a strange
twist of academic fate, they are offered courses on the history and politics of
the homeland they have just left behind.

These Igors, Irinas and I - we are sharers in that perplexing thing, the Soviet
experience: I, through professional immersion in the study of the Soviet Union;
they, through the living of it. We recognize one another, befriend one another,
and circle around one another in revealing, sometimes maddening, discussions of
communism, socialism, capitalism, the Soviet Union, the United States. In
different ways, we learn from one another.

By Soviet standards, they represent relatively upscale social backgrounds: They
come from the large urban centers of European Russia. (In the Soviet Union,
their parents belonged to the intelligentsia - engineers, educators - or worked
in the white-collar sector.) They are, by self-definition, and by Soviet ethnic
criteria, Jewish, not Russian. Ironically, in the United States, they tend to be
viewed as Russians, not Jews.

I, too, see them as Russians, even prototypical Russians - like those I meet on
my trips to the Soviet Union - and they endlessly live up to the prototype. They
have wit, verve and insouciance; they are warm, friendly and open; they are
opinionated and hyperbolic, good at repartee, and they love to talk.

They enrich the atmosphere of my classes with their high spirits and
irreverence. American students at the Polytechnic, and others from abroad
studying at the school, also engage Soviet history with lively and intense
interest. But only the Russians can challenge me so aggressively, as one of them
did recently, by saying, ''Look, I lived there for 23 years.''

My dialogues with the Russians spill out of the classroom, into the elevators,
the corridors, into my office. I get to know them personally; I learn that
though they are victims and critics of Soviet society, they are - more than they
care to admit - its representatives and beneficiaries as well. Their educational
background, if tendentious, is solid. They are keen on political and social
analysis and have a taste for culture; they are uncommonly well-read.

Although they bare their wrath at the Soviet system, they show no small amount
of respect for its power, and pride in its achievements. Interestingly, their
anti-Soviet discourse is tinged with the kind of dogma and polemical edge that
we associate with the official Soviet style. They enjoy America, but criticize
it from a Soviet perspective: too much crime, too much looseness, too much
materialism, too much competitiveness, not enough friendliness, too little
culture.

They are, to use a term from the excellent, literate Marxist they speak,
contradictions.

IT IS INTERSESSION, January 1985. I run into Valery Berman in the elevator.

''Hello, Professor,'' he greets me warmly.

''Hello, Val. Kak dela?'' (''How are things?'') ''Wonderful. What can be bad?
Reagan was elected!''

Yes, if I were to poll the Russian caucus, Reagan would win by a landslide
there, too. Reagan is strong, they tell me; he knows how to stand up to Moscow.

Val is spoiling for an ad hoc discussion. He is big and burly, with high color
in his cheeks and a languid, faintly aristocratic air about him. There is
something else, a way of looking at me that I notice among others in the Russian
caucus, a look of condescension and gentle indulgence. It is as if our roles are
reversed, and I am their student. ''You mean well, Professor,'' the look seems
to say, ''and you know a lot about Russian history. But you are very naive about
the Soviet Union. We know what it's really all about.''

It is hard, very hard to shake that attitude; it carries an authority that is
difficult to deny. I have to summon all my eloquence to demonstrate that the
Soviet Union is a product of a harsh, traumatic history and deserves some
balanced as well as critical understanding. Also, I argue, socialism as a system
of economic organization must not be judged by the Soviet version of it.

That, roughly, is the credo I bring to my classes. American students sympathize;
they welcome what is for them an alternative view. What always comes back at me
from the Russian caucus, however, is ''Yes, Professor, but you wouldn't want to
live there.'' You're right, I wouldn't. Still, I try to think rationally about
the place.

I mutter some insincere congratulations to Val on Reagan's victory and leave him
in the elevator. Val is one of a troika that collars me after class, twice a
week, for quick hallway seminars. The troika wants to ''correct'' things I say
in class. For example: ''You said the U.S.S.R. is more interested in good
relations with the U.S.A. than helping revolutionaries. What about Cuba and
Vietnam?'' No matter how cogent my defenses, these seminars end with a ''Wake
up, America!'' exhortation from the troika.

Mikhail Z. (Mischa) Podokshik, a Leningrader, is still learning English and
rarely says anything to me directly. But he has a kind of ideological eminence
in the troika. Occasionally, he will whisper something in Russian to his
colleagues, who will then use it to score a polemical point. Sometimes they turn
to him for an opinion about something I have said. If he nods, they concede my
point.

Roman Litvak, the third troika regular, has made it his mission to prove to me
that the world is in mortal danger from the Soviet threat. He has a quick and
restless mind; thoughts chase one another in a spring torrent.

''Don't you have eyes to see? Everywhere they are taking over! If there was no
Bolshevik Revolution, Russia would be beautiful today. In their . . . sut' '' -
Roman gropes for the English word and cannot find it; essence, I tell him - ''in
their essence, fascism and communism are alike!''

''Hold on, one thing at a time, Roman,'' I say. ''Fascism and communism are
different in their sut'. They are not alike in theory or in ideals. . . .''

''Big deal!'' he interrupts, poking me in the chest. ''What are ideals compared
with reality!''

That is Roman, a streetwise math major from the Ukraine, with a command of
colloquial English. He is short, but he could knock over a tree trunk with his
shoulder, and has the temperament to match. Roman is ready for ideological
combat any time of day.

Everything interests him and he sees everything through political lenses. A
great deal of the official Soviet view of the world has rubbed off on Roman. He,
too, sees the globe as a vast arena in which the forces of capitalism and
socialism are locked in daily, permanent battle. Class interests govern the
behavior of political leaders everywhere. Nothing is ever accidental - in
politics, economics or culture. Governments manipulate and lie to their people
all the time. That's the way it is.  When I ask for comments after a showing of
the tender Soviet film ''Ballad of a Soldier,'' set in World War II, Roman
bellows immediately, ''Soviet peace propaganda!'' And he has a similar reaction
to a Western rendition of Romanov and Revolution: ''Nicholas and Alexandra.''
''The capitalists must have put up the money for this film, know what I mean,
Professor?'' - and he winks at me. A nice touch, the use of the quaint ''the
capitalists.'' ''You know, Roman, your attitudes are quite Leninist,'' I tell
him. ''Well, Lenin was a smart guy,'' he shoots back.

SOVIET SOCIAL-SCIence education has done its job well, even, as in Roman's case,
before the university level. Most of my Soviet students have been through high
school; many attended what are known in the Soviet Union as ''higher technical
institutes,'' and a handful began university studies before their departure. In
their school transcripts, I see courses on ''Marxist Ethics'' and ''History of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union'' sandwiched between ''Technology of
Construction Materials'' and ''Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer.'' These
students are familiar with the language and concepts of Marxism-Leninism. No,
not just familiar with them; they accept them as naturally as they quote
Pushkin.

The ''Glossary of Marxist Terms'' I distribute at the start of every course in
Soviet history draws condescending smiles from the Russian caucus. It takes
effort for an American student to define and use the term ''bourgeoisie,'' not
to mention spell it properly. For the Russian caucuses, bourgeoisie,
proletariat, capitalism, intelligentsia, the state, imperialism are all
components of their normal analytic language.

''What is the 'Open Door'?'' I ask the class during a discussion of the
diplomatic origins of the cold war and the principles of American foreign
policy. Students cite, correctly, China at the turn of the century, the American
demand for territorial integrity and no annexations, and so on. Only Alexander
(Sasha) Lekhtman, an anti-Soviet Muscovite, replies in the form of a
self-evident axiom: ''The Open Door is insuring that third-world countries are
open to the flow of U.S. capital.'' No Soviet historian of American diplomacy
could have put it more succinctly - or categorically.

Of course, the Russian caucus knows the send-ups that go with the Soviet terms.
One of the Russians volunteers a better definition of socialism for my glossary:
''Socialism,'' he tells the class, ''means a shortage of sand in the desert.''

The main quarrel that the Russian caucus has with socialism is that it is
inefficient; it doesn't work well economically. In Soviet form, it is also a
system of privileges favoring the well-placed. ''So long as Soviet leaders have
shoes that fit, they don't care what the Soviet people wear,'' Sergei Poliakoff,
another Muscovite, points out. (American students, on the other hand, associate
socialism with statism and political oppression.) The Russian students complain
of the political climate, but their resentments over shortages and the
inequitable distribution system are stronger. If only there were a little more
meat, they seem to say, we wouldn't mind the political shortcomings.

Dwelling on socialist failure is a hallmark of Sergei Poliakoff, who came to the
United States with a year of Moscow University, the nation's best, under his
belt. In class, he listens attentively to my lectures, his blue eyes dancing
with skepticism, waiting for the ripe moment to apply the needle. As I catalogue
the ills of developing countries in the United States-capitalist orbit -
poverty, chronic political unrest, inflation, external debt - he raises his
hand. ''Professor, what about socialist'' - a derisive jerk of the head as he
hisses the word socialist - ''what about socialist Poland?''

MEAT IS A RECUR-rent image, a measure of things.

I am describing my experiences in Moscow and Leningrad to the class after a trip
during Easter recess, my fifth to the Soviet Union. The American students are
fascinated by my journey to the Evil Empire. I tell of the warmth of Russians,
of their concern over Reagan's foreign policy, of the many improvements I saw
compared with my previous trip a decade ago.

''Did you see any meat in the stores, Professor?'' Sergei cuts in; he is
obviously annoyed with my benign account.

''Well, apart from plentiful meat at hotels and restaurants, I saw some meat at
a small supermarket I used to browse in near my hotel in Leningrad. . . .''

''If you had gone to other cities,'' retorts Sergei, ''you wouldn't have seen
any meat at all. And what you saw in Leningrad was what we call soup meat, not
good for eating alone.''

Someone (not a Russian) asks: ''Were you allowed to go anywhere?'' - a question
I hear often from Americans.

''My visa specified Moscow and Leningrad,'' I explain. ''In those cities, I went
wherever I pleased and nobody followed me, if that's what you mean.'' This
brings guffaws from the Russians, all 12 of them, about a third of the whole
class. ''I know, I know, you think I was tailed by the K.G.B.''

''Of course you were, Professor,'' says the caucus in unison.

Among them is Dina Yershova, a charming computer-science major from Riga who,
like the few other women in the caucus, always dresses glamorously (the men tend
to wear the informal, blue-jeans uniform of the Polytechnic undergraduate). Dina
has a way of arching her eyebrows and tucking her chin into her chest when she
speaks to me that makes me feel both flattered and scoffed at simultaneously. Is
it her version of the Russian condescending look?

Before I left for Moscow, Dina had warned me against acting like a ''spasibo-big
shot.'' (Spasibo is the Russian word for ''thank you.'') ''Russians get
suspicious when you know the language,'' she explained. Now, after my trip, she
and the caucus are insisting I was watched continuously inside the Soviet Union.

''Look,'' I appeal to their reason, ''the Soviet Union doesn't want to scare
Western tourists; it wants their hard currency and it wants them to come back.
Besides, do you think the K.G.B. is interested enough or has the resources to
keep tabs on the hundreds of thousands of Western tourists visiting the U.S.S.R.
every year?'' Of course. The caucus holds firm.

THAT SMUG, DOG-matic certainty of theirs, hard as birchwood, where does it come
from? Is it their youth and naivete? Or am I the naive one? They are, after all,
Jewish emigrants, many of whom know refuseniks or have them in the family.
Brushes with the K.G.B. and other Soviet bureaucracies are among their youthful
experiences. It is natural for them to hold these attitudes. Oddly, however, it
is not fear or even hatred that they express. What I consider their tall tales
may be a species of Soviet boasting, part of a palpable Soviet political
culture.

''The prevailing faith'' in the Soviet Union ''encourages a belief that the
Soviet people are better, smarter, more altruistic, self-sacrificing than, and
generally morally superior to, other peoples,'' observe Polly Howells and
Mikhail Galperin, two psychotherapists working in Brighton Beach, in a recent
paper. (Galperin is himself an emigrant.) Some of the emigres, they continue,
''will tell you that the light bulb was invented by a man named Yablochkov, the
radio by Alexei Popov, and the steam engine by two serf brothers from the Ural
Mountains. Lenin is often quoted as saying the Russian language is the richest,
most powerful tongue in the world.''

So why shouldn't the K.G.B. be the most powerful security organization in the
world?

Perhaps the Soviet pride of the emigrants is a form of compensation, a way of
coping with or adjusting to the often bewildering American landscape. And
another thing, my students always seem to convey, we don't come from some small
shtetl, you know; we come from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. They
will argue, of course, that it is neither a union nor soviet; neither socialist
nor republican; but, chert voz'mi - damn it - it has to be taken seriously,
treated with respect.

Oleg, a Leningrader, is exceptionally knowledgeable about Soviet affairs, and I
often turn to him for a piece of information. He is also one of a handful among
the Russians who don't despise socialism. It has simply, he feels, gone
hopelessly off the tracks in the Soviet Union.

A discussion of Soviet-American relations focuses on the problem of
predictability, or assessing the other side's motives and policies, and
identifying probable courses of action. I cite, in order to disqualify it,
Winston Churchill's famous formulation of the Soviet Union as ''a riddle wrapped
in a mystery inside an enigma.'' It is fraudulent, I argue, a mystification of
the Soviet Union intended to encourage fear and anxiety in the West. Moreover, I
try to clinch the point, don't you think some Soviet Churchill in the Politburo
might plausibly say the same thing about the United States, based on our often
baffling foreign-policy swings or peculiar domestic politics?

''No,'' Oleg replies blandly, ''the Politburo knows everything about the U.S.''
''How, exactly?'' I ask.  ''They have ways of knowing.''

''Come on, Oleg, do you really believe they are a mystery to us and we are an
open book to them?''

''Let me put it this way, Professor'' - always the patronizing tone - ''they
know all they need to know.''

Soviet pride comes out in other ways from the Russian caucuses. It is there in
Roman's thunderings about the Soviet threat: the Russians are dangerous because
they are so powerful, so clever, so politically realistic. The same Roman
volunteers a lecture on the Battle of Stalingrad for my class on the Great
Fatherland War (as World War II is known in the Soviet Union). His barrel chest
swells at least three inches as he stands before a map of the Soviet Union and
chronicles the battle. How smart Gen. Georgi Zhukov was. How brave Soviet
soldiers were. How devastating Katusha rockets were.

Dina Yershova asserts with full confidence that in a non-nuclear war Americans
would be no match for the Russians. They are stronger and tougher. No question
about it.

Irina, a prim Leningrader, offers a brief portrait of her native city for the
benefit of American students. Her talk has an old-fashioned formality, the way
it might be presented in a Soviet classroom. How beautiful Leningrad is, how
rich in culture, how broad its boulevards, how it suffered, endured and
triumphed during the terrible 900 days of the German blockade.

I have heard Intourist guides lecture the same way.

Some student from Long Island invariably suggests that if it weren't for the
Russian winters, or American lend-lease assistance, the Germans would have
conquered the Soviet Union. For once, the Russian caucus fully supports my
thesis that the Red Army, not General Winter, defeated the Wehrmacht. The war is
a somber subject for my Russian students. All are ready to offer tales of Soviet
suffering and heroism, often drawn from their own family histories.

All, that is, except Sasha Lekhtman, the resident voice of Solzhenitsyn. Why
don't I admit, he wants to know, that Stalin was worse than Hitler? Hitler
victimized others; Stalin slaughtered his own people.

He also challenges what he sees as my overglorification of the Soviet
achievement in World War II. Sasha speaks in short, rapidly delivered bursts,
with long pauses as he searches for the English words. ''Isn't it true,
Professor . . . that if the Nazis had not . . . had not been so cruel to . . .
to the Russian peoples . . . Hitler would have won the war?''

The Russian caucus squirms with embarrassment. I have heard this question
before, and I give one of my stock answers: ''If the Nazis hadn't been so cruel,
they wouldn't have been Nazis.'' Sasha grants me a small smile, but he is not
convinced.

AFTER SEEING THE film ''Moscow on the Hudson,'' directed by Paul Mazursky, I am
eager to discuss it with my Russians, anticipating their approval of Mazursky's
satire, particularly its gloomy Moscow sequences. Not so. They are indignant.
They like to criticize the Soviet Union, but they seem to resent images of
Soviet backwardness that prevail among Americans.

''Why do all Americans think we have no refrigerators in the Soviet Union?''
more than one of my Russians complain. Even Sergei Poliakoff is annoyed by
Mazursky's film. ''Really, Professor . . . Muscovites standing in line at night,
waiting for toilet paper. . . .''

''But don't Russians suffer from endless queuing for basic commodities?'' I
reply.

''Right!'' shouts Roman. ''I remember waiting for toilet paper once.''

''That's because you come from the Ukraine,'' retorts Sergei, the proud
Muscovite.

Others argue Roman down; they can't recall queuing for toilet paper. ''Americans
think Russians are all robots,'' adds Yevgeny from Kiev. ''No Russian would
stand in a line the way they stood in the film. Russians are too, too . . .
lively to be robots.''

It is true. In my classroom, a general buzzing emanates from wherever the
Russian caucus is sitting. I ask for silence. The buzzing continues. I finally
shout, ''Zamolchite!'' (Quiet!). They laugh. There is a moment's silence. The
buzzing resumes. The only student who has the chutzpah to sit through one of my
lectures wearing his Walkman earphones is a Russian (Lev Goldberg, a splendid
electrical-engineering major from Moscow).

Complaints from some of my colleagues about the Russians' raucousness are offset
by reports of their impressive background, intelligence, even creativity,
especially in the humanities. A professor of freshman English is amazed at the
breadth of their reading and by their psychological insights into literary
texts. ''It's not just that they know Pushkin, Che-khov and Gogol,'' she tells
me. ''They know, I mean, have actually read and can talk about Dickens, Mark
Twain, Jack London, Hemingway and de Maupassant.''

A humanities professor recalls how she plastered every wall at the Polytechnic
with announcements of ''Amarcord'' as part of a cultural program one semester.
Only three students showed up for the film - Russians, of course. ''We love
Fellini,'' they told her.

WHEN IT COMES TO RUS-sian history before 1917, my Russians have as hard a time
sorting out the reigns of the various Ivans and Alexanders as do my other
students. There is an indifference to the whole subject, despite my entreaties
that Soviet society bears the deep and enduring influences of the past. My
Russians don't object to this analysis; in fact, they accept it to the point of
locking the national character into patterns of despotism.

During a discussion locating the possible roots of Stalinism in the
authoritarian political culture of the czars, someone from the caucus observes:
''We have a saying, Professor - sobaka palku liubit'' (''the dog loves his
lash''). This proverb has turned up several times on exam papers. In another
context, a gabby civil-engineering student from Odessa confides: ''Russians
won't do anything unless they are forced or bribed.''

The interest of the caucus quickens with the triumphs of 1917: The Soviets! The
Bolshevik Revolution! The Dictatorship of the Proletariat! They know a great
deal about these events, but gaps abound, a consequence of one-sided instruction
back in the Soviet Union. They know much of Lenin and Stalin, next to nothing of
Trotsky and Bukharin. Hostile as they are to the Bolsheviks, they still can't
overcome the feeling, as in the official Soviet view, that the Mensheviks were
little more than devious misfits.

Then there are other details, very familiar in the West, all but ignored in the
Soviet curriculum - the character and fate of Nicholas II, the last Czar;
Rasputin's significance; the role of Kerensky. I fill in these issues and
personalities, and my Russians are grateful. By the end of the topic, the
Bolshevik Revolution has become a bit more complex and some color has been
added, but my Russian students' basic attitudes, charged with respect and hate,
remain about the same.

They take as a given the shortcomings of czarism that made revolution
inevitable. The Bolsheviks were smart and also sincere in their slogan of bread,
land, peace. And Lenin was a genius. All granted.

A residual respect for Lenin is surprisingly common. Many of my Russians exempt
Lenin from the great sins that followed him. But their respect is tempered by
criticism, ranging from the thoughtful to the abusive. Yevgeny astonishes me by
citing Engels on the tragedy of a revolutionary party's assuming political power
before its time.

''The working class in Russia was too small, and too . . . uncultured,'' Yevgeny
explains. ''So they ruled by coercion.''

Still, they love to smudge the gleaming icons of 1917. ''Why do you use that
name for so beautiful a city?'' inquires Igor, an Odessan with a flair for
philosophy, when I am speaking of Leningrad. (Many Leningraders do refer to
their city as ''Piter,'' from the old name Peterburg.) Sergei Poliakoff attacks
the Revolution at its ideological root - the utopian vision of a Communist
future. American students always ridicule the idea of a harmonious, classless
society with colossal wealth available to all. ''People are too selfish for
that,'' they say. ''It's not human nature.'' Sergei offers a sophisticated gloss
on that common critique. ''If there were absolute material abundance,'' he
comments, his blue eyes smiling, ''this would lead to degeneration. No one would
want to work in such a society.''

Alyosha, by contrast, is cruder in his deflations. Alyosha is pudgy and wears a
perpetual melancholic hang-dog look. His ultimate source of authority is the
impersonal, oracular ''It is well known.''

''Professor, you did not mention that Lenin was a German spy,'' Alyosha corrects
me after a discussion of Lenin's return to Petrograd from exile in 1917.

I will not entertain this hoary red herring. ''Who taught you that, Alyosha,'' I
kid him. ''Solzhenitsyn?''

''No,'' he replies, unblinking. ''It is well known.''

Our discussion of the Lenin cult in the young Soviet state carries us to the
mausoleum in Red Square, the national shrine. ''His so-called body is made of
wax,'' Alyosha tells the class mournfully. ''Also, Professor, you said Lenin
died of stroke. Impossible.''

''Impossible, Alyosha? What's your diagnosis?''

''Lenin died of syphilis. It is well known.''

POLITICAL FOLKLORE, LIKE that offered by Alyosha, together with other notes and
pictures drawn from Soviet life are among the precious things I learn from my
Russians. More important, I learn to respect their resentments about that life,
the droll ones and the serious.

They, in turn, learn or relearn their own history. They welcome a refresher
course from a different point of view. They especially value analysis of
subjects that are taboo back in the Soviet Union. Our dialogues and locked horns
expose them to less dogmatic, either/or ways of understanding the Soviet Union.
They appreciate that, although I can't say their fundamental opinions have been
altered as a result. I get the feeling that before their opinions change, there
might be more meat in Leningrad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of the 'troika' (NYT/Keith Meyers)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CHOICE

BYLINE: By Esther B. Fein; Esther B. Fein is a reporter for The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6781 words


CAROL A. BARKALOW KEEPS the five frayed diaries on the floor by her bed, half
expecting that she might turn over one night and scribble in some new thoughts.
It was nine years ago when she cracked the binding on the first small red book
and wrote, in the meticulous handwriting of someone starting something new and
remarkable, ''July 7, 1976 - What a Day!''

It was a historic day, a day when Carol Barkalow became one of the first 119
young women to enter the United States Military Academy at West Point, a school
that had thrived as the all-male preserve of the Army career officer for 174
years. And now, after four years at the Academy and five years in the military,
Captain Barkalow still skims the diaries and assesses her growth from an awkward
young cadet who broke the zipper in her pants on her first day at West Point to
a polished officer and woman.

Linda T. Garcia, in the same year Carol Barkalow entered West Point, became a
member of the first class of women at the United States Air Force Acad-emy in
Colorado Springs. Occupying a proud place on her living-room wall is a framed
collage of photographs: Linda in the cockpit of a T-41; Linda as a freshman in
her starched ''doolie'' uniform; Linda with her saber in its sheath and her hand
raised, being sworn in as an officer by her father, a retired Air Force major.

''I'm often asked would I do it again,'' says Captain Garcia. ''Yes. Without
hesitation.''

Scattered about the den in Elizabeth Belzer Semcken's house are scrapbooks and
mementos from her days as a member of the class of 1980 at the Naval Academy at
Annapolis. There are also models of fighter planes that her husband, John, a
Navy pilot, has flown. But the room is cluttered mostly with pictures of their
bright-faced daughter, Rebecca, whom Liz reluctantly leaves with a baby sitter
when she goes to work for the Navy each morning.

''To the world, being in the first class was probably the most significant thing
I've done,'' says Lieutenant Semcken. ''But in my own life, there's no question
- it's Rebecca.''

Nine years ago these three officers were among 357 women who, by lugging their
duffel bags and books onto the campuses of the United States service academies,
made history. And now these women are poised once again at a juncture where
women have never stood. This month they will complete the five years of military
service they committed to when they entered the academies, and they must decide
either to stay in the military or leave it, to continue their careers as
officers or begin them anew as businesswomen. What they do will shed light on
questions many consider crucial for the United States armed services: Can women
succeed in today's military? Do women really want careers as officers in the
military, and does the military really want women officers?

''Where they go and what they do will in many ways measure the military's
success at integrating and promoting women,'' says Lieut. Gen. Robert E. Kelley,
vice commander of Tactical Air Command at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia,
and a former superintendent of the Air Force Academy. ''We are working very hard
to eliminate institutional biases in the military, and certainly admitting women
to the academies is a measure of that. But we have to look at whether these
women decide to stay or leave and ask ourselves, 'Are we doing enough to create
an environment in which women feel they can reach their potential?' ''

Carol Barkalow, Linda Garcia and Elizabeth Belzer Semcken are representative of
the dozens of women from the class of 1980 who were interviewed for this
article. Each of the three has strong emotional ties to military service and her
academy experience, but each is questioning what place the military will have in
her future. One says she will leave, one plans to stay, one is still painfully
un-sure. The decisions the three ultimately make will not only reveal the mood
of the class as a whole, but will say much about whether the military has been
successful in incorporating women into its ranks.

RADUATES OF THE service academies have traditionally enjoyed the luxury of being
sought after by both the military community and the private sector, and they
have prospered in both environments. The academies have long grappled with the
dilemma of training their young officers so well that private companies lure
them away to their carpeted corporate worlds. High-technology and manufacturing
companies are often drawn to the graduates for their engineering backgrounds,
and companies with defense contracts are eager to employ the perspective of a
former officer. Often, too, the high security clearance that many young officers
have proves useful to companies that deal with the Pentagon.

Head-hunting executives, while noting the prestige factor of the academies, also
say that academy graduates are desirable because of their leadership experience.
''At a relatively young age, they have been trained to accept great
responsibility,'' says Walter B. McNichols, a vice president of Fox-Morris
Executive Recruitment, a national firm whose Junior Military Officer Division is
one of the largest in the country. ''There is a maturity and a discipline about
them. They have not only been working, like their civilian peers, they have been
commanding. Leadership has been ingrained into them and it shows. They have a
more professional, less naive approach to their work.''

Now, the contest over these graduates includes, for the first time, players who
are women. And industry, in this age when many companies are expanding their
rosters of women, is pursuing them and offering jobs ranging from electrical
engineers to junior executives and computer analysts. ''Industry does still have
a commitment to hiring females,'' says Mr. McNichols, ''and these are the first.
They are special. We are certainly trying to get them as candidates.''

On the other hand, the appeal of these women to the military is obvious, and
some feel keenly the pressure to remain officers. Out of a pool of more than
28,000 young men and women who applied to be members of the class of 1980 at the
three service academies, only 4,376 matriculated, and of that number, only 357
were women - women the academies had chosen to be the first and expected to be
the best.

''It certainly is in our vested interest to keep these women because of the fine
training they've had and because of their potential for being immensely
successful,'' said Vice Adm. William P. Lawrence, chief of naval personnel and a
former superintendent of the Naval Academy. ''They represent a wealth of talent.
The academies were highly selective of the women that entered, the women
succeeded there and it only gives them an added quality now.''

''My future seems limitless,'' says Captain Barkalow. ''West Point has afforded
me countless opportunities - some that I don't even know exist. People tell me,
'You're in that seat. Everyone wants you.' Frankly, at times, it's a little
overwhelming.''

None of the services has completed a formal survey of the women of the class of
1980 to determine their present career plans. But officials from each of the
branches say that informal checking has found that about 30 percent of the women
have already said they intend to resign their commissions. Although roughly the
same percentage of men leave when their first commitment is due, some military
officials have said that they expect the proportion of women who resign to grow
in the next few years. The first wave of women academy graduates, these
officials say, were recruited more vigorously and may take longer to evaluate
the lure of opportunities outside the military.

A profound sense of patriotism and job security rank high among the reasons
women list for staying in the military. Among the reasons that the women cite
for leaving are family conflicts, more gainful civilian jobs and a feeling that
ultimately their success in the military might be limited by the Congressional
mandate that prohibits women from serving in Navy or Air Force jobs that could
expose them to combat and the Army's policy that also excludes them from these
jobs. The rulings prohibit women from holding jobs that might result in direct
confrontation - hand-to-hand, rifle-to-rifle contact - with the enemy. Women,
however, may serve in units that support combat troops. For example, a woman may
not fly a fighter jet, but she may fly a plane that refuels fighter jets. Some
women, like Carol Barkalow, express concern about being barred from direct
combat roles. It could, they say, affect their military careers because the top
military leaders have traditionally come from the combat divisions.

''There has been a dramatic expansion in the role of women in the military since
the mid-70's,'' says Martin Binkin, a senior fellow in defense manpower at the
Brookings Institution. ''But I don't think there's any question that women are
still not in the kind of jobs that will put them at the top of the heap.''

The prevailing opinion that military leaders express publicly, however, is that
the combat-exclusion rule will not hinder the promotion of women, that women
commanding noncombatant units, heading multimillion-dollar procurement offices
and leading intelligence forces will forge through the ranks and garner their
stars. Most of the generals and Defense Department officials that were
interviewed hedged on the subject of whether the combat-exclusion rule might be
repealed by noting that the rule was a Congressional mandate reflecting the will
of the public; they added that no other country allowed women to serve in combat
in its regular armed services.

But the issue of combat was of critical concern in 1975 when Congress was
debating whether to open the academies to women. Many officials testified at the
time that admitting women who are barred from combat would inevitably alter the
standards of the schools, which were predicated on producing combat leaders. The
debate on that point was so intense that a year after Congress had voted
overwhelmingly to admit women and after they had already successfully completed
their first year at the academies, Gen. William C. Westmoreland, former Page 36
-37 Army Chief of Staff who was then retired from active duty, said in an
interview: ''Maybe you could find one woman in 10,000 who could lead in combat,
but she would be a freak and we're not running the military academy for
freaks.''

T WAS IN A CLIMATE OF MILITARY ambivalence over the role of women, and with
great public attention, that on July 7, 1976 Carol Barkalow and 118 other women
arrived on the West Point campus. At the same time, 81 women at the Naval
Academy and 157 women at the Air Force Academy - some still too young to vote -
were similarly having their introductions to the previously all-male schools.

''What a day,'' Carol wrote in the first entry of the journal she kept during
her four years at the academy. ''It was just unbelievable. I learned how to
march today. When we took our oath, we paraded on the grounds. My pants zipper
broke and I had to wear Cadet Porter's. . . . I have never been through anything
like this in my life. What a day.''

The year that the academies began admitting women was a traumatic one for them,
because, while still scrambling to recover from the post-Vietnam legacy, they
had to readjust their operations. There was frequent nipping and tucking that
first year, as the academies tried to tailor the women to the schools and the
schools to them. A spring on the M-14 rifle was shortened; the time given women
to run two miles was lengthened; gynecologists were added to the health-service
staffs; some dormitories were segregated, then integrated.

The progress of the women through the schools was monitored by the military and
the news media, and all the attention caused jealous male classmates to sneer
and taunt. ''Every time we turned around a corner,'' says the Air Force's Linda
Garcia, ''some upperclassman would be telling us to get out.''

As the years progressed, the women were homogenized into the academies. They
became regimental commanders and class representatives. They hiked 12 miles in
full combat dress alongside men and studied the military applications of the
laws of physics. The men stopped ridiculing them and started dating them, and,
by graduation, many of the women had planned to marry other academy graduates.
Some, like the Navy's Elizabeth Semcken, now say that the incompatibility of a
dual military career family is contributing to their decision to leave the armed
forces.

In all, 214 of the 357 women who entered the three academies graduated in 1980
and were commissioned as officers, representing about 8 percent of the classes.
The overall rate of attrition for women was slightly higher than the rate for
men - 40 percent compared to 37 percent. By everyone's account, surviving the
four years was harder on the women, who worked under greater scrutiny,
resentment and pressure.

''Whenever things were bad at the Academy, in the back of your mind you knew
there was the choice to leave,'' says Lieutenant Semcken, whose academic record
made her the No. 1 female graduate at Annapolis in 1980. ''But I think I knew I
didn't really have that option. To me, leaving would have been like failing. Now
it is a choice.''

For Liz Semcken, who flutters with thoughts and ideas, the choice to stay or go
centered on her eagerness to ''truly love'' her work, but it also involved her
husband, John, a 1978 Annapolis graduate and a Navy pilot, and their 9-month-old
daughter, Rebecca. For Linda Garcia, the decision must take into account the
''rootlessness'' she felt as the child of an Air Force officer, and her
newly-found role as a model for the Hispanic community. For Carol Barkalow,
there was the question of whether the combat-exclusion rule would limit her
ability to command troops, and whether she could truly reconcile herself to the
isolation of Army life.

AROL BARKALOW WAS 13 years old when someone first challenged her right to do
something because she was a woman.

''Ewald Nyquist,'' she says, laughing at how easily the childhood bitterness
summoned up the name. ''I still remember.''

Mr. Nyquist was New York State's commissioner of education when Carol was a
freshman at Shenende-howa High School, in Clifton Park, N.Y., and the
first-string center-halfback on the soccer team - the boys soccer team. That was
until Mr. Nyquist informed Carol and her coach that he was enforcing the New
York State rule that precludes girls from participating in ''contact sports''
with boys.

''I was devastated,'' says Captain Barkalow, one of five children and, at age
26, still a confirmed tomboy. ''I knew I was good enough to play and I didn't
see any difference. They got knocked around and I got knocked around. We both
got bruised.'' She flips through a scrapbook, past newspaper clippings of her
successes in other sports, until she comes across the letter, dated Sept. 8,
1972, that stated ''Your request to play soccer on the boys freshman soccer team
cannot be granted.''

''I cried, but I wasn't old enough to realize it was this male establishment
doing this to me,'' she says. ''All I could see was that I wanted to play and
they wouldn't let me.''

In a manner of speaking, that is what Carol Barkalow sees now, too. Working as a
transportation officer for the Logistics Assessment Task Group at Fort Lee, Va.,
she is studying, among other things, the issue of women and combat, coding Army
jobs based on their probability of exposure to combat and, given the
combat-exclusion rule, determining the opportunities open to women in the Army.
In doing that study, she has been able to see, job by job, brigade by brigade,
the positions that she is prohibited from holding.

Captain Barkalow is philosophical about the point. She knows there has been a
broader acceptance by the public of women in the military, since the number of
women in the armed forces burgeoned after the draft was ended in 1972 and
recruitment of women, as officers and enlisted personnel, increased. There are
now 28,719 women officers and 172,491 enlisted personnel, which means that women
make up 9.5 percent of the officers and enlisted ranks (including the women in
the Marine Corps), compared to less than 2 percent in 1972. But there is still a
public reluctance to accept women in the key combat posts. A 1982 study by the
National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago found that only
one in three Americans think that women should be assigned to combat roles.

''There is still a stereotype image of a soldier slog ging through the mud,''
says Mr. Binkin of the Brookings Institution. ''People can't conceptualize their
daughters or their wives stalking through the jungles like that, and they're
particularly sensitive about the vulnerability of women who might be taken as
prisoners of war. It's a very difficult stereotype to break. We still have a
macho mentality in this country.''

For her part, Carol Barkalow is willing to stay in the Army and pursue
vigorously the paths that are accessible to women, something she decided to do
when she first entered West Point. ''I had no delusions about how difficult the
whole experience was going to be,'' she says. ''But I also knew that the impact
we made wasn't going to be silent. It was a positive, visible course of action
that made a positive impact for women in the Army. Getting us into the Academy
meant one more wall was toppled down. Now it is our responsibility to seek new
heights, to get infiltrated.''

Carol Barkalow's reasons for entering the Academy - and for now committing
herself to military service - were not entirely feminist. In fact, when she was
first accepted to West Point, she was criticized by a member of the National
Organization for Women for saying in an interview that at times she thought the
women's movement ''went too far.'' She is a deeply patriotic woman who believes
the United States should have compulsory service for military or civilian work,
so that people can ''give something back and learn an appreciation of the great
country we live in.''

That is something she has done ever since she graduated from the Academy and
accepted her first assignment at Fort Bliss, in Texas, where she trained on the
Nike-Hercules defense system in preparation for a three-year stint with the D
Battery of the 3d Battalion, 71st Air Defense Artillery, in Pforzheim, West
Germany. During her time there, says Captain Barkalow, she realized how
unrealistic the no-combat rule can be. ''We were six to eight air minutes from
East Germany,'' she says. ''If we were attacked, they couldn't possibly have
moved us out. So what if we weren't face to face. We were sitting ducks there as
much as anyone.''

It was there, she says, that, as executive officer, she had her first taste of
commanding troops and, with it, the full realization that she wanted a lifetime
Army career. Supervising a battery that was almost entirely male, taught her,
she says, that ''you need to establish yourself, to show the troops that this
isn't a shy, coy female; this is your commander and she means business.'' More
importantly, she discovered the allure of power and authority, of taking young
men and women and molding them into soldiers.

''I loved working with troops,'' says Captain Barkalow, who has been at Fort Lee
since last September. ''I want that responsibility. I want a command. I'm not
really in charge of anyone here, and I want that control.''

She says that she does not really look beyond her next command, but she also
does not shy away from admitting she believes she has ''the potential'' to
become a general. ''Over the years,'' she says, ''I will be honed and groomed
and I will take and adapt the very best from the people that I meet.''

Toward that end, Captain Barkalow has recognized the importance of her
affiliation with West Point - ''Grads take care of grads,'' she says - and of
finding a mentor for herself, a pratice that is common among young people
starting off in the business world. Her mentor is Lieut. Gen. Robert L.
Bergquist, Logistics Commander for the Training and Doctrine Command and her
superior at Fort Lee.

General Bergquist says that Captain Barkalow is ''exactly what we want in a
young officer. She's tough and she's sensitive.'' He expresses some concern
about the civilian opportunities now open to Captain Barkalow and her
classmates. But, he says with satisfaction, ''Carol hasn't shown me that she
wants a plaque on the door and a rug on the floor.'' He expects her to continue
doing what she was trained to do - ''be a soldier.''

In many ways, the choices the women of the class of 1980 face about family and
career are not so different from those of civilian career women their age. They,
too, must balance their personal and professional lives. Brig. Gen. Mildred E.
Hedberg, the Deputy Adjutant General and the senior ranking woman in the Army,
is currently interviewing women graduates of West Point's class of 1980. ''Many
of them are juggling motherhood, being a wife and having a career,'' she says.
''They have to be superwomen. So when you talk about challenges, these women
have it.''

Deciding to stay in the military was made easier, says Captain Barkalow, by her
realization that she does not want to have a family and may indeed never want to
marry. ''I'm not the motherly type,'' she says, although she tends to nurture
her co-workers, suggesting one day that a colleague ''go home and visit his
wife'' when she knew he had a head cold.

She is content, she says, to make a home for herself and is just beginning to
settle into the town house she bought in Hopewell, Va., five miles from the Fort
Lee post. ''I'm perfectly confident being by myself,'' she says. ''It gets
lonely. I'm not saying it doesn't. But it's something I've chosen to deal
with.'' Her house is filled with the trappings of single life - a microwave
oven, a freezer filled with Lean Cuisine, a state-of-the-art stereo and a stack
of periodicals that range from Handyman Magazine to Good Housekeeping - and with
keepsakes: her scrapbooks from high school, hand-carved wooden nutcrackers from
Germany and her diaries from the Academy.

LINDA GARCIA HAS always known the isolation of military life. She shuttled as a
child from Air Force base to Air Force base, as her father, Juan, pursued his
career as a pilot, and her mother, Sally, struggled to keep making new homes for
her five children. She fondly tells how close her family became, drawing on each
other's strength and friendship to feel comfortable in strange places. But now
that she is faced with the possiblity of repeating that pattern in her adult
life, Linda Garcia also remembers the childhood feelings of having ''had no
roots.''

When she was a student at the Air Force Academy, she wrote a song about how
lonely life could get with her father away so often, and how her mother had to
care for the children alone. ''Well Dad was gone when we were small but we
didn't understand.

Mom took his place and carried on the job she did was grand.

Those lonely years she struggled on and never once complained.

She did it all with love and joy and never showed the pain.'' ''One of the
problems in military life is that immediate family kinship is very strong, but
the family network is not there,'' says Captain Garcia, recounting that she was
born in Louisana and raised in Texas, Puerto Rico, Florida and Massachusetts.
''In the past couple of years, it hit me hard that I don't have any roots, and I
wonder what kind of impact that would have on the family I hope to have
someday.''

Captain Garcia, a Latin America analyst with the Tactical Air Command at Langley
Air Force Base, thrives on her family. Her conversations are peppered with
comments about her youngest sister, Mara, a freshman at the Air Force Academy
and ''a super, super woman,'' her two brothers, Juan Jr. and Luis (''They are so
good looking''), and her older sister, Amanda, an Air Force captain and ''my
best friend.'' And, always, there is mention of her parents, who finally settled
down after her father retired as a major from the Air Force and moved the family
to Colorado Springs.

It was her father, says Captain Garcia, who, when she was considering submitting
her resignation five months ago, encouraged her to give the Air Force another
year. Over a long-distance phone conversation from her apartment in Arlington,
Va., where she was working as an analyst for the Defense Intelligence Agency,
she and her father discussed her qualms about military life and the offers she
was starting to receive from private corporations.

''He helped me to realize that, in all honesty, I couldn't resign my commission
and say I didn't like the Air Force because I had never actually been stationed
on a base,'' says Captain Garcia, who was assigned to Washington after her
graduation and served in various intelligence positions there before moving to
Langley last December.

By accepting the transfer within a year of completing her five-year commitment,
she incurred additional time, because officers are required to remain in a post
for at least a year. Other women from the class of 1980 have also deferred their
decisions by accepting recent transfers or by extending their commitment to the
military in exchange for time at graduate school.

''Each option has its fears,'' says Captain Garcia, now 26 years old. ''When I
think of private industry, I wonder, 'Will I make it? Will I be bored?' If I
remain, there's the uncertainty about my next assignment. I really enjoy what
I'm doing now, but what about the next job? Ultimately, it comes down to, 'What
do I want to be when I grow up?' But along the way, I'm also feeling a lot of
pressure from people who've followed my career, people who say, 'Linda, you can
be a general.' ''

There are currently three female generals in the Air Force, compared with 340
men; four female generals in the Army, compared with 408 men, and two female
commodores, the equivalent of a one-star general, in the Navy, compared with 129
men. (There are 122 male admirals and no women of that rank.) Still, some people
who have tracked Linda Garcia believe she can attain the rank of general. Many
are members of the Hispanic community, proud of her accomplishments as the
daughter of a Mexican-American and a Puerto Rican-American. Her achievements
inspired the Mexican American Opportunity Foundation to name her Woman of the
Year in 1980. The following year, she was named Woman of the Year by the
National Conference of Puerto Rican Women.

One of her assignments at the Department of Defense was a six-month project for
the Secretary of Defense coordinating the creation of a commemorative stamp
honoring Hispanics who had served in America's armed forces. As part of that
job, she brought together the 10 surviving Hispanic Americans who have been
awarded the Medal of Honor, wrote speeches for senior defense officials,
maintained a liaison with the White House and coordinated receptions and
luncheons, including one at the White House last October, when President Reagan
unveiled the stamp. ''The Academy gave me the self-confidence and the polish to
handle that,'' says Captain Garcia.

She notes that the national-level jobs she has held are ''highly unusual'' for a
junior officer. Another of her tasks at the Pentagon was analyzing Argentina's
military capabilities during the Falklands crisis. ''I've seen the big
picture,'' she says. ''High-level decisions were based on what I had done. I
briefed the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff - as a second
lieutenant - talking ad hoc about missile fighters. To this day it blows my
mind.'' She admits, however, that starting in such visible and prestigious jobs
has a disadvantage. It creates a feeling of ''nowhere to go but down.''

''She's unusually composed for a junior officer,'' says Gen. Robert E. Kelley of
the Langley Air Force Base, who requested that Captain Garcia be transferred to
Langley after she introduced herself to him at a convention in Washington. ''She
walked right up to me and made a pitch for a job,'' he recalls. ''She's got that
get up and go. That says a lot about her.''

That quality - that ''enthusiasm, moxie and chutzpah,'' as General Kelley calls
it - has not escaped the civilian companies and business people that Captain
Garcia has come across as an officer. Captain Garcia is very reluctant to
discuss specifically the companies that have contacted her or what kind of
offers they have made, fearing that to be so candid would ''burn the bridges''
if she decides to remain in the Air Force.

''I am looking around; I will be passing out my resume soon,'' she says. She
does say that most of the companies that have demonstrated an interest ''are
high-technology, some with Government contracts,'' and mentions that one such
company in Colorado Springs called and said, ''You want engineering? You got it.
You want accounting? You got it? Management? It's yours.'' ''The problem is,''
she says, readily admitting that she enjoys the attention, both corporate and
military, ''I don't know what I want to do and that's scary.''

For the time being, Linda Garcia is mulling over the offers she receives, and by
summer, she expects to ''sit down and physically make a list'' of the pros and
cons of staying and leaving. ''If I stay in, I sure do think ahead to being a
general,'' she says, speaking with the self-assuredness that landed her the job
at Langley. ''I don't want to sound conceited, but I have a good start and
there's no reason I couldn't. But the opportunities are just, well, frightening.
When we were in the Academy, they told us being a cadet would open doors. We
said 'Sure.' You know what? They were right.''

THERE WAS A TIME when Liz Belzer Semcken was not interested in what lay beyond
the Naval Academy. Encouraged by her commanders at Annapolis, she committed her
mind, her career, and, at one point it seemed, possibly even her marriage, in
pursuit of her military life.

In her four years at the Academy, Liz Belzer was special, not only because she
was one of the first women, but because she was the best of those women. She had
an almost perfect grade point average, became a regimental commander and a
battalion commander, and in her senior year was chosen as a Trident Scholar, an
award given each year to ''exceptionally capable'' senior midshipmen. She was
lauded by her commanders as a paragon for female students, and, in turn, she was
ridiculed and hazed by male midshipmen who could not accept her success.

Still, she blossomed under the rigors of Navy life and the careful tending of
her commanding officers. ''People were very enthusiastic and supportive of me at
the Academy,'' says Lieutenant Semcken. ''I was in a leadership position, and,
at the time, I looked at the Navy as my destiny. I thought God wanted me to be a
model for women in the Navy.''

Now she says, ''That was the dream of a 19-year-old.''

Some Naval officials say they regret that Lieutenant Semcken no longer has that
dream. ''I sure as hell would like to keep her,'' says Captain James J. Hogan
3d, in charge of the branch of the Surface Warfare Officers School in Coronado,
Calif., where Lieutenant Semcken is an instructor. ''She is very highly regarded
in the Navy. To be honest, when I go to the Academy or to Washington, her old
commanding officers are always asking after her.''

But Lieutenant Semcken says that the attention of her superiors is ''late in
coming'' and began only after they learned she would be profiled in this
article, and that disinterest has contributed to her decision to pursue a
civilian career.

''I came here from an experience where I was outstanding - one of the best,''
she says, noting that she does not take such attention for granted. ''Now it's
like I'm one of a million. Maybe I have an over-inflated ego, and maybe it would
be the same in the civilian world, but it seems to me that if you have someone
with exceptional potential, you guide them - someone like Mary Lou Retton, and I
know that's a strange comparison. She had someone beside her to get her to the
Olympics. You'd figure that someone here would be pushing, too.''

Vice Adm. Lawrence, the chief of naval personnel, says he ''regrets'' Lieutenant
Semcken's ''perception'' of official disinterest, and says that counseling and
career planning for junior officers is considered ''a matter of policy.''

The casual attention to her career, says Lieutenant Semcken, is only a part of
her decision to leave the Navy. Her own interest in bursting through the Naval
ranks has waned, she admits, as she has come to measure the toll that such blind
determination can exact from her family. ''A woman is still behind the power
curve in the Navy,'' she says, ''and to get in line with it, there's a lot of
cost, especially in terms of time with my husband and my baby. That's something
you don't realize right away when you're an eager new graduate ready to take on
your first assignment.''

Fresh out of the academy, Liz Belzer married her college sweetheart, John
Semcken (class of '78), under crossed swords at the Annapolis chapel. After she
deployed on the Samuel Gompers, a destroyer tender that maintains ships and
submarines, it was seven months before the two saw each other. ''The separation
was very hard on our marriage,'' says John, who is temporarily working as a
public-affairs officer at the Naval Air Station in Miramar, Calif., and who must
also decide whether to continue his military career.

''When I got back, we were not very comfortable with each other,'' says Liz.
''We had a lot of problems to work out and I began to realize then that with two
people in the military there would always be those separations and that
readjustment.''

She was also growing more discontented with the line of duty she had chosen
within the Navy, surface warfare - the division that governs all Navy ships
except submarines and aircraft carriers. Only a limited number of women enter
surface warfare each year, and they are currently serving on only 36 of the
Navy's 530-ship fleet. Most of those 36 vessels are tenders and repair ships,
since the combat-exclusion rule prohibits women from serving on ships that may
be involved in combat. Lieutenant Semcken says that she chose the field -
knowing that her opportunities would be limited - because her commanders at the
Academy convinced her that the Navy was training ''men and women of the line,
not administrators.''

While praising her work, her commanding officer, Captain Hogan, speculates that
the ''uncertainty'' of Lieutenant Semcken's opportunities as a woman in surface
warfare should give her cause to consider ''following her husband wherever his
career takes him,'' and to changing billets if necessary. ''She could still have
a tremendous future in the Navy,'' he says.

''For me,'' says Lieutenant Semcken, ''that would be copping out; it would be
staying just for the security of the Navy and that would not be satisfying.''

All the frustrations - the separations from John, the disinterest of her
commanders, the constraints of surface warfare - were brought to a head last
August after the birth of her daughter, Rebecca. ''I don't think you can
appreciate how that little life will change your world, until she's born and
she's yours,'' says Lieutenant Semcken, who rises at 5:30 every morning to
prepare Rebecca for the sitter, drops her off at 7 A.M., and picks her up at 5
in the evening. ''I had a feeling for a while that I was no longer meant for the
Navy, that I had done my best, and served my time. But when Rebecca was born, I
knew I could never go back to sea.''

She says she began to receive letters from executive recruiters even before she
decided to leave the Navy. She has already interviewed with some of them and was
''overwhelmed'' by the response. One recruiter that she and John interviewed
with together suggested that, given Liz's impressive Academy credentials, John
should follow her wherever she got the best offer - a corporate twist to Captain
Hogan's advice.

Executives at several firms say that, to start, most officers could expect at
least to match their military salaries - which are about $32,000 a year for
officers at Liz Semcken's level, figuring in the untaxed military living and
housing allowance. And an academy degree, says an executive at one company that
deals in defense contracts, ''can be worth about 10 grand more a year and up,
depending on the person.''

The salary appeal, say many executives and recruiters, is not so much in what
academy graduates can earn in the first year out of the military, but in their
potential for future earnings. ''At the low end, there is not too much
difference between military pay and corporate pay,'' says Thomas C. Barron, a
management consultant in New York. Mr. Barron is a 1965 graduate of West Point
and vice president of the West Point Society of New York, which advises alumni
about transferring to the corporate world. ''But at the high end, after even
just a few years, the difference is substantial; there's no comparison. A good
person could count on making two, three, even four times as much as they would
in the military.''

The money is not the primary lure of a civilian career, says Lieutenant Semcken,
even though she is determined that her daughter will never have to choose a
college, as she did, because of finances. ''I want the kind of job that I'm
willing to put all my hours in, and then some, because I love doing it,'' she
says, adding that it is a ''relief'' to have made the final decision to leave
the Navy. ''I wish I knew exactly what I want to do. Computers, maybe, I think.
What I do know is that I want the world to open up and say, 'Hey Liz, look
what's here for you.' ''

WHAT IS OUT there beckoning to Liz Semcken and Linda Garcia and Carol Barkalow
and the women who graduated with them is a future fraught with uncertainty and
promise: Will they live up to the expectations that followed them through the
academies and the beginning of their careers? Will they find a way to be happy
and fulfilled? Will they make their marks and change the world?

''When you're in the military,'' says Liz Semcken, ''at least for me, when
things get bad, you can drop back and say, 'Hey, I'm serving my country.' As far
as getting out, though, I know that I've done something for my country, for the
time that I did it, to the best of my ability. And I've learned that you can
serve your country, even if you go into business. When you're younger,
especially in an environment like the Academy, you think that being a soldier is
the only way to be patriotic. It's not.''

''Yes, we would like to retain them; we want to keep the experience and the
talent,'' says General Hedberg, of the Army. ''We do know that not all will
stay. We also know that if they get out, they will lend to society their talent
and experience and the values that they gained. They serve their country even if
they leave the service.''

What these women did nine years ago, say many people, gave a new shape to the
military. It changed the concept of the academies as ''a macho challenge'' and
it startled people both inside and outside the military into realizing that
women could cope with its rigors. ''What these women did is bigger than
symbolism,'' says Lieut. Gen. Edgar A. Chavarrie, Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Military Personnel and Force Management. He compares the women of
the class of 1980 to the astronaut Sally Ride, the first American woman to ride
in space. ''They broke the barrier,'' he says, ''and it will never again be
unbroken.''

The military may have failed some of its brightest women members. The academies
may have been, to some of the women, both a burden and an opportunity. But there
is no doubt that the barrier General Chavarrie cites remains unbroken. Since
that July morning nine years ago, when Carol Barkalow, Linda Garcia and Liz
Belzer Semcken took their places and defied the odds, 1,278 women have gone
through the service academies. There are no longer students at any of the
schools who can remember what it was like without women studying in the
classrooms, running the obstacle courses, or shouting drill commands, On May 22,
when the academies hold their commencement exercises, 296 more women are
expected to graduate, and after they leave to begin their new assignments as
officers, about 450 ardent and awkward young women will take their places, when
the class of 1989 arrives on the campuses to begin basic training.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of woman in excerise routine (Anthony Edgeworth) (page 42); photo
of Lieut. Elizabeth Semcken (Anthony Edgeworth) (page 37); photo of Lieut.
Elizabeth Semcken, husband John and daughter (Anthony Edgeworth) (page 36);
photo of Linda Garcia (Anthony Edgeworth) (page 35); photo of Linda Garcia
(Anthony Edgeworth) (page 34); photo of Carol Barkalow with maintenancemen
(Anthony Edgeworth); p

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

YOU PAY ATTENTION, YOU LEARN SOMETHING

BYLINE: By Julian Moynahan; Julian Moynahan is a novelist who also writes on
20th-century literature.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words


OCCASIONAL PROSE By Mary McCarthy. 341 pp. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
$17.95.

MARY McCARTHY'S new book comprises uncollected reviews and criticism, obituary
pieces on her friends Philip Rahv, Nicola Chiaromonte, Hannah Arendt and F. W.
Dupee, political reporting, several prefaces and afterwords to other people's
books, a retelling of ''La Traviata'' commissioned by the Metropolitan Opera and
one biographical sketch, all culled from the last 15 years or so of her
distinguished writing career.

The earliest article in ''Occasional Prose,'' ''On the Demo,'' is from 1968. It
describes the big demonstration against the Vietnam War that took place in
London that fall. Things came to a head before the fortress-styled United States
Embassy in Grosvenor Square. I had witnessed a particularly violent
demonstration there that spring, organized by an international roster of student
radicals, and can certify the correctness of her remark that ''Grosvenor Square,
if not a death-trap, is a box in which pressures build up almost by
themselves.'' By the fall, apparently, the demonstrators and the police had
learned a little patience with each other; she describes how one constable in
the siege line across the front of the embassy flicked his lighter for one of
the cigarette-smoking Maoists opposite him. In March they would have tried to
club each other.

This description is typical of her reportorial style - a quick eye for the
telling and anomalous detail, along with a tendency to view public events, or at
least public events in the 1960's, as theater: ''Indeed, the Demo, which might
have been a tragedy, turned into a comedy of manners.'' Come to think of it,
''demo'' is to ''demonstration'' as ''panto'' is to ''pantomime,'' with Tariq
Ali, the abrasive Pakistani leader of the Trotskyist faction of demonstrators,
playing Turko the Terrible. The abbreviation somehow makes it all more cozy.

Her latest dated essay is a ''postface'' to a new edition of Nicola
Chiaromonte's ''Paradox of History,'' which has not even been published yet. It
is the second piece in the book on this too little known Italian intellectual
who flew with Malraux during the Spanish Civil War and combined an independent
left-wing political stance with a lifelong passion for live theater. As a
working drama critic, Chiaromonte distrusted Brecht and the ''alienation
effect,'' clung to Pirandello, Shaw and Ibsen as exemplary influences on modern
drama, approved the distancing effected by masks, stylized acting and other
devices deriving from the Attic stage and yet defined the essence of the play as
''reasoning action.'' Miss McCarthy shows us how these seemingly diverse and
contradictory tendencies fit together. We are reminded that she has also been an
excellent drama critic, starting out with the old Partisan Review.

Some of Miss McCarthy's closest friends passed away during the 1970's and become
the subject of her obituary commemorations, which seem to me to be suffused with
a downright Irish need to speak ''nice words'' about the departed. These people
were of a generation, though they were not a clique, and she is of that
generation too, though, being something of a Wunderkind in her literary
beginnings, she was actually four or five years younger than any of them.

Her strongest friendship was perhaps with Hannah Arendt, whom she not only
describes as an intellectual's intellectual - ''The task that had fallen to her
. . . was to apply thought systematically to each and every characteristic
experience of her time . . . and, having finally achieved this, to divert
thought inward, upon itself, and its own characteristic processes'' - but also
as ''beautiful . . . alluring, seductive, feminine.'' That may go a little far,
though many will remember Arendt's vitality and charm. She was arresting even
when quoting passages of technical philosophy in languages unknown to most of
her auditors. In the spring of 1959, Mary McCarthy and Hannah Arendt sometimes
attended the Gauss Seminars in Criticism, which Richard Blackmur directed at
Princeton University. Without saying a word, they were a daunting pair. Their
looks spoke volumes, and they always seemed in total agreement.

As a literary critic Miss McCarthy often likes to lay down rules and devise
categories (see the pieces ''Politics and the Novel'' and ''Novel, Tale, and
Romance''), but her finest talent is for unraveling difficult texts by paying
the closest possible attention to the actual twists and turns of words on the
page. Who can forget her superb explication of ''Pale Fire'' nearly a
quarter-century ago, which did so much to firm up Nabokov's post-''Lolita''
literary reputation with his American audience? Here she tries something similar
with Italo Calvino's ''If on a Winter's Night a Traveler'' and Joan Didion's
''Democracy.''

She is wonderful on the tale in ''Novel, Tale, and Romance.'' It's unlikely any
other American literary journalist could reveal intimate knowledge of the works
of Adalbert Stifter in the original German and then go on to associate him with
the northern European forests and wooden house architecture. Her account of the
novel, which emphasizes its factuality and ties to common sense and the reality
principle, seems unduly restrictive. I would also dissent from her conventional
account of how Joyce's heaping up of verbal detritus in ''Finnegans Wake'' and
the overwhelming nature of modern events have stopped the novel dead in its
tracks. Nobody can prove it, but these bones live.

Everywhere in ''Occasional Prose'' appear bracing opinions tartly expressed -
Americans are slow, tedious talkers; big-time art collectors are not very nice
people; the word ''drugget'' must never be used for stair carpeting; everybody
misuses prepositions because nobody studies Latin in school anymore. In this
mood she is reminiscent of Miss Jean Brodie, without that character's feckless
right wingery, of course. May she continue to call us all to attention (''No
slumping in the back seats!''), showing us the world of her imagination, thought
and rich experience. AUTOBIOGRAPHY IN PROGRESS Mary McCarthy, reporting on
herself from her Montparnasse apartment in Paris with customary verve: ''I've
given up on long fiction. I decided not to write any more novels after the age
of 65.'' (She was born in 1912.) ''I do not believe that you can write a
successful novel that calls for social observation after a certain age.
Observation doesn't have to do with high or low society. What matters is
sharpness of perception. You can write tales, like Tolstoy did after 'Anna
Karenina,' but your powers of observation decline. 'Cannibals and Missionaries'
in 1979 was my last novel. ''My publisher, William Jovanovich, suggested that I
write what he called an intellectual autobiography, and that's what I've been
working on for several years. I have one of those first-reading agreements with
The New Yorker and they've already bought a couple of chapters. Because of a
series of operations, I had to put it aside. Instead, I assembled the essays and
lectures that appear in 'Occasional Prose.' Seeing the new book has cheered me
up. My husband and I spend summers in Castine, Me., and I'll continue writing
there - nonfiction.'' - Herbert Mitgang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mary McCarthy

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VON BULOW, AND OTHER SOAP OPERAS

BYLINE: By Stephen Gillers; Stephen Gillers is professor of law at New York
University

SECTION: Section 4; Page 25, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: OTIS, Mass.


Who cares who killed Martha von Bulow (or tried to) - if anyone did?

Who cares whether Jean Harris killed Dr. Herman Tarnower on purpose or by
accident? Or whether John Z. DeLorean was or was not entrapped when he allegedly
imported cocaine?

Great trials that once captured the nation's attention raised compelling
political questions - for example, the unsuccessful prosecutions of Dr. Benjamin
M. Spock for counseling draft resistance and of Dr. Daniel Ellsberg for
allegedly releasing the Pentagon Papers. Other trials carried enormous
intellectual significance: one thinks of the Scopes case, in which William
Jennings Bryan and Clarence Darrow clashed over teaching evolution in the public
schools, and of the trial to ban the sale of James Joyce's ''Ulysses.''

Although some current trials do raise crucial questions about our liberties -
for example, Gen. William C. Westmoreland against CBS, and Ariel Sharon against
Time magazine - by contrast, the stories behind other big legal contests are
melodramatic and without substance. They are barely distinguishable from the
relentlessly repetitive plot line of ''Dallas,'' with characters who are often
equally unsympathetic. Even if we do care about the guilt of Claus von Bulow,
Jean Harris and John DeLorean, why should their trials merit greater media
attention than a brief report on the verdict with a summary of the evidence?

We devour much more than the verdicts, though. We feast on the testimony as it
unfolds, with nearly simultaneous news conference commentaries from the lawyers.
We gobble up stories about black bags and luxurious life styles, about cheating
on wives and cheating on lovers, about exclusive boarding schools and the drug
habits of the well-to-do.

The Harris crime has led to two books and the von Bulow case to one.

A DeLorean biography has been published. Movie deals are rumored.

Will we debate these defendants' guilt for decades, much as we still debate the
guilt of Sacco and Vanzetti, Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, Joe Hill, Alger Hiss?
Even to compare the two sets of cases is to see how far our requirements for
public discourse have declined, how close to voyeurism they have come.

As good citizens, we all hope justice is done. We hope Claus von Bulow is
acquitted if he is innocent, convicted and punished if guilty. But we hope for
such outcomes in all criminal cases, and very few win the public and press
attention that has descended on the von Bulow courtroom.

Is there educational value? Don't we learn something about our legal heritage,
about our criminal-justice system, by reading, seeing and hearing of daily
developments in these cases?

No, for two reasons. First, the media can provide only highlights of the trials
- snippets that tell almost nothing about our system for determining guilt or
innocence. More important, though, trials like Mr. von Bulow's look as much like
the trial of an ordinary criminal case as a Hitchcock film looks like a home
movie. They reveal what our legal system can do on those rare occasions when
both sides are willing and able to spare no expense and are prepared to insist
on every prerogative that Anglo-American legal precedent has devised. Very few
criminal trials are like that. Very few criminal cases are ever tried.

Still, the von Bulow, Harris and DeLorean cases are at least interesting because
the lawyers are good, and, as we all know, a well-fought trial can offer great
drama. If newspapers and television can bring us only the high points - the
stunning revelations, say, or brilliant cross-examinations - why, these, after
all, are the parts most fascinating to hear and read about. But soap opera
doesn't become news simply because it is produced in a courtroom and not a TV
studio.

It was important to us as citizens whether Dr. Ellsberg could be sent to prison
if he had released the Pentagon Papers; whether Dr. Spock could protest the
Vietnam War in the way he did; whether controversial books like ''Ulysses''
could be excluded from the country.

Except that we hope the verdict is correct - we may never know for sure if it is
- who cares what happens at the von Bulow trial?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOWPATH OF OLD IS YIELDING TO CANAL PROJECT

BYLINE: By LEO H. CARNEY

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 1, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1563 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON


ALONG the old towpath of the Delaware and Raritan Canal here, there is little
left but dust and stones, as well as twigs from a couple of thousand trees that,
until recently, dotted the area.

It was on this path between Trenton and New Brunswick that mules pulled the
barges that brought the beginnings of the Industrial Revolution to much of
central New Jersey during the first half of the 19th century. Steamboats
gradually replaced the mules after the Civil War.

The towpath, which is about 25 feet wide, is now just a devegetated berm that
separates Lake Carnegie from the much narrower canal. A pockmarked milestone
stands alone in witness to the canal's 151-year history and that of the lake,
built in 1910 by Andrew Carnegie.

The cutting and clearing, which got under way last year, were done by
contractors hired by the state's Water Supply Authority. The methods of cleaning
were approved first by the Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission.

The purpose of the work was to facilitate dredging the canal, a major supply of
water for some 600,000 people. Although the state is authorized to divert 100
million gallons of water each day from the Delaware River into the canal so that
it can be sold, officials say that sedimentation and weed growth have reduced
the marketable water to 8 million to 65 million gallons a day, depending on the
season.

Much of the $20 million dredging and improvement project along 32 miles of the
canal's 60-mile length is nearing completion, but the loss of trees endures and
so does the anger of some of the residents here, including officials of
Princeton University.

In a letter to a local newspaper, a reader suggested that the towpath be used as
an aircraft runway or a bypass corridor, but that was where the joking ended.

''The towpath has essentially been destroyed,'' said Margen Penick, a trustee of
the Delaware and Raritan Canal Coalition, a nonprofit group that oversees
protection of the canal and its environs, which comprise a linear state park.

''It looks like a dirt truck road, which actually it is now,'' Mrs. Penick
added.

The dual function of the canal - as a water-supply facility and, since 1976, as
a state park - has always been not only palatable to residents of the region,
but also a complete source of pride until the construction began.

In the last month or so, steamy debate has developed over whether the Water
Supply Authority can be trusted with ownership of the canal itself, as has been
proposed, without endangering the recreational, environmental and historic
aspects of the park that embraces it.

The Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park and the canal proper have been
operated by the state's Department of Environmental Protection.

Rocco D. Ricci, executive director of the Water Authority, and Robert E. Hughey,
Commissioner of the D.E.P., were supposed to have signed a memorandum of
agreement and a deed by now. The land would have transferred the canal, not the
state park, to the authority.

However, the increasingly complex controversy that has ensued has held off the
signing of these documents.

''It has gotten even more complex in the last few weeks because of the wild
accusations that have been made,'' Mr. Ricci said in an interview last week, For
example, he said that the authority had been inundated by telephone calls from
residents along the canal who were led to believe that Agent Orange, a herbicide
used in Vietnam, was being applied by the project's contractors. This proved to
be untrue, but Mrs. Penick said there had been no real assurances by the
authority that it would abandon all plans to use toxic herbicides to clear
vegetation.

The Delaware and Raritan Canal Coalition, comprising 14 historic societies and
conservation groups, contends, among other things, that the clear cutting was
done merely out of convenience and to save contractors money.

The ''devastation and destruction'' that the environmentalists say has occurred
has taken place in Princeton, West Windsor, Plainsboro, Lawrence and Kingston.

Rosemary Blair, president of the coalition and chairman of Princeton Open Space,
an environmental organization, said that the groups were not opposed to the
dredging, only to the ecologically careless manner in which they contend the
project had been approached.

The Water Supply Authority has said that the coalition's contentions have been
either exaggerated or fabricated. The trees and vegetation, it says, cannot be
allowed to grow thick over a potable water source and, besides, the vegetation
will eventually be replaced.

Mr. Ricci said that approval of the clear cutting and other aspects of the
project had been given by the appropriate state and regional agencies only after
numerous public meetings, and that the protesters should have known all along
what type of work was being done.

But the issues are not all that simple. The coalition says that, based on the
authority's past performance, it cannot be trusted with the ecological and
historic features of the park and should not be allowed to operate the
''transmission complex,'' as the canal proper is called.

Under an agreement drafted by the Water Supply Authority and the D.E.P., the
environmental agency's Division of Parks and Forestry would retain control and
ownership of the recreational, historic and conservation aspects of the canal,
while the authority would gain title to the canal itself as a water-supply
facility.

Mr. Hughey said in an interview last week that transfer of title to the
authority was necessary to assure the future of the canal's water supply.

However, Mr. Hughey said, two meetings have been scheduled with coalition
members - one with the state's Division of Building and Construction last week
and a second with the Attorney General's office this week.

''Until these meetings are completed,'' Mr. Hughey said, ''I'm not going to sign
the deed.''

Michael J. Galley, chief engineer for the Water Supply Authority, said in an
interview that ''every effort is being made to restore the park upstream from
Trenton,'' and that it will be a ''nicer-looking park'' when the restoration is
done.

''But,'' he added, ''there's no way to restore it to its original state because
some of the trees that were removed were diseased or leaning trees. You can't
afford to allow vegetation to grow up over a water supply.''

Mr. Galley acknowledged that, after the clearing of trees and vegetation, the
periphery of the canal in Princeton ''sure looked like hell when you first saw
it.'' However, he said this was only in comparison to the former heavy
overgrowth that other state agencies had neglected to cull over the years.

Mrs. Penick said that the coalition did not want the towpath and park restored
to their original 1834 look, only to their condition before the recent project
began.

Mr. Ricci said that a 10,000-foot-long underground partition, known as a slurry
wall, had to be implanted on the towpath between Lake Carnegie and the canal to
guard the latter against possible lake-water intrusion.

He said this would preclude completely revegetation of the towpath, a prospect
that has angered Princetonians. They say that the wall is not an engineering
necessity.

Mrs. Penick said that the coalition had formulated its own restoration plan,
which called for allowing new pin oaks, shagbark hickories and other trees to
sprout from stumps that had been left behind. Crabapple and cherry trees should
be planted in certain parts of Princeton and Kingston, she said.

''The towpath had a historical ambiance,'' Mrs. Penick said. ''You could see
where the canal was, where the locks were and how it all worked. We want it the
way it existed before.'' The coalition's proposals asked for more than simple
restoration, however.

For example, Mrs. Penick said it was proposing that the Water Supply Authority
should not be given title to the transmission complex and be able, therefore, to
float revenue bonds to generate its own income.

In essence, she said, this would be a ''precedent for mortgaging state parks
because the bondholders would have the real property of New Jersey parks - the
canal - as collateral.''

Instead, Mrs. Penick said, the coalition wants the state environmental agency
either to lease the transmission complex to the authority or to have the
authority's annual income from water sales subjected to review by the
Legislature.

In this way, she said, if the recreational, ecological or historical aspects of
the canal were being destroyed or neglected by the authority, the Legislature
could withhold all or part of the income until a specific situation was
corrected.

Water from the canal is drawn by some two-dozen businesses and water purveyors,
including the Elizabethtown Water Company, largest in the state, and the
Middlesex Water Company. Annual income is expected to be about $6 million.

In a statement issued by his office - one of many that has addressed the
coalition's charges point by point in recent weeks - Mr. Ricci said that the
authority ''must be able to show ownership of the land in order to be able to
obtain short- and long-term financing in the public marketplace.''

Mrs. Penick said that the coalition also would continue to oppose further
construction and tree cutting planned for the towpath along Lake Carnegie and on
the eastern side of the canal adjacent to Mapleton Road.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Delaware and Raritan Canal; Photos of the Delaware and Raritan
Canal (NYT/Mark Sherman)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thai Marines Fight Vietnamese at Border

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 94 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 5


Thai marines backed by air strikes have mounted a major operation against
Vietnamese who entered this country in pursuit of Cambodian guerrillas, a senior
Thai officer said today.

''We are using everything we have'' against the intruders, the officer said. The
operation, he said, was carried out Saturday in Chanthaburi Province, along the
southern stretch of the border with Cambodia.

The officer said the Vietnamese, who were pursuing Khmer Rouge guerrillas, had
crossed the border into Chamrak, a village on high terrain about 200 miles east
of Bangkok.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF REAGAN'S SPEECH AT AIR BASE AFTER HIS VISIT TO THE CEMETERY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1750 words

DATELINE: BITBURG, West Germany, May 5


Following is a transcript of remarks by President Reagan today at the United
States Air Base at Bitburg after his visit to a German military cemetery, as
recorded by The Associated Press:

I have just come from the cemetery where German war dead lay at rest. No one
could visit here without deep and conflicting emotions. I felt great sadness
that history could be filled with such waste, destruction and evil. But my heart
was also lifted by the knowledge that from the ashes has come hope, and that
from the terrors of the past we have built 40 years of peace and freedom - and
reconciliation among our nations.

This visit has stirred many emotions in the American and German people, too. I
have received many letters since first deciding to come to Bitburg cemetery,
some supportive, others deeply concerned and questioning, others opposed. Some
old wounds have been reopened, and this I regret very much, because this should
be a time of healing.

To the veterans and families of American servicemen who still carry the scars
and feel the painful losses of that war, our gesture of reconciliation with the
German people today in no way minimizes our love and honor for those who fought
and died for our country. They gave their lives to rescue freedom in its darkest
hour. The alliance of democratic nations that guards the freedom of millions in
Europe and America today stands as living testimony that their noble sacrifice
was not in vain. 2 Former War Heroes No, their sacrifice was not in vain. I have
to tell you that nothing will ever fill me with greater hope than the sight of
two former war heroes who met today at the Bitburg ceremony, each among the
bravest of the brave, each an enemy of the other 40 years ago, each a witness to
the horrors of war. But today they came together, American and German, Gen.
Matthew B. Ridgeway and Gen. Johannes Steinhoff, reconciled and united for
freedom, they reached over the graves to one another like brothers and grasped
their hands in peace.

To the survivors of the Holocaust: your terrible suffering has made you ever
vigilant against evil. Many of you are worried that reconciliation means
forgetting. I promise you, we will never forget. I have just come this morning
from Bergen-Belsen, where the horror of that terrible crime, the Holocaust, was
forever burned upon my memory. No, we will never forget, and we say with the
victims of that Holocaust, ''Never again.''

The war against one man's totalitarian dictatorship was not like other wars. The
evil world of Naziism turned all values upside down. Nevertheless, we can mourn
the German war dead today as human beings, crushed by a vicious ideology.

The Bitburg Cemetery

There are over 2,000 buried in Bitburg cemetery. Among them are 48 members of
the SS. The crimes of the SS must rank among the most heinous in human history.
But others buried there were simply soldiers in the German Army. How many were
fanatical followers of a dictator and willfully carried out his cruel orders?
And how many were conscripts, forced into service during the death throes of the
Nazi war machine? We do not know. Many, however, we know from the dates on their
tombstones, were only teen-agers at the time. There is one boy buried there who
died a week before his 16th birthday.

There were thousands of such soldiers to whom Nazism meant no more than a brutal
end to a short life. We do not believe in collective guilt. Only God can look
into the human heart. All these men have now met their Supreme Judge, and they
have been judged by Him, as we shall all be judged.

Our duty today is to mourn the human wreckage of totalitarianism, and today, in
Bitburg cemetery, we commemorated the potential good and humanity that was
consumed back then, 40 years ago. Perhaps if that 15-year-old soldier had lived,
he would have joined his fellow countrymen in building this new democratic
Federal Republic of Germany devoted to human dignity and the defense of freedom
that we celebrate today.

Or perhaps his children or his grandchildren might be among you here today at
the Bitburg Air Base, where new generations of Germans and Americans join
together in friendship and common cause, dedicating their lives to preserving
peace and guarding the security of the free world.

Reconciliation of 2 Nations

Too often in the past, each war only planted the seeds of the next. We celebrate
today the reconciliation between our two nations that has liberated us from that
cycle of destruction. Look at what together we have accomplished. We who were
enemies are now friends. We who were bitter adversaries are now the strongest of
allies. In the place of fear we have sown trust, and out of the ruins of war has
blossomed an enduring peace.

Tens of thousands of Americans have served in this town over the years. As the
Mayor of Bitburg has said, in that time there have been some 6,000 marriages
between Germans and Americans, and many thousands of children have come from
these unions. This is the real symbol of our future together, a future to be
filled with hope, friendship and freedom.

The hope we see now could sometimes even be glimpsed in the darkest days of the
war. I'm thinking of one special story - that of a mother and her young son
living alone in a modest cottage in the middle of the woods. One night as the
Battle of the Bulge exploded not far away, three young American soldiers arrived
at their door - standing in the snow, lost behind enemy lines. All were
frostbitten; one was badly wounded. Even though sheltering the enemy was
punishable by death, she took them in and made them a supper with some of her
last food.

Knock at the Door

And then, they heard another knock at the door. This time four German soldiers
stood there. The woman was afraid, but she quickly said with a firm voice,
''There will be no shooting here.'' She made all the soldiers lay down their
weapons, and they all joined in the makeshift meal. Heinz and Willi, it turned
out, were only 16. The corporal was the oldest at 23. Their natural suspicion
dissolved in the warmth and comfort of the cottage. One of the Germans, a former
medical student, tended the wounded American.

Now, listen to the rest of the story through the eyes of one who was there, now
a grown man, but that young lad that had been her son. He said, ''Then Mother
said grace. I noticed that there were tears in her eyes as she said the old,
familiar words, 'Komm, Herr Jesus. Be our guest.' And as I looked around the
table, I saw tears, too, in the eyes of the battle-weary soldiers, boys again,
some from America, some from Germany, all far from home.''

That night, as the storm of war tossed the world, they had their own private
armistice. The next morning the German corporal showed the Americans how to get
back behind their own lines. They all shook hands and went their separate ways.
That happened to be Christmas Day, 40 years ago.

Those boys reconciled briefly in the midst of war. Surely, we allies in
peacetime should honor the reconciliation of the last 40 years.

Vielen Dank

To the people of Bitburg, our hosts and the hosts of our servicemen: like that
generous woman 40 years ago, you make us feel very welcome. Vielen Dank.  And to
the men and women of Bitburg Air Base, I just want to say that we know that,
even with such wonderful hosts, your job is not an easy one. You serve around
the clock, far from home, always ready to defend freedom. We are grateful, and
we're very proud of you.

Four decades ago, we waged a great war to lift the darkness of evil from the
world, to let men and women in this country and in every country live in the
sunshine of liberty. Our victory was great, and the Federal Republic, Italy and
Japan are now in the community of free nations. But the struggle for freedom is
not complete, for today much of the world is still cast in totalitarian
darkness.

Twenty-two years ago, President John F. Kennedy went to the Berlin wall and
proclaimed that he, too, was a Berliner. Today, freedom-loving people around the
world must say: I am a Berliner, I am a Jew in a world still threatened by
anti-Semitism, I am an Afghan, and I am a prisoner of the Gulag, I am a refugee
in a crowded boat foundering off the coast of Vietnam, I am a Laotian, a
Cambodian, a Cuban and a Miskito Indian in Nicaragua. I, too, am a potential
victim of totalitarianism.

Lesson of the War

The one lesson of World War II, the one lesson of Nazism, is that freedom must
always be stronger than totalitarianism, and that good must always be stronger
than evil. The moral measure of our two nations will be found in the resolve we
show to preserve liberty, to protect life and to honor and cherish all God's
children.

That is why the free, democratic Federal Republic of Germany is such a profound
and hopeful testament to the human spirit. We cannot undo the crimes and wars of
yesterday, nor call the millions back to life. But we can give meaning to the
past by learning its lessons and making a better future. We can let our pain
drive us to greater efforts to heal humanity's suffering.

Today, I traveled 220 miles from Bergen-Belsen and, I feel, 40 years in time.
With the lessons of the past firmly in our minds, we have turned a new, brighter
page in history. One of the many who wrote me about this visit was a young woman
who had recently been bat mitzvahed. She urged me to lay the wreath at Bitburg
cemetery in honor of the future of Germany, and that is what we have done. On
this 40th anniversary of World War II, we mark the day when the hate, the evil
and the obscenities ended, and we commemorate the rekindling of the democratic
spirit in Germany.

Hope for the Future

There is much to make us hopeful on this historic anniversary. One of the
symbols of that hope came a little while ago when we heard a German band playing
the American national anthem, and an American band playing the German national
anthem.

While much of the world still huddles in the darkness of oppression, we can see
a new dawn of freedom sweeping the globe. And we can see, in the new democracies
of Latin America, in the new economic freedoms and prosperity in Asia, in the
slow movement toward peace in the Middle East and in the strengthening alliance
of democratic nations in Europe and America, that the light from that dawn is
growing stronger.

Together, let us gather in that light and walk out of the shadow. Let us live in
peace. Thank you, and God bless you all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
'I AM A JEW...'

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


To President Kennedy's ''Ich bin ein Berliner,'' a powerful and personal
statement of identification with people struggling for freedom, President Reagan
added: ''. . . I am a Jew in a world still threatened by anti-Semitism, I am an
Afghan, and I am a prisoner of the Gulag, I am a refugee in a crowded boat
foundering off the coast of Vietnam, I am a Laotian, a Cambodian, a Cuban and a
Miskito Indian in Nicaragua. I, too, am a potential victim of totalitarianism.''

The poet-theologian John Donne made that point in his ''no man is an island''
passage, and Ernest Hemingway used a phrase from Donne in his title of a book
about resistance to fascism, ''For Whom the Bell Tolls.'' Many Jews will
remember the lesson from the seder service that requires commemoration of the
need for personal identification, during which it is recounted that an arrogant
son asks, ''What did the Almighty do for you?'' and is castigated for not asking
as a Jew, ''What did the Almighty do for me?'' To understand humanity, you have
to be an active part of it.

Ronald Reagan, a month ago, had no real grasp of the moral priorities of the
Holocaust or the fear of forgetting that prevents forgiveness. His journey to
understanding - his own ''painful walk into the past'' -opened the minds of
millions to the costs of reconciliation in a way that no other process could
have accomplished. In driving home the lessons of history, his incredible series
of blunders turned out to be a blessing.

At first, he did not want to go to a concentration camp. Too gloomy to be part
of an upbeat trip. Like so many, he praised ''remembrance'' so long as it
involved no personal pain.

The discovery of the SS graves in the scheduled cemetery visit saved him from
the sin of avoidance. At that point, Mr. Reagan - and the world -had to go to a
death camp and bear witness.

Then some invisible pedagogic hand led him to equate the victims of the death
camps with the dead soldiers of the Third Reich. He soon learned, along with
millions who had never given the matter any thought, that no reconciliation
could ever come about by glossing over the enormity of the crimes committed by
the Nazis and all the Germans who enthusiastically abetted them. Feeling sadness
at the grave of soldiers is on a different order of magnitude from feeling agony
at the slaughter of innocents.

The President absorbed the point. In an inspiring instructional penance in the
Oval Office, he led a huge audience in listening to the testimony of Elie
Wiesel, the quintessential survivor.

The invisible teaching hand would not let go. An ignoble motive (fear of
appearing weak and subject to pressure) merged with a noble motive (the concern
about insulting a new generation of Germans) to send him to a place tainted with
the graves of storm troopers. This posed a test: Would he understand, and be
able to articulate both the need for remembrance and the requirement for
reconciliation?

In part one of this amazing exam, he stood at Bergen-Belsen alongside the German
Chancellor, a man of relentless repentance, ''to confront and condemn the acts
of a hated regime of the past.'' The Jewish prayer for the dead speaks not of
the dead, but determinedly of faith in God; fittingly, the President stressed
the message of the doomed Anne Frank, ''I still believe that people are really
good at heart.'' No horror photograph can be as affecting as that example of
intelligent innocence and pure hope snuffed out: The ritual ''never again'' had
context.

In the final part of the test, at the Bitburg cemetery, he acknowledged the
presence of the Nazi graves first by turning his back on them, then by
contrasting them with the remains of young draftees, and left the judgment to
Heaven. He did not equate them with their victims or with the soldiers who fell
in a moral cause. One false note was an extended anecdote about the suspension
of hostilities on a holiday - as if the Wehrmacht had been made up mainly of
sentimental boys - but he drew the central lesson clearly: ''that freedom must
always be stronger than totalitarianism, that good must always be stronger than
evil.''

That followed his uplifting ''I am a Berliner, I am a Jew in a world still
threatened by anti-Semitism'' passage, and for me redeemed the thoughtless early
planning of this trip.

In seeking at first to sidestep the smouldering resentments, the President
brought on a firestorm 40 years after a Holocaust, which in turn forced a
forgetful world through a most necessary grief.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Southeast Asians Hold A Reunion in California

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 155 words

DATELINE: CAMP PENDLETON, Calif., May 5


About 10,000 Southeast Asian refugees gathered at this Marine Corps base
Saturday for a reunion including Vietnamese barbecues, photographs of long-lost
friends and exhibits of their life when they arrived here a decade ago.

They were among 80,000 Cambodian and Vietnamese immigrants processed here.

Most of the adults at the reunion spoke in their native tongues, while their
children, many of them too young to recall the camp, chatted in English.

Crowds of Vietnamese gathered around a massive sculpture called the Hand of
Hope. The 8-foot hand, with replicas of a Vietnamese and a Cambodian child
cradled in its palm, was covered with freshly cut roses. The work, which was
dedicated on July 4, 1975, was built by a Vietnamese artist and two Marines.

''When we first came, we were very touched by their sensitivity and caring,''
said Loan Bui, who was 8 years old when she and her family arrived in the United
States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NORTHWEST JOURNAL;
TEACHING CANDIDATE A LESSON

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., May 5


A year ago, Patrick J. Gillis rang doorbells night after night across Oregon's
20th Legislative District, hoping that his personality and conservative
Republican views would propel him into a political career.

Last May, he won his party's nomination for State Representative by 175 votes.
In November he defeated the Democratic incumbent with 55 percent of the vote.

But now, instead of finishing his first session as an Oregon legislator, Mr.
Gillis, who is 24 years old, is awaiting trial on a felony charge that grew out
of a campaign statement in which he said he had a master's degree. He did not.

Mr. Gillis told the Oregon Voters Pamphlet, which is published by the state and
distributed to every Oregon voter, that he had a master's degree from Lewis &
Clark College in Portland.

''I did not find out I was wrong until after the Voters Pamphlet came out,'' he
said.

Mr. Gillis said he thought he had won his degree last year; he paid graduation
fees and took part in graduation ceremonies in June.

In July, however, the school's officials sent him a letter saying his grade
point average of 2.7 was below the 3.0 mark required for a master's degree.

He said he never received the letter and signed the statement for the pamphlet
on Aug. 28 believing it to be correct.

The contents of the letter were disclosed after the election. When the
legislative session opened Jan. 21, the Oregon House first refused to seat Mr.
Gillis, then censured him and allowed him to take office.

The day after he was seated, a petition was filed calling for a vote in his
district on the edge of Portland to remove him from office. On Feb. 21, the
Marion County grand jury in Salem, the state capital, indicted Mr. Gillis on a
felony charge of giving false information to the state and a misdemeanor count
of signing a false statement. His trial is to begin May 20. Meanwhile, on March
26, the voters recalled Mr. Gillis from the office he had held only two months.

Millions of salmon eggs have been discarded by state hatcheries in Oregon and
Washington in an attempt to control a virus that infects the young fish. The
hatcheries, operated with Federal support, insure the survival of salmon in the
Columbia River and some other streams that have been blocked by hydroelectric
dams.

They were to have released 93 million Chinook salmon this year, but that is to
be cut about 30 percent.

Eggs are taken from salmon that try to swim up the small streams flowing from
the hatcheries where the salmon were released three to five years earlier.

The virus, which poses no harm to humans, is infectious hematopoietic necrosis.

''It just explodes,'' said Warren Groberg, a fish pathologist with the Oregon
Department of Fish and Wildlife. ''Ninety-five percent mortality is very
typical.''

Each female whose roe is taken and each male whose semen is used to fertilize
eggs is tested for the infection. The egg trays are labeled. ''When the tests
come back positive, you really hate to tell the guys to take those eggs out and
bury them,'' Mr. Groberg said. The once lovely inverted cone that was Mount St.
Helens may never be recreated by nature, but five years after the peak exploded
on May 18, 1980, the scars are fading.

The state of Washington, the Weyerhaeuser Company and the United States Forest
Service are the major landowners in the devastated area. They have completed the
recovery of millions of board feet of timber from trees flattened by the
volcano's blast and have replanted thousands of acres. Animal life has returned
and the once-gray ash is covered with plants.

On April 27 the United States Army Corps of Engineers finished drilling a tunnel
to drain part of Spirit Lake, which had raised to a dangerous level because of a
sand plug left by the volcano. If the plug gave way, Kelso and Longview, Wash.,
would have faced a threat of flooding.

Today marked the 40th anniversary of the only deaths in World War II from enemy
attack on the continental United States.

On a Saturday afternoon 40 years ago the Rev. Archie Mitchell and his wife,
Elyse, then 26 years old, took five teen-agers on a picnic into the Ponderosa
pine forest near Bly, Ore.

One of the boys spotted a balloon, and, ignoring Mr. Mitchell's shouted warning,
moved it. A bomb attatched to the balloon exploded, killing all but Mr. Mitchell
who was some 40 yards away.

A monument on the spot lists the names of Mrs. Mitchell, Dick Patzke, 14; Jay
Gifford, 13; Edward Engen, 13; Joan Patzke, 13, and Sherman Shoemaker, 11.

Beginning in late 1944, the Japanese released about 6,000 balloons armed with
bombs, expecting them to float to North America to start forest fires or cause
other damage. About 300 of them have been found in Canada and the United States,
but the only deaths came from the one found near Bly.

Mr. Mitchell later became a missionary in South Vietnam. No one around Bly has
heard from him since his mission was overrun by insurgents on Memorial Day,
1962.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CITY OPENS VIETNAM VETERANS' TRIBUTES TODAY

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 470 words


Maj. Michael Davis O'Donnell's 1970 poem, written three months before his death
in Vietnam, is a soldier's plea for remembrance.

''Save for them a place inside of you,'' the 24-year-old helicopter pilot wrote
from the jungles of Dak To. ''Be not ashamed to say you loved them. . . .

''Take one moment to embrace those gentle heroes you left behind.''

New Yorkers will honor Major O'Donnell's plea today and tomorrow, when the city
that sent 250,000 of its sons and daughters to the Vietnam War finally offers
them an official welcome home.

The events, scheduled to coincide with the 10th anniversary of the fall of
Saigon, the official end of the war, include the dedication of the New York
Vietnam Veterans Memorial in lower Manhattan and a ticker-tape parade from
Brooklyn to the Battery, including that stretch of Broadway that is the
traditional route of heroes.

Fireworks Display

At the dedication ceremony tonight, at 55 Water Street, Mayor Koch will light
the city's memorial, a translucent glass-block wall 16 feet high and 70 feet
long that is etched with the words of soldiers like Major O'Donnell.

After the ceremony, which is closed to the public because of limited space,
fireworks will light the sky over the East River beginning at 10 P.M.,
accompanied by music from the Vietnam era.

The ticker-tape parade will begin at 10 A.M. on Tuesday at Cadman Plaza in
Brooklyn. The marchers - organizers expect 8,000 Vietnam veterans -will cross
the Brooklyn Bridge, turn west on Chambers Street and proceed south on Broadway
to Battery Park. The veterans will later be honored at a reunion aboard the
U.S.S. Intrepid.

Anticipating large crowds for both the fireworks and the parade, the Police
Department yesterday issued traffic and transportation advisories. Benjamin
Ward, the Police Commissioner, urged the public to use mass transit. The
fireworks will be supervised by 1,400 officers; 2,500 will be on duty for the
parade.

Subway Station to Close

The Police Department also announced that the fireworks can be viewed from the
southbound lanes of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive below Jackson Street. These
lanes will be closed to traffic beginning at 8 P.M.; the northbound lanes will
remain open until 9:30 P.M.

For the parade, the eastbound lanes of the Brooklyn Bridge and its pedestrian
footpath will be closed beginning at 9:30 A.M. No interruption of traffic is
planned for the Manhattan-bound lanes, or on the local streets in Brooklyn
Heights, but this could change in the event of an unexpectedly large turnout.

The City Hall station of the BMT subway line also will be closed from 9:30 until
the end of the parade. For visitors from out of the city, supervised parking for
vans and campers will be available betweeen Ganesvoort and Morton Streets along
the Hudson River.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Treasury Official Oversees Embargo

BYLINE: By Kenneth N. Gilpin and Todd S. Purdum

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 356 words


The year had already been a busy one for John M. Walker Jr., the top law
enforcement official at the Treasury Department. But last week, President Reagan
made Mr. Walker's life even more hectic.

Since February, Mr. Walker has been involved in uncovering details about money
laundering scandals at the Bank of Boston Corporaion and a number of other major
banks. Last Wednesday, when President Reagan issued an executive order under the
Emergency Economic Powers Act that banned trade with Nicaragua, Mr. Walker, who
has about 20,000 employees under his jurisdiction, was called on again.

The order, which does not apply to foreign subsidiaries of American
corporations, will be implemented by the Office of Foreign Assets Control, one
of five groups that report to Mr. Walker.

In addition to that office and agents who handle money laundering investigations
for the Treasury, Mr. Walker has responsibility for the United States Customs
Service, the Secret Service and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.

In a telephone interview, the 44-year-old official, who has served as Assistant
Secretary of the Treasury for Enforcement and Operations since 1981, disagreed
with some economists and political scientists who doubt the efficacy of economic
embargoes as foreign policy tools.

''Some embargoes are more successful than others, but one cannot state that
embargoes per se are ineffective,'' he said. ''You have to look at the
objectives an embargo hopes to accomplish.''

In the case of Nicaragua, the fifth country currently subject to a trade ban -
Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea and Cambodia are the others - Mr. Walker said that
the United States did not expect to bring Nicaragua to its knees through the
boycott, but it expected to convey that it is displeased with Nicaragua.

A lawyer and a native of New York City, Mr. Walker moved to Washington and a
partnership in the Wall Street firm of Carter Ledyard & Milburn. He may be
returning to Manhattan in the future: in February, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato
recommended to President Reagan that Mr. Walker be named a judge in the Federal
District Court in Manhattan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK PAYS HOMAGE TO VIETNAM VETERANS

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 841 words


In the troubled winter of 1969, a letter arrived in Glendale, Queens, from a
21-year-old soldier seeking small pleasures beside a sun-dappled river in
Vietnam.

''Well, I am fine today, and I hope you are in good shape also,'' the soldier,
Sgt. Jack Calamia, wrote to his mother. ''I am at the river swimming, washing
and taking in the sun. The beach is great, the sand is white and the sky is
clear. Boy, I wish every day was like this.''

Eight months later, Sergeant Calamia was dead, killed by a land mine.

Last night his brief life was recalled and honored as New York City began paying
homage to the 250,000 local men and women who fought in Vietnam.

The two days of ceremonial events started with a dedication ceremony at the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial, between South Street and Water Street, in lower
Manhattan, and was to continue today with a ticker-tape parade from Brooklyn to
the Battery.

The celebration was organized by the New York Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Commisssion, which was appointed by Mayor Koch in 1982, and was designed to
honor veterans who came home a decade ago with no hero's welcome.

''What we do here tonight begins to undo that terrible injustice,'' Mr. Koch
told a crowd of 2,000 invited guests at the Vietnam Veterans Plaza and thousands
more who were massed behind barricades and along the adjacent Franklin D.
Roosevelt Drive. ''What we do here tonight is much more than lighting a glass
wall of letters.''

''We have heard the voices of a lost generation,'' he continued, his voice
soaring as the assembled veterans shouted their praise, with fists and flags
raised to the dark sky. ''We have opened the eyes of a new generation to the
lessons of the past. We have opened the arms of this great city to Vietnam
veterans from across America.''

The centerpiece of the commission's effort is the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, a
glass-block wall, 70 feet long and 16 feet high, which is etched with excerpts
from 83 letters - including Sergeant Calamia's - that were written by or to the
soldiers who served in America's most unpopular war.

''It's not just brick and mortar,'' said Donald Trump, the real-estate executive
who donated $1 million of the $2.5 million raised by the commission, which is
also charged with financing programs for unemployed local veterans. ''It's very
much a living monument.''

''I was a very strong opponent of the Vietnam War,'' he said, ''but I also
recognized that the people who went to fight were great Americans. I always
thought they got a bad shake in life and never got their just recognition.''

Last night these veterans basked in that new-found recognition. ''We answered
the call of our country, and when we came back home we were kicked back into
society almost like criminals,'' said Bob Moore of West Volusia, Fla., a member
of the Air Force security police in Vietnam from 1967 to 1969. ''A phenomenal
change has happened over the last few years. You got a whole bunch of people
here coming out of the closet, so to speak.''

''To see a city take it upon itself to do this!'' said Mike Milne of
Wilkes-Barre, Pa., who has been confined to a wheelchair since his Army tour in
Vietnam and Cambodia. ''And in downtown Manhattan. It's unreal. They really
pulled a coup.''

Mr. Milne rose partway from his chair to embrace the Mayor, who was later asked
what he had told the disabled veteran. ''I said, 'Thank you,' '' Mr. Koch said.
''It's as simple as that.'' Readings From Letters The dedication ceremony
included readings from letters by three actors who had served in Vietnam:
Anthony Chisholm and Brian Delate, both of whom are appearing in ''Tracers'' at
the Public Theater, and Robert Woods, from the ABC-TV daytime drama ''One Life
to Live.''

Mr. Trump read a telegram from President Reagan, pledging that the Government
would seek ''the fullest possible accounting of your missing comrades in arms.''

Mayor Koch then urged the city to prolong the spirit of the ''Dear America''
celebration - named for a recently published collection of the veterans' letters
- long after the blizzard of ticker tape is swept away.

Finally, the Mayor flipped the switch to illuminate the memorial, its
fluorescent lights flickering and then settling into a soft yellow glow. That
private lighting ceremony was followed by a more public one, a fireworks
extravaganza over the East River designed by the Grucci family.

Songs From the War Years

The sparklers, rockets and Roman candles were accompanied by a sound track of
songs emblematic of the Vietnam War years, songs that had soothed or buoyed the
soldiers in their base camps and bunkers.

Included were the Rolling Stones with ''Paint It Black,'' the Fifth Dimension
with ''Aquarius/ Let The Sun Shine In,'' Simon and Garfunkel with ''Bridge Over
Troubled Water'' and ? and the Mysterians with ''96 Tears.''

Then, finally, the driving rhythms of the Animals:

We gotta get out of this place If it's the last thing we ever do. We gotta get
out of this place.  Girl, there's a better life for me and you.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of crowd watching fireworks (NYT/Larry C. Morris)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
THE LETTERS HOME

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 728 words


This week New York City is honoring the veterans of Vietnam with fireworks, a
ticker-tape parade and the dedication of a memorial in Lower Manhattan. Because
this was a war that traumatized America, it has taken us a decade just to begin
to show them respect and acknowledge their sacrifices.

The memorial, 66 feet long and 16 feet high, is built of translucent glass
blocks, into which are etched excerpts from the letters and poems and diaries of
veterans and veterans' families from all parts of the country. These and other
pieces of correspondence have been collected into a telling book being published
by W.W. Norton & Company; it is called ''Dear America - Letters Home From
Vietnam.'' Most of the book's profits will go to a vocational jobs program for
New York's Vietnam veterans - fitting, since an estimated 25 percent of them are
unemployed.

Because too many outsiders' words have already been spoken and published during
this time of looking back, I shall simply quote here from some of the soldiers'
letters, which have the sound of the many voices of America.

''I'm real glad I have what I have. It seems poor to you maybe, and you want new
things because you think our house doesn't look good, but after seeing the way
these people [the Vietnamese] live, there's no comparison. We are more than
millionaires to these people - they have nothing.'' -Pfc. John Dabonka.

''Felt real bad though when [I] found out one of the dead was my best friend, a
guy I'd known since basic [training] and always hung around with. Wished the
whole thing hadn't happened in a way. He was married and had three kids - never
should have been drafted. Intend to get some Charlies [enemy] for him. Hope I
run into some of those peace demonstrators when I get back. Like to knock their
heads in.'' - Pfc. Louis E. Willett, killed in Kontum province on Feb. 15, 1967.

''As I applied bandages to his wounds, he looked up at me and said, 'Doc, I'm a
mess. Oh, God, I won't want to die. Mother, I don't want to die. Oh, God, don't
let me die.' We called a helicopter to take him and the rest of the wounded to
the hospital. Richard died before the ship arrived. . . . I often wonder if what
we're fighting for is worth a human life.'' - Charles Dawson, a medic, writing
to the mother of a fellow medic.

''I went down to this orphanage the other day, and these little kids are
pitiful. They sleep on plain floors and don't get hardly anything to eat. The
reason I want you to tell everyone to help them [he enclosed the orphanage's
address] is because I feel I may have killed some of their parents and it makes
me feel sick to know they have to go on with nothing.'' - Pfc. Dan Bailey.  ''I
believe you probably got a telegram by now telling you I've been seriously
wounded. Well, I lost my left arm above the elbow, but the way they are making
artificial arms these days, it's no sweat. Stop worrying about me. I can do
anything I want, and I'm in fine shape. I just don't want you to be shocked. So
don't worry about me, OK? I love you very, very much, and now I can't
concentrate any more because of the pain. I love you, my darling. Say hello to
Tammy and Terry for me.'' - Second Lieut. Fred Downs.

''I'm sorry to rebuke all of you, but I'm no hero. They are only in comic books
and television and movies. The so-called heroes over here are guys trying to do
their jobs and get home from this useless war.'' - Specialist 4 Phillip
Arterbury.

''Being in a medical battalion, I find myself curiously suspended from 'sides'
or causes and can only feel the human loss and terror which can never be
measured in pretty medals or sweet patriotic speeches. Humans can be such damned
fools.'' - Specialist 4 John R. Riggan.

''Mom, I appreciate all your letters. I appreciate your concern that some of the
things you write about are trivial, but they aren't trivial to me. I'm eager to
read anything about what you or the family are doing. You can't understand the
importance these trivial events take on out here. [They] help keep me civilized.
For a while, as I read your letters, I am a normal person. I'm not killing
people, or worried about being killed. Instead I am going ice skating with David
or walking through a department store to exchange a lamp shade. It is great to
know your family's safe.'' - Rod Chastant, a marine later killed in action.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Was Lost Before Hanoi's Infiltrations

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 420 words


To the Editor:

My greatest dispute with ''The Cause and Defect of Orangemail'' (editorial) lies
in a statement that epitomizes the controversy surrounding the Agent Orange
issue: ''Both with Bendectin and Agent Orange, the herbicide used in Vietnam,
the available scientific evidence speaks formidably against a causative link to
injuries.''

That may be true for Bendectin but not Agent Orange. Exposure to Agent Orange
causes chloracne and liver damage. Science doesn't speak against causation; it
screams loudly for causation. Factory workers exposed to 2,4,5-T show chloracne
and liver damage, the same for exposed forest workers and animal studies, and
Vietnam veterans have been living with it since they entered the defoliated
areas in Vietnam.

As for the legal system, it is apparent to me that Judge Jack B. Weinstein of
United States District Court rose above the controversy and forced a settlement
that benefits the veterans and their families claiming damage. He did not issue
low fees to the attorneys as a punishment or to send a message to other lawyers.
After hearing the tragic testimonies of hundreds of veterans and their families
during the fairness hearings, he simply allocated as much money to the veterans
as he could without being unfair to the attorneys.

Further, the jury is still out regarding medical and scientific evidence linking
exposure to Agent Orange-Dioxin with most of the other illnesses claimed by the
veterans. The veterans may not be able to prove conclusively that those
illnesses resulted from their exposure; however, no one can prove that they
didn't. The jury will be out as long as there are 54 studies being conducted in
America and 108 worldwide.

The Agent Orange issue is fading from American legal and legislative
battlefields. From the veterans' perspective most of the battles have been lost:
few will receive compensation for chloracne and liver damage from the Veterans
Administration; the medicine and science will go on for decades and do little to
ease the veterans' plight. The only battle won is that the spraying of
2,4,5-T/Dioxin in America has ended with the ban.

The veterans who initiated the litigation never sought billions; they sought to
establish a trust fund to address their catastrophic health conditions and those
of their children, and to stop 2,4,5-T spraying, so that no more Americans will
be exposed. We believe that war will be won. FRANK MCCARTHY President, Vietnam
Veterans Agent Orange Victims Stamford, Conn., April 12, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Was Lost Before Hanoi's Infiltrations

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 99 words


To the Editor:

Your article on the lessons of Vietnam has too narrowly defined a starting
point. Missing from it was that there were many of us whose objection was to the
Kennedy Administration's interference in the affairs of Vietnam even before we
became militarily involved. After the French were defeated, the U.S. moved in -
much to the dismay of many Americans.

The comparison of this group of concerned people, who formed the nucleus of the
antiwar movement, to those afraid of American involvement in Nicaragua today is
a valid one. JEAN F. REISEN Summit, N.J., April 30, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Was Lost Before Hanoi's Infiltrations

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 476 words


To the Editor:

''History and Hindsight: Lessons From Vietnam'' (page A1, April 30) says that by
late 1964 the war in Vietnam was being lost and that a ''major reason was the
infiltration of South Vietnam by ever-growing numbers of regular North
Vietnamese troops.'' It would be nice to believe that the North Vietnamese were
the ones to escalate the war and that the war was being won before they did so.
The historical record indicates the opposite.

First, according to official U.S. estimates of the time, the number of people
coming over the infiltration routes remained fairly steady, 5,400 to 12,400 a
year, from 1961 until after the bombing of North Vietnam in 1965. When all the
intelligence was in, in fact, it turned out that fewer infiltrators came over
the trails in 1964 than in 1962. Second, there is no evidence of infiltration of
significant numbers of individual North Vietnamese, much less of regular troops,
before December 1964.

All the evidence available at the time was assembled in the State Department
white paper ''Aggression From the North: The Record of North Vietnam's Campaign
to Conquer South Vietnam,'' which was issued in 1965 to support the case for
bombing North Vietnam. No captured documents, equipment or materiel were
presented that indicated the presence of North Vietnamese in significant
numbers. The white paper was able to present case studies on only four captured
infiltrators who were ethnic North Vietnamese.

Neither was evidence presented of the presence of regular North Vietnamese units
except the allegations of two of these and of two other captured Vietcong of
southern origin.

Later evidence permits two conclusions. First, one battalion of North Vietnamese
regulars had entered South Vietnam in December 1964. Second, the United States
Government did not know this at the time.

In December 1964 and in January 1965, the first of a new family of Soviet small
arms were recovered after clashes with a disciplined and uniformed enemy unit.
This aroused suspicion, but it was not until the Highway 19 campaign in February
and March of 1965 that there was evidence of the presence of significant numbers
of North Vietnamese members of a march unit. Hard evidence then began to
accumulate that regular North Vietnamese units had been introduced into South
Vietnam. But not until the enemy summer monsoon campaign in the central
highlands was it established that the infiltration of North Vietnamese regulars
had begun in late 1964 and was substantial.

Thus the war in South Vietnam was being lost before these units arrived, and the
U.S. escalated the war before it knew that North Vietnamese regular forces had
been introduced. ROGER HILSMAN New York, April 30, 1985 The writer, professor of
government at Columbia University, was Assistant Secretary of State for Far
Eastern Affairs in 1963-64.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JOURNALISTS DISAGREE ABOUT PRESS CREDIBILITY

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: MIAMI BEACH, May 6


Senior journalists from four of the nation's largest news organizations
expressed strong disagreement here today over whether the press has a serious
credibility problem.

''There's a tendency to cater to your critics, and I don't like it,'' Benjamin
C. Bradlee, the executive editor of The Washington Post, told members of the
American Newspaper Publishers Association who have gathered here for their
annual convention.

Mr. Bradlee and Don Hewitt, the executive producer of ''60 Minutes'' for CBS
News, argued that the press was no less credible now than in years past, and
that credibility was largely an issue created by people with an ideological bias
who objected when news reporting did not conform to their opinions.

But Larry Jinks, the senior vice president for news for Knight-Ridder
Newspapers, said the nation's press had a ''serious credibility problem'' fueled
by ''three sins: inaccuracy, unfairness and arrogance.''

'Real Concerns' Are Seen

And John Seigenthaler, the editorial director of USA Today who is also publisher
of The Tennessean in Nashville, cautioned journalists not to ''brush aside and
ignore real concerns'' that the public has regarding the credibility of
newspapers and television.

The lively debate, which was organized by The Associated Press for publishers
whose newspapers are members of that news cooperative, was moderated by Louis D.
Boccardi, the president and general manager of the A.P.

In part the catalyst for the discussion was a study indicating that there is a
broad public perception that news organizations are prejudiced. Mr. Boccardi
said that 54 percent of those polled felt personal biases of reporters were
reflected in their articles.

Mr. Hewitt said such statistics were prompted by people who confuse coverage
with bias.

''They assume you are expressing approval because you're interviewing people,''
Mr. Hewitt said. ''We would have interviewed Hitler.''

Liking and Being Believed

Mr. Hewitt added that such studies and statistics represented ''worrying
ourselves to death'' and advised the publishers not to confuse being liked with
being believed.

Both Mr. Hewitt and Mr. Bradlee, whose organizations have been criticised by
groups like Accuracy in Media as having a liberal bias, said much of the
credibility issue was being manufactured by ultraconservatives who did not want
fairness, but a conservative bias. Ultraliberal groups, they said, have also
been critical.

''The problem really is that the left wing thought we were all fascists, and now
the conservatives think we're all communists,'' Mr. Hewitt said. ''They're both
wrong.'' But Mr. Jinks said that it would be a serious error to dismiss the
issue of press credibility as a ''conspiracy theory'' by political extremists.

''Fairness is the ultimate issue,'' said Mr. Jinks, who added that news
organizations were ''perceived as more powerful than they used to be, and people
distrust power.''

Turning Points Suggested

Mr. Seigenthaler suggested that the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal had
been turning points in the relationship between news organizations and the
public.

He said that from the New Deal until midway through the Vietnam War, the
Government had been perceived by the public as a solver of crises, and news
coverage of government had been generally supportive and positive.

But the unpopular Vietnam War and later the Watergate scandal made the press
appear to be an adversary of government, he said, and hence ''events forced the
public to choose between us and them, and since that time, we have forced
choices on issues large and small.''

Mr. Hewitt said that a proper role for news organizations in any future war
might be ''a happy medium'' between the news blackout ordered by Government
officials in the early stages of the invasion of Grenada and virtually complete
freedom for news organizations to roam at will in the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 851 words


TUESDAY, MAY 7, 1985



International

Washington will offer Moscow several proposals tomorrow intended to reduce
tensions, including a ''military-to-military communications link,'' according to
Reagan Administration officials. [Page A1, Col. 6.]

Arms control talks are not hopeless, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader,
said. In a message to a group of French war veterans, he said he was ''soberly
optimistic'' about the prospects for success in the Geneva weapons negotiations.
[A5:1-3.]

President Reagan arrived in Spain amid strict security as United States and
Spanish officials began talks on Nicaragua and the size of American forces in
Spain. [A8:5-6.]

Israeli leaders voiced bitter anger over President Reagan's visit Sunday to a
German military cemetery in which 49 SS soldiers are buried. Defense Minister
Yitzhak Rabin said, ''The historic mistake of President Reagan was in equating
murderers with their victims.'' [A1:5.]

All 17 U.S. marines aboard were lost in the crash of a military helicopter in
the Pacific off the southwestern coast of Japan. All 17 were missing and
presumed dead. The cause of the crash was not known. [A1:3-4.]

National

The Challenger landed safely and was greeted by the smiles of scientists from a
dozen countries that cooperated in one of the most productive scientific
missions of the space shuttle program. On its seventh mission Challenger landed
on a dry lakebed at Edwards Air Force Base in California soon after noon.
[A1:1.]

A major new voice in television is increasingly likely. Rupert Murdoch, the
Australian-born publisher, and Marvin Davis, the Denver oilman, agreed to buy
the nation's largest group of independent television stations from Metromedia
Inc. for more than $2 billion. The proposed purchase of the seven Metromedia
stations - WNEW-TV in New York and television stations in six other major cities
- brought into question Mr. Murdoch's continued ownership of The New York Post
and The Chicago Sun-Times. [A1:2.]

A highly compact health data card will be made available to subscribers of Blue
Cross and Blue Shield of Maryland. The health insurer said it would issue
membership cards the size of credit cards that can contain the equivalent of up
to 800 pages of medical histories and insurance data by use of laser optics that
are used in compact audio and video disks. Blue Cross said it expected to make
the cards available around the country within a few years. [A1:4-6.]

Violence in bars has stirred anger in Hispanic districts of Texas cities, where
an influx of illegal aliens is straining community relations. As a result, state
law-enforcement agents swept through Houston's beer-and-wine bars on the last
four weekends, making more than 450 arrests for such crimes as drunkenness,
possession of weapons or narcotics and sales to minors. [A18:1-2.]

Claus von Bulow won a key decision at his Providence, R.I., trial. Judge Corinne
P. Grande barred a Newport Hospital neurologist from testifying that the
scratches and bruises he saw on Mr. von Bulow's wife, Martha, in 1980 resulted
from a struggle. The ruling left the state without a witness to support its
claim that Mrs. von Bulow fought with her husband on Dec. 20, 1980 before she
fell into a coma from which she is never expected to recover. [A21:1-3.]

Metropolitan

New York honored Vietnam veterans who were denied a hero's welcome when they
returned home a decade ago. The two days of ceremonial events to pay homage to
the 250,000 local men and women who fought in the Vietnam War are to continue
today with a ticker-tape parade from Brooklyn to the Battery and a reunion for
veterans aboard the aircraft carrier Intrepid. [A1:1-3.]

A Federal judge upheld Princeton in the first court challenge to the
university's 92-year-old honor code. Judge Harold Ackerman of Federal District
Court in Newark found that Princeton had the right to discipline its students as
long as they were accorded a minimum standard of fairness. [B2:1-3.]

Demolitions led to an indictment for perjury against Sol Goldman, one of New
York City's largest real-estate investors, his lawyer said. Mr. Goldman has
maintained he had nothing to do with the illegal nighttime demolition of four
buildings on West 44th Street in Manhattan on Jan. 9. Two of the buildings
housed single-room-occupancy hotels. [B3:3-6.]

School library services are abysmal in New York City, according to a civic group
that cited severe shortages of funds, personnel and reading material. The group,
the Educational Priorities Panel, said that several hundred city schools had no
librarians or functioning library programs. [B5:1.] PARADE TODAY

The Vietnam Veterans Memorial Parade begins at 10 A.M. today on Cadman Plaza in
Brooklyn, moving across the Brooklyn Bridge to Manhattan, past City Hall and
down Broadway to Battery Park, ending at 3 P.M.

The eastbound roadway of the Brooklyn Bridge will be closed from 8 A.M. to 3
P.M. Centre Street, Chambers Street and lower Broadway will be closed from 9
A.M. to 3 P.M. Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION;
WEST POINT GOES HUNTING FOR RECRUITS

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 6; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1218 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y., May 6


The United States Military Academy, which historically has been in the enviable
position of choosing from among the top students in the country, now finds
itself having to compete with private colleges to attract cadets in a shrinking
market of 18-year-olds.

It has revised its recruiting procedures to compete with the better colleges and
universities as well as the other military service academies. Some of the new
procedures resemble the marketing and head-hunter efforts of private industry.

While the overall efforts are broad, special emphasis has been placed on getting
blacks to enroll.

Col. Manley E. Rogers, the director of admissions at West Point, said that in
recruiting blacks, for example, ''It's often an executive search type of
operation - telephone calls, letters and visits to the home - or the kind of
thing you'd see for an athlete.''

''We even have faculty members go to the homes of outstanding minority students
to explain the programs, the environment and the career opportunities here,'' he
said. Despite those efforts, blacks represent only 7 percent to 8 percent of
West Point's enrollment, and the percentage has been declining in recent years.

Although they compete with each other for outstanding prospects, the admissions
directors of the service academies also exchange tips on recruiting procedures
and common problems, such as dealing with high attrition rates.

Colonel Rogers, who is retiring next month at the age of 57 after 17 years as
admissions chief at West Point, said recruiting has changed significantly since
1968, when the academy had difficulty attracting prospects because of the
Vietnam War. In the early 1970's the academy also had recruitment problems
because of a cheating scandal.

More recently West Point and the other service academies have been required by
Congress to attract qualified women for military careers.

In response to the new demands, Colonel Rogers has increased the number of
cadets used as recruiters from 100 to 1,000, focused on high schools that
consistently produce desirable West Point applicants, and added community
centers to the forums used for recruiting.

He has established a nationwide force of 400 reserve officers and 600 graduates
to help recruitment. He also makes sure that West Point maintains links with
qualified applicants ''who don't get in right away.''

Colonel Rogers invites high school guidance counselors to the academy, as many
as 45 at a time, to encourage ''assertive'' counseling for those students who
show an interest in West Point. A few days ago he spoke to such a group about
how to deal with ''disappointed applicants.''

Generals Who 'Didn't Make It'

''Robert E. Lee didn't make it the first time and Jefferson Davis took the
vacancy,'' he told the counselors. ''Pershing didn't make it for two years,
MacArthur couldn't get in the first year and Eisenhower took an extra year of
high school to get in.''

George S. Patton Jr., the World War II general, ''took three years to get in and
five to get out,'' he said.

High school counselors represent an important resource to the military
academies, especially those who display their material or promote them. Cadet
James Kennard of Athens, Ohio, a West Point plebe, or freshman, said his
interest was stirred ''in my freshman or sophomore year of high school when I
saw West Point material in the guidance office.''

Accepted also by Ohio University, Ohio State University and Dartmouth College,
Cadet Kennard said he was drawn to West Point by the promise of ''a good
education plus commitment.'' He said he was still not persuaded about pursuing a
military career, however.

Nancy Nakahara of Sacramento, Calif., a plebe who turned down acceptances by
Stanford University, the University of Southern California and the University of
California at Los Angeles, was living on a United States Army post in Japan,
where her father worked as a civilian for the Army Corps of Engineers.

Lure of Academy

''I was a clerk-typist in a summer hire program while going to high school and
one day a sergeant asked me if I had considered West Point,'' she said. ''The
guidance counselor had an application card, so I sent it in.'' She said she was
drawn by the cost-free aspect of the academy - the Government pays expenses for
all cadets - as well as the job security it offered, but was ''flexible'' about
making the army a career.

West Point opens files on about 13,000 students a year, but that group is
narrowed to 6,000 nominated applicants, of whom 2,700 are found to be qualified
and 1,400 are enrolled. The mean Scholastic Aptitude Test verbal score for this
year's freshman class was 570, with a 640 mean score for mathematics, well above
the national averages of 430 for the verbal test and 470 in math. The West Point
results have not changed much in 30 years.

Roughly half the members of the entering class this year were varsity team
captains, a proportion that has grown steadily over the years, while 83 percent
of new cadets were in the top 20 percent of their class, compared with 72
percent over the last decade.

Three-quarters of the entering cadets are nominated by members of Congress, with
most of the rest coming from the Army's enlisted ranks. Academy officials say
there is a widely held belief that it takes political pull to get in, but most
Senators and members of the House form local committees to do the interviewing
and then ask the admissions office to make the final selection.

Competition From Air Force

Colonel Rogers said West Point did not really begin recruiting until ''the Air
Force Academy came on the scene'' in 1956. He said the Colorado Springs academy
attracted more applicants in its first year than West Point ever did ''and they
still get more qualified youngsters than we do.''

''It's a big tug, that high performance aircraft and the space age,'' he said.

He said that the curriculum has been broadened somewhat for today's entering
cadet, ''who is a more practical youngster,'' according to Colonel Rogers.
Fifteen years ago cadets were interested to a great degree in the
financial-educational opportunity - the service academies are cost free to
cadets - but now, he said, ''they want to see a diversity of career options.''

Women were admitted by Congress in 1977 over the objections of the academies,
and they now represent 12 percent to 13 percent of the cadet corps.

High Dropout Rate

Through it all, the number of dropouts at West Point remains high. Last year's
graduating class of 986 officers began with 1,462 plebes, an attrition rate of
33 percent. It has been as low as 28 percent and as high as 40 percent. The
academy considers 20 percent the minimum it should expect.

Colonel Rogers, asked how West Point's attrition compared with that of private
colleges, said, ''They're much lower, but Harvard doesn't consider anyone a loss
until he dies without a diploma, because they say he can always come back and
finish.''

The military academy shares another problem with the best colleges, alumni
pressure. ''The pressure you feel the most is from the family, the Army family.
There are a lot of people, associates and friends, trying to get their kids in.
The only way to deal with it is to make sure the winners are winning on their
merits.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THAYER REPAYMENT BID CITED

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 6


Paul Thayer, former Deputy Secretary of Defense, and a Dallas stockbroker have
offered to pay the Government more than $750,000 to settle civil charges of
illegal insider stock trading, according to lawyers involved in the case.

The Securities and Exchange Commission was expected to approve the offer under
which Mr. Thayer and his friend Billy Bob Harris, a Dallas stockbroker, would
cover some of the illegal stock profits that the agency says Mr. Harris and
eight other individuals made as a result of the confidential corporate
information that Mr. Thayer illegally provided them in 1982.

The S.E.C. accused Mr. Thayer of giving Mr. Harris insider information relating
to impending takeover offers by companies of which Mr. Thayer was a director.

On Wednesday, Mr. Thayer and Mr. Harris are to appear for sentencing before a
Federal judge here on criminal charges of obstructing justice in connection with
the S.E.C.'s investigation of the $1.9 million insider trading case.

Mr. Thayer, who resigned from the Defense Department in January 1984, and Mr.
Harris pleaded guilty in March to the obstruction of justice charge, which
carries a penalty of up to five years in prison and a $5,000 fine. At the time
the pleas were entered, the Justice Department said it would recommend some
prison time for the two men, but not a ''substantial amount.'' Negotiations for
an agreement to settle the S.E.C. civil suit were already underway at that time.


Memorandums on Sentencing

Attorneys for both men last week submitted long memorandums to the court urging
that their clients not be sent to prison. In Mr. Thayer's case, the memorandum
included 68 personal testimonials about Mr. Thayer's good character many from
prominent individuals, such as former President Gerald R. Ford, Senator Barry M.
Goldwater, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the
United States ambassador to Great Britain and top executives of major
corporations..

Letters on behalf of Mr. Harris were submitted by the United States Attorney in
Dallas and the head of the Dallas office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Several private attorneys in Washington who specialize in white-collar crime
cases noted that it was common for character references to be submitted in such
cases, but they added that the number of well known figures who have written to
the court on Mr. Thayer's behalf was somewhat unusual.

The attorneys for Mr. Thayer and Mr. Harris said today that they were hopeful
the settlement with the S.E.C. would be regarded favorably by Judge Charles
Richey of United States District Court when he makes his decision on sentencing.
''The judge was concerned with restitution, and we see the S.E.C. settlement as
a factor in determining whether someone has acknowledged his mistakes and made
amends,'' said Judah Best, who is representing Mr. Harris.

The Justice Department, in a response today to the sentencing memorandums filed
by Mr. Thayer and Mr. Harris, reiterated its intention to seek prison time for
both men. The Government reply noted that Mr. Thayer and Mr. Harris had asked
for leniency because they were first-time offenders who had not committed
violent crimes, because they had already suffered enough and because the crimes
were aberrations in otherwise good lives.

''These arguments are typical of those made in cases involving white-collar
crime and should be rejected by this court,'' the Government reply said, adding
that ''the deterrent value of sentencing white-collar criminals to jail should
not be overlooked.'' The Government prosecutors also urged Judge Richey to
ignore the community service sentences handed out in two cases cited by the
defendants' attorneys as similar to the the current case. Government attorneys
said that the insider trading in the case of Mr. Thayer and Mr. Harris was
''egregious'' and that their obstruction of justice was ''rampant.''

Instead, the Government cited its own precedent, a case in which a District of
Columbia government employee earning $32,000 a year was sentenced to prison for
stealing a $700 chandelier. ''To allow these defendants - men clearly more
wealthy, privileged and powerful and men clearly involved in more signifcant
criminal activity - to escape prison as their counsel now advocate would, in our
view, be unjust,'' the Justice Department argued.

Mr. Thayer's attorney, Robert B. Fiske Jr., declined comment on any details of
the proposed settlement with the S.E.C. but said that if it is approved, it
would be presented to Judge Richey as part of the plea for leniency in
sentencing.

Community Service Sought

In arguing that Mr. Thayer be sentenced to a term of community service rather
than prison, his attorneys said that the conduct underlying the criminal charges
was an aberration. ''The entirety of Mr. Thayer's life of contribution
significantly outweighs the offense which he has admitted committing,'' the
memorandum said.

The memorandum contained a biography of Mr. Thayer, describing his youth in
Wichita, Kan., his decorated service as a Navy fighter pilot in World War II and
his career in business.

Mr. Thayer became president of the LTV Aerospace Corporation in 1965, and in
1974, he became chairman and chief executive officer of the LTV Corporation. He
resigned in 1982 to become Deputy Secretary of Defense.

Some of the letters accompanying the memorandum do not directly address the
matter of sentencing. For example, President Ford, who wrote Judge Richey that
he had known Mr. Thayer for 20 years, praised his work at LTV and in the Defense
Department, and concluded, ''Throughout our friendship, I have always found Paul
Thayer to be honest and forthright. From my personal experience, he was a person
of good character.''

'Dedicated' and 'Patriotic'

Senator Goldwater, an Arizona Republican who is chairman of the Armed Services
Committee, described Mr. Thayer as a ''great personal friend'' and a man of
''great talent and ability in the field of community service.'' Mr. Goldwater
told the judge that he knew very little about the case in which Mr. Thayer is
involved, but added, ''I don't know of another man living in this country who
has been as dedicated, patriotic and such a willing and constant servant to our
government and our Constitution.''

Jan C. Scruggs, president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, praised Mr.
Thayer for ''extraordinary efforts'' as chairman of the fund's corporate
advisory board in helping to get the monument built. ''He is a great patriot and
a man of integrity,'' Mr. Scruggs wrote.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Paul Thayer

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 8, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORKERS ROAR THANKS TO VETERANS

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words


Vietnam veterans accepted New York City's thanks yesterday at a bittersweet
ticker-tape parade through the canyons of lower Manhattan.

The blizzard of confetti that greeted the 25,000 marchers, all veterans of
America's most unpopular war, culminated a night and a day of celebration
orchestrated by the New York Vietnam Veterans Memorial Commission.

The belated welcome home from a war that ended 10 years ago began Monday night
when Mayor Koch lighted the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, adjacent to 55 Water
Street. It continued yesterday when a thunderously appreciative crowd, which the
police estimated at one million, lined the parade route from Cadman Plaza in
Brooklyn to the Battery.

March's Leader in Wheelchair

''There was a time when it was difficult to accept the lack of recognition,''
said John L. Behan, a Republican Assemblyman from Long Island who led
yesterday's march in a wheelchair pushed by Mr. Koch. Mr. Behan lost both legs
in a land-mine explosion near Da Nang in 1966.

''But the people on the sidelines say it all to me,'' Mr. Behan continued.
''They are out there, welcoming us back home, and their enthusiasm should help
the veterans realize what they did for their country. The war was bad, but the
people who fought it were good.''

The people who fought that war were both participants and spectators at the
parade, thousands of them streaming down Broadway and thousands more at
curbside, at impromptu reunions in parks and on street corners, or gathered by
the nearby memorial, a glass-block wall that stands as a permanent reminder of
their service and suffering.

''I want to see the whole parade, not just part of it,'' said Frank Valentine, a
former Army infantryman who stood on Broadway, his 2-year-old son on his
shoulder and a South Vietnamese flag in his hand, and shouted ''Hey, grunts!''
to the marchers.

The veterans came in tattered jungle fatigues and pin-striped suits, wearing
dogtags and ribbons and black armbands in memory of their 2,477 comrades still
listed as missing in action.

''It's the first time I took them out of the closet,'' Mr. Valentine, a court
officer and aspiring lawyer from the Bronx, said of his decorations. ''I was
kind of ashamed to wear them, but not today. Today I'm not ashamed.''

They came from across town, riding subway cars suddenly dominated by khaki and
camouflage, or from across the country, crowding into vans with friends who
shared the gas and tolls.

''It reminded me of when I left 'Nam,'' said Fairl Gilband, who served in the
11th Cavalry and this week took a ''very up'' bus ride from New Bedford, Mass.
''It was that same kind of feeling and it made me feel good.''

They came with buddies, splitting six-packs during the hazy morning wait at
Cadman Plaza.

And they came alone, carrying signs identifying their old outfits and scanning
the gathering for a familiar face.

Wrenching Tales to Tell

''Anybody who's been in 'Nam is automatically accepted by anybody else who's
been in 'Nam,'' said Larry Haupt, a Marine at Cam Ranh Bay in the late 60's and
now a mover in Manhattan.

Far too many of them came in wheelchairs, or telling wrenching tales of neglect,
unemployment or drug addiction.

''My head, the drugs and stuff, I'm still fighting that,'' said Jay Solomon,
once a private on Hawk Hill and now an often-unemployed New Jersey laborer. ''I
take it one day at a time is all I do.''

''We came home and we had to pin on our own medals,'' said Julio Rivera of the
Bronx, wounded several times as an Army Specialist 4 at Cam Ranh Bay and now
unemployed because of his disabilities. ''The people who greeted us were waving
North Vietnam flags.''

''A lot of us are in jails,'' he continued. ''A lot of us are in psych wards. A
lot of us are drug addicts, but that's 'cause they treated us like we were
nothing. This is 10 years late, but it opened up my heart that people know a
little bit what we went through.''

The veterans, who had braved the bullets of the enemy and the opprobrium of
their countrymen, seemed simultaneously bitter and grateful at the belated
homage, but most were lavish in their praise of Mayor Koch, who appointed the
Vietnam memorial commission in 1982.

''A long time coming,'' said Kevin Harrington, who flew supplies from the
Philippines to Cam Ranh Bay and Da Nang from 1965 to 1968 and now is a New York
City police officer.

''Better late than never,'' said Huey McGowan, a Brooklyn postal worker and
former Naval torpedo mate. ''It's better than being called a child killer.''

'Too Many Wounded Hearts'

''I'm not sure it is better late than never,'' said Basil Branford, an
unemployed Manhattan resident who was an Air Force flier in Pleiku. ''There are
too many wounded hearts.''

There were wounded hearts on the sidelines, as well, among them Rafaela
Rodriquez, who stood with her family on Broadway with a sign that said ''Looking
for Charlie Company - My Boy Needs Help.''

She said that her son had spent 10 of the last 16 years in prison, but that he
belonged instead in a veterans hospital where his Vietnam stress syndrome could
be treated.

''We need someone from his old unit to corroborate testimony about his
experiences,'' she said, as ticker tape swirled overhead, 200 miles of it,
donated by the Trans-Lux Corporation and distributed to 41 buildings along the
parade route.

Karen Gawronski, a Staten Island mother of three, kept Lori, 3; Kelly, 6, and
Christine, 9, out of school yesterday to teach them the lessons of another time.

''People say you shouldn't forget the Holocaust,'' Mrs. Gawronski said. ''Well,
this is something that shouldn't be forgotten either. It's hard to explain that
to them, but how else will they learn?''

And then there was another mother, Marilyn Behan, who marched at the head of the
parade beside her husband, John Behan, the Assemblyman, whom she married two
years after he lost his legs.

On the reviewing stand, at Broadway near City Hall, were the Behan children -
15-year-old Jason, 13-year-old Jack and 9-year-old Bridget - who would have
missed their father's glorious moment had New York honored its veterans when
they first returned.

''This was a parade for John,'' Mrs. Behan said, ''and because it's 10 years
late my kids got to see it. New York has a big heart and today it opened. It's
never too late to say you're sorry.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of the parade for the Vietnam Veterans (NYT/Sara Krulwich and
Chester Higgins Jr.)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 8, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Senate Panel Urges Approval Of Walters as U.N. Delegate

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 75 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 7


The Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted 10 to 0 today to recommend
confirmation of Lieut. Gen. Vernon A. Walters as the new United States delegate
to the United Nations.

General Walters, 68 years old, was a negotiator at the Paris peace talks during
the Vietnam War and deputy director of Central Intelligence.

Since 1981, he has been a roving Ambassador in the Reagan Administration.

General Walters will replace Jeane J. Kirkpatrick.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 8, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PHILIP SCHARPER, A PUBLISHER, DIES

BYLINE: By GLENN FOWLER

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 576 words


Philip J. Scharper, a leading figure in theological publishing for three
decades, died Sunday at Phelps Memorial Hospital in North Tarrytown, N.Y., after
a stroke. He was 65 years old and lived in Scarborough, N.Y.

Mr. Scharper was a co-founder of Orbis Books 15 years ago. The small concern's
biggest success came in 1973, when it published ''A Theology of Liberation'' by
Gustavo Gutierrez, a Peruvian priest.

Earlier Mr. Scharper had brought a number of the world's prominent theologians
to American audiences during his 13 years as editor in chief at Sheed & Ward, a
publishing house specializing in Roman Catholic subjects.

He also was active in television as a writer and forum host. He and his wife,
Sarah, received an Emmy award for their documentary on the visit of Pope John
Paul II to Poland in 1979.

Encouraged by Nicaraguan

With Orbis Books, which is supported by the Maryknoll Fathers, Mr. Scharper
sought out literary works by authors in the third world, especially Latin
America. The Maryknoll priest who persuaded him to set up the new venture was
Miguel d'Escoto Brockmann, who is now Foreign Minister of Nicaragua.

Orbis's ''Theology of Liberation,'' the concern's best seller at 70,000 copies,
introduced a controversial theology aimed at replacing social, political and
economic structures in developing nations to help the poor.

Liberation theology has been received coolly by most church authorities, who
consider it too radical, even justifying violence. But Mr. Scharper said earlier
this year that he and the liberation theologists whose works he had published
were ''completely surprised'' at the reception.

''It seems to them so transparent,'' he said. ''Our primary responsiblity is to
the poor, because most of the world's people are poor.'' Liberation theology, he
went on, ''is not a fad or an exotic plant, not a 'death of God' theology or a
'secular city' theology.''

Studied for the Priesthood

Mr. Scharper, a native of Baltimore, studied for the priesthood at Woodstock
Theological Seminary there. He received a bachelor of arts degree but did not
become a priest. He received a master's in English from Fordham University and
advanced degrees in education and philosophy from Georgetown University.

After teaching at Fordham and at Xavier University in Cincinnati, he became
associate editor of Commonweal magazine in 1955. From 1957 to 1970 he was editor
in chief at Sheed & Ward.

During the 1960's Mr. Scharper was Catholic chairman of Clergy and Laity
Concerned, an interreligious group that worked for an end to the war in Vietnam.


Vatican Consultant

He was also a special consultant to the Second Vatican Council on the church's
role in the modern world and was active in promoting ecumenism in religious
circles.

He is survived by his wife, the former Sarah Moormann; three brothers, Henry and
Frederick, of Baltimore, and Earl, of Huntington, W. Va.; two sisters, both
Roman Catholic nuns, Sister Dolores of Emmitsburg, Md., and Sister Anina of
Taipei, Taiwan; three sons, Philip, of Detmold, Germany; David, of Manhattan,
and Stephen, of Peekskill; three daughters, Grail Anne Grant of Manhattan, Sarah
Katherine Harper of Hyattsville, Md., and Alice Marie Scharper of San Francisco,
and three grandchildren.

A funeral mass will be offered at the Maryknoll Cemetery in Ossining tomorrow at
2 P.M. There will be a memorial mass at St. Patrick's Cathedral on June 1 at 2
P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Philip J. Scharper (NYT)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 8, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

After Rite, Veterans Save 18 From Blaze

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 163 words


Seven Vietnam War veterans on their way home from the dedication of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial in lower Manhattan saved 18 people from a house fire in Long
Island City, Queens, early yesterday, the Fire Department said.

The group spotted the fire in a three-story frame building at 28-08 41st Street,
roused the sleeping residents and helped them out windows and down fire escapes,
according to a department spokesman, Lieut. Jim Powell. The damage to the
building was heavy, and marshals were investigating the cause of the fire, which
was called suspicious, Lieutenant Powell said.

The veterans gave their names to the marshals as Bill Warner, Patrick Regan,
Billy Pavano, Jack DeFrancis, Doug Paterson, Bill Giovanniello and Bill Hubell,
but their ages and addresses are not known, said Lieutenant Powell. He said all
were from the Queens Vietnam Veterans Outreach Center.

Six firefighters were hurt batting the two-alarm blaze, whose initial alarm was
at 1:50 A.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 8, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
VIETNAM: ANOTHER VIEW

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 198 words


A new television documentary on the Vietnam War, produced by a group dedicated
to combating what it views as liberal bias in the news media, will get its first
semi-public showing this week before officials of the National Endowment on the
Humanities, which provided part of the financing for the project.

The one-hour film, ''Television's Vietnam: the Real Story,'' was made by
Accuracy in Media in response to a 13-part series on the war aired by the Public
Broadcasting System in 1983. Reed Irvine, chairman of A.I.M., said that there
were ''errors and omissions'' in the PBS series and that the response would
involve interviews with its makers as well as military experts and journalists.

The endowment provided about $1.5 million to finance the original series, so Mr.
Irvine applied for a grant for the response. He asked for $200,000 and received
$30,000, from a discretionary fund dispensed by the chairman, William J.
Bennett, who has since become Secretary of Education. The new documentary had a
sneak preview in the White House last December, according to endowment
officials, but President Reagan was not in the audience. It will be shown on the
PBS network June 27.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 8, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT NEW YORK;
THE TICKER-TAPE PARADE THEY FINALLY GOT

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. GEIST

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 842 words


The scene on lower Broadway seemed straight out of black and white newsreels of
the V-E Day celebrations held 40 years ago today. A young woman very much live
and in color darted yesterday out of the cheering throngs to plant a big,
smacking kiss on a soldier, a stranger, Specialist 4 Dennis Johnson, during a
ticker-tape parade. ''This was worth the wait,'' concluded the smiling
Specialist Johnson.

The ''parade they never had,'' which came to symbolize the nation's cool
attitude toward Vietnam veterans, was finally held 10 years after the return of
the last American forces. Its theme: ''It's time.''

The veterans seemed to agree that the wildly enthusiastic reception they
received from an estimated one million people crowding the ''Canyon of Heroes''
(the stretch of lower Broadway where ticker-tape parades have been held for
conquering heroes from Theodore Roosevelt and Charles A. Lindbergh to astronauts
and Olympic champions) exceeded their greatest expectations.

Clay Evans, a veteran from Harlem, pointed out that America had in fact lost the
war and said he had wondered if a parade was appropriate. But, he shouted above
the din, ''I think it must be! It sure feels good right now!''

The people cheered and clapped and threw computer printouts and computer cards
until they piled up ankle deep in some spots. They held up ''Welcome Home''
signs. Some of them reached out to touch the estimated 25,000 marching veterans.
Some in the crowd wept and some of the veterans did too.

It was an emotional day from the outset, as veterans from throughout the
country, most of them proudly sporting their jungle fatigues, began lining up on
the Brooklyn side of the Brooklyn Bridge. Whoops of joy were heard throughout
the morning as many veterans were reunited after 10 or 20 years. They punched
each other's shoulders and embraced.

''A lot of us came today because we want to liberate ourselves,'' said Joe
Maniscalco of Piscataway, N.J. ''I was afraid to stir bad memories, afraid to
hear that someone else had died whom I hadn't heard about. But I had to come.''

Indeed, many marchers and onlookers alike had expected a lot of this walk down
Broadway, hoping it would have a cathartic effect. ''It's our parade as much as
theirs,'' said Rhoda Singer, watching the parade pass by. ''We treated them
shabbily and need to get rid of guilt.''

One veteran likened all of the festivities here as ''a gluttonous feast after
years of starvation - overwhelming.'' There was the dedication of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial followed by the fireworks display Monday night, as well the
renaming of an expressway in the Bronx, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Expressway, and the dedication of the flagpole on top of the World Trade Center
to Vietnam vets.

Awaiting the start of the parade, the veterans drank American beer and looked
skyward at the hovering television news helicopters as they recalled experiences
in Vietnam -something many of them said they had not done since leaving Vietnam.

Remembrances came all too easily for others, veterans who still think about
their war experiences every day. George Wakefield, of Lake Ronkonkoma, L.I., a
former marine, marched despite anxiety over a possible rush of painful memories.
He suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder, which causes him to live in
fear. He has been divorced twice since his return from Khe Sanh 15 years ago and
lives on tranquilizers.

He and Ed McSorley talked about their days as marines. ''That was a long time
ago for me,'' said Mr. McSorley, an investment banker dressed in a pin-stripe
suit. But it seemed like only yesterday to Mr. Wakefield. He said he knew that
the parade he never had would not solve all his problems. ''I'm just hoping for
a little lift.''

The groups of marchers stepped off the starting line to cheers, and wide grins
broke across their faces as they basked in the first gestures of appreciation
for their service in Vietnam. ''Never thought I'd see the day,'' said Mr. Evans.

Along the parade route, women blew kisses to the men, some stepped out to hug
them and one woman entertained passing veterans by doing a mock strip-tease in
an office window.

Mr. Wakefield introduced James Donnelly, of Staten Island, as ''my good
friend,'' though they had just met. Mr. Donnelly had seen little combat in
Vietnam, had grown bored and turned to cheap, powerful and readily available
heroin. He has been fighting his addiction for 15 years. He hopes to enter a
job-training program that is to be established with funds remaining from the
memorial drive. ''I should be married now,'' he said wistfully, ''and have
children and a house like my friends.''

Mr. Donnelly was arrested on drug charges by the military police. Soon the young
man found himself outside an Army office in Manhattan, with a duffel bag, a
dishonorable discharge and an addiction to heroin. He walked to the Staten
Island Ferry, not a cent in his pocket, but he said he was lucky. ''The ferry
was 5 cents,'' he said, ''but the guy said that veterans don't have to pay.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of dedication to memorial (NYT/Sara Krujwich and Chester Higgins
Jr.)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 8, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Already Acquainted

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 68 words


Trying to play gracious host on the reviewing stand yesterday outside City Hall,
Mayor Koch called out when he spotted Gen. William C. Westmoreland: ''General,
General! Let me introduce you to the best reporter in America.''

With that, Mr. Koch turned to Irene Cornell of WCBS Radio, who had covered
General Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS.

''Yes,'' General Westmoreland answered. ''We've met.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 8, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
A Change of Mind

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 230 words


Like many Americans, Archbishop John J. O'Connor has revised his opinions about
the Vietnam War.

In 1968, he wrote a book defending United States conduct. Now, he regrets ever
having written it. ''A Chaplain Looks at Vietnam'' was ''sincerely written,''
the Archbishop said, ''but sincerity and accuracy aren't always synonymous.''

A Marine and Navy chaplain from 1952 to 1979, the Archbishop told of his change
of mind at a forum at the Sutton Place Synagogue on Monday night and in a recent
interview with the Catholic News Service. The book argued that President Lyndon
B. Johnson's Administration accepted ''the tragedy of war as the only available
road to meaningful peace.''

Since he wrote the book, a number of developments have changed his views, he
said - atrocities committed during the war, although ''quite limited'' in
number; the ''enormous expenditure of human and material resources,'' and the
eventual feeling that the war was a ''juggernaut that no one seemed to know how
to stop.''

''I do not think my book was a good book,'' he declared. ''I regret having
published it.''

At the same time, he said, the American involvement in the war brought about
significant changes. ''Witness the care, the hesitancy, the concern expressed
about U.S. involvement in Central America,'' he noted. ''That is a direct,
dramatic result of our experience in Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 8, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 67 words


''There was a time when it was difficult to accept the lack of recognition. But
the people on the sidelines say it all to me. They are out there, welcoming us
back home, and their enthusiasm should help the veterans realize what they did
for their country. The war was bad, but the people who fought it were good.'' -
John L. Behan, an Assemblyman from Long Island and a Vietnam veteran. [A1:1.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 8, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 875 words


WEDNESDAY, MAY 8, 1985



International

A cut in American forces in Spain is in prospect. United States and Spanish
officials said that President Reagan and Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez had
agreed in talks in Madrid to begin discussions leading to a reduction and
eventual withdrawal of the 12,000 American military personnel in Spain. But
American officials said such a move depended on continued Spanish membership in
NATO. [Page A1, Column 6.]

Italy opposes Washington's embargo on trade with Nicaragua. Prime Minister
Bettino Craxi said Rome would not join the economic embargo and would proceed
with a $25 million project in Nicaragua. [A7:1.]

Seeking to capture Josef Mengele, Israel offered $1 million for the apprehension
of the notorious Nazi death camp doctor. The offer brings to nearly $3.4 million
the total reward money put up for capture of the longtime fugitive. [A3:1.]

Germans have a generational gap, a deep cleavage between the the older and the
younger, according to some sociologists and pollsters. For the majority of West
Germans, the solemn event that will be marked today - the 40th anniversary of
Nazi Germany's surrender - is a reminder of the end of parents' or grandparents'
war, a war of which they have at most only childhood memories. [A1:5.]

National

Organized baseball drug tests are scheduled. Asserting that he wanted the sport
to be a leader in eradicating drugs from American society, Peter V. Ueberroth,
the baseball commissioner, ordered all major league personnel except the
unionized players to submit to drug tests and urged the players to join the
program. [A1:1-2.] Americans are divided on Bitburg, with the same number
supporting and opposing President Reagan's visit to the German war cemetery, a
New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. Forty-one percent said Mr. Reagan should
have gone to the cemetery, 41 percent opposed the visit and 18 percent had no
opinion. [A12:4-6.]

The judge in Claus von Bulow's trial refused to declare a mistrial, which was
sought by defense lawyers on the ground that the jury had been prejudiced by
statements that Mrs. von Bulow was involved in a struggle the night before she
was found in a coma that doctors say is irreversible. But the judge, Corrine P.
Grande, left open the possibility of granting the motion later if the state
failed to produce enough medical testimony to let the jury conclude that a
struggle occurred. [A16:4-6.]

Republicans opened a voter drive and announced plans to try to persuade 100,000
registered Democrats to switch to the Republican Party in the next 100 days.
[A15:6.]

Spend a Buck, breaking tradition, will forgo a run at racing's Triple Crown by
skipping the Preakness Stakes at Pimlico on May 18 and instead shoot for $2.6
million in prize money in the Jersey Derby at Garden State Park in Cherry Hill
on May 27, Memorial Day, the owner of the Kentucky Derby winner announced.
[B11:4-6.]

Metropolitan

Vietnam veterans accepted thanks from New Yorkers at a bittersweet ticker-tape
parade that stretched from Brooklyn to Battery Park in Lower Manhattan. The
25,000 veterans were hailed l0 years after the end of America's most unpopular
war by a thunderously appreciative crowd that the police estimated at one
million. [A1:1.] Quashing bias against homosexuals, a New York State appellate
court panel upheld Mayor Koch's authority to bar such discrimination by private
organizations, including church-operated agencies, that do business with New
York City. In a 3-to-1 decision, an Appellate Division panel in Manhattan ruled
that the Mayor had not only the authority but also a ''constitutional
obligation'' to bar all forms of discrimination that were not related to job
performance. [A1:4.]

An obese person cannot be denied a job simply because of being seriously
overweight, New York State's highest court ruled. By a 5-to-1 vote, the Court of
Appeals held that because obesity is an ''impairment'' under the state's
human-rights law, employers unwilling to hire obese people must be able to prove
they are unable to perform their assigned tasks. [B3:3-5.]

Demolitions led to guilty pleas by a major Manhattan real-estate company and one
of its vice presidents, John Tassi. They were allowed to plead guilty to
misdemeanor charges without receiving any jail sentence for the illegal
nighttime demolition of four buildings on West 44th Street in Manhattan on Jan.
7 in return for a payment to the city of $2 million to help construct and
maintain single-room-occupancy dwellings. [A1:2-4.]

Judges would assume the main role in questioning prospective jurors in New York
State courts under a plan agreed to by legislative leaders in Albany. The new
procedure would curb a power long cherished by lawyers and would initiate a
system long sought by Sol Wachtler, the state's chief judge. [B1:5-6.]

A panel will study police procedures in New York City. Mayor Koch, faced with a
department in turmoil over assertions of police misconduct, appointed a special
advisory committee to review the recrutment, hiring, medical and psychological
testing, supervision and promotion of officers and to recommend changes in the
practices. [B3:3-6.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 9, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
THE ONE-TRACK MIND

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 732 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The essence of Ronald Reagan was exposed at Bitburg. Confronted by the most
profound questions of man's nature and responsibility, he responded with narrow
ideology and distorted history.

''I am a Jew in a world still threatened by anti-Semitism,'' Mr. Reagan said
after visiting the German military cemetery. ''I am an Afghan, and I am a
prisoner of the Gulag, I am a refugee in a crowded boat foundering off the coast
of Vietnam, I am a Laotian, a Cambodian, a Cuban and a Miskito Indian in
Nicaragua. I, too, am a potential victim of totalitarianism.'' So freedom-loving
people around the world must say today.

The rhetoric of that passage was much noted, and it was brilliantly effective
rhetoric. But think about the message.

Every victim Mr. Reagan mentioned, after the reference to anti-Semitism, was a
victim of Communism. He was saying that the serious violations of human rights -
the only ones worth mentioning in the shadow of the Holocaust - are all the work
of Communist governments.

Not a thought there for those who have suffered and died at General Pinochet's
hands in Chile, for the Bahai and other victims of religious terror in Iran, for
the South Africans who live under institutionalized racist tyranny. Not a word
of memory for the Armenians who died at the hands of Turks in this century's
first genocide.

The point is not to play down the existence of cruelty in Communist regimes. It
is to recognize that inhumanity of appalling kinds may appear in all kinds of
societies and systems - and must be opposed regardless of ideology.

That is one of the most obvious lessons of the history of the Nazi period.

There were people who argued, then, that we should not object too strongly to
Hitler's racial ideas, because after all he was anti-Communist. Some political
excuse can always be presented for closing one's eyes to the horror of an Idi
Amin, of the Khmer Rouge, of the torturers in the Argentine generals' regime, of
Stalin.

The concept of human rights must be universal to have meaning: If we have not
learned that, we have learned nothing from what Hannah Arendt called this
terrible century.

But Ronald Reagan, speaking in the shadow of its most terrible crime against
humanity, saw an occasion to make an anti-Communist point.

Along with the zealot's one-eyed view of human rights, Mr. Reagan offered an
extraordinary version of the great crime that left its imprint all around him:
Nazism. In his edited history, Nazi Germany was not a system, not a terrifying
mass phenomenon, but the work of one man.

''One man's totalitarian dictatorship'' was the President's phrase for it. But
Hitler was not alone. Millions voted for him, mouthed his ideas, hated and
killed with him. The horror of Nazism was that ordinary men, or ones who would
have been thought ordinary, pushed Jews into gas chambers. And there are still
advocates of fascism today.

In the Reagan memory, as displayed at Bitburg, there were mostly good Germans:
teen-agers drafted into the army, ''soldiers to whom Nazism meant no more than a
brutal end to a short life,'' the mother and son in the Reader's Digest story
told by Mr. Reagan - who welcomed both American and German soldiers to their
cottage in the woods on Christmas Day 1944.

''We do not believe in collective guilt,'' the President said, and he was right.
But neither can we rightly close our minds to the terrible knowledge that
millions followed Hitler. It is by facing that fact that successive generations
of West German political leaders have done so much to create a healthy Federal
Republic. A perfect symbol of Mr. Reagan's attitude was his refusal to meet one
of the bravest of those leaders, an early anti-Nazi, former Chancellor Willy
Brandt. In his speech at the U.S. air base in Bitburg, the President said he had
received many letters about his planned visit to the cemetery: some supportive,
some concerned, some opposed. He described only one, from a young Jewish woman
who recently had had her bat mitzvah. ''She urged me,''

Mr. Reagan said, ''to lay the wreath at Bitburg cemetery in honor of the future
of Germany, and that is what we have done.''

The young woman was later identified by the White House press office as Beth
Flom, of Marlboro Township, N.J. Miss Flom told The Associated Press that in her
message to the President she told him she disapproved of his plan to visit
Bitburg.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 9, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FOM REAGAN'S ADDRESS TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3717 words

DATELINE: STRASBOURG, France, May 8


Following are excerpts from a transcript of President Reagan's speech today to
the European Parliament here, as recorded by The Associated Press:

Thank you ladies and gentlemen. It is an honor to be with you on this day.

We mark today the anniversary of the liberation of Europe from tyrants who had
seized this continent and plunged it into a terrible war.

Forty years ago today the guns were stilled and peace began - a peace that has
become the longest of this century.

On this day 40 years ago they swarmed onto the boulevards of Paris, rallied
under the Arc de Triomphe, and sang the ''Marseillaise'' in the - they went out
there in open and free air.

And now, on this day 40 years ago, Winston Churchill walked out onto a balcony
in Whitehall and said to the people of Britain, ''This is your victory'' - and
the crowd yelled back, in an unforgettable moment of love and gratitude, ''No -
it is yours.''

Londoners tore the blackout curtains from their windows, put floodlights on the
great symbols of English history. And for the first time in nearly six years Big
Ben, Buckingham Palace and St. Paul's Cathedral were illuminated against the
sky.

Across the ocean, a half a million New Yorkers flooded Times Square and laughed
and posed for the cameras. In Washington, our new President, Harry Truman,
called reporters into his office and said, ''The flags of freedom fly all over
Europe.''

'I Felt a Chill'

On that day 40 years ago, I was at my post at an Army Air Corps installation in
Culver City, Calif. Passing a radio I heard the words, ''Ladies and gentlemen,
the war in Europe is over.''

I felt a chill, as if a gust of cold wind had just swept past, and - even
though, for America, there was still a war on the Pacific front - I realized: I
would never forget that moment.

This day can't help but be emotional, for in it we feel the long tug of memory.
We are reminded of shared joy and shared pain. A few weeks ago in California an
old soldier with tears in his eyes said: ''It was such a different world then.
It's almost impossible to describe it to someone who wasn't there, but when they
finally turned the lights on in the cities again it was like being reborn.''

If it is hard to communicate the happiness of those days, it is even harder to
communicate to those who did not share it, the depth of Europe's agony.

The common men and women who somehow dug greatness from within their souls - the
people who sang to the children during the blitz, who joined the resistance and
said ''no'' to tyranny, the people who had the courage, who had the courage to
hide and save the Jews and the dissidents. The people who became, for a moment,
the repositories of all the courage of the West - from a child named Anne Frank
to a hero named Raoul Wallenberg. These names shine. They give us heart forever.


The War's Aftermath

The glow of their memories lit Europe in her darkest days. Who can forget the
hard days after the war? We can't help but look back and think: life was so
vivid then. There was the sense of purpose, the joy of shared effort, and,
later, the impossible joy of our triumph.

Those were the days when the West rolled up its sleeves and repaired the damage
that had been done, the days when Europe rose in glory from the ruins.

Old enemies were reconciled with the European family. Together, America and
Western Europe created and put into place the Marshall Plan to rebuild from the
rubble. And together we created an Atlantic alliance, which proceeded not from
transient interests of state but from shared ideals.

Together we created the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, a partnership aimed
at seeing that the kind of tyrants that had tormented Europe would never torment
her again. NATO was a triumph of organization and effort, but it was also
something very new and very different.

For NATO derived its strength directly from the moral values of the people it
represented, from their high ideals, their love of liberty and their commitment
to peace. But perhaps the greatest triumph of all was not in the realm of a
sound defense or material achievement.

The Choice: Freedom

No, the greatest triumph after the war is that in spite of all the chaos,
poverty, sickness and misfortune that plagued this continent, the people of
Western Europe resisted the call of new tyrants and the lure of their seductive
ideologies. Your nations did not become the breeding ground for new extremist
philosophies. You resisted the totalitarian temptation. Your people embraced
democracy, the dream the fascists could not kill. They chose freedom. Today we
celebrate the leaders who led the way - Churchill and Monnet, Adenauer and
Schuman, de Gasperi and Spaak, Truman and Marshall.

And we celebrate, too, the free political parties that contributed their share
of greatness: the Liberals and the Christian Democrats, the Social Democrats and
Labor and the Conservatives. Together they tugged at the same oar, and the great
and mighty ship of Europe moved on.

I am here to tell you America remains, as she was 40 years ago, dedicated to the
unity of Europe. We continue to see a strong and unified Europe not as a rival
but an even stronger partner. Indeed, John F. Kennedy, in his ringing
''declaration of interdependence'' in the freedom bell city of Philadelphia 23
years ago, explicitly made this objective a key tenet of postwar American
policy.

That policy saw the new world and the old as twin pillars of a larger democratic
community. We Americans still see European unity as a vital force in that
historic process. We favor the expansion of the European community. We welcome
the entrance of Spain and Portugal into that community, for their presence makes
for a stronger Europe, and a stronger Europe is a stronger West.

Yet despite Europe's economic miracle, which brought so much prosperity to so
many, despite the visionary ideas of the European leaders, despite the
enlargement of democracy's frontiers within the European community itself, I am
told that a more doubting mood is upon Europe today.

'Europessimism'

I hear words like ''Europessimism'' and ''Europaralysis.'' I am told that Europe
seems to have lost the sense of confidence that dominated that post-war era.
Well, if there is something of a ''lost'' quality these days, is it connected to
the fact that some, in the past few years, have begun to question the ideals and
philosophies that have guided the West for centuries? That some have even come
to question the moral and intellectual worth of the West?

I wish to speak, in part, to that questioning today. And there is no better
place to do it than Strasbourg - where Goethe studied, where Pasteur taught,
where Hugo knew inspiration. This has been a lucky city for questioning and
finding valid answers.

We in the West have much to be thankful for - peace, prosperity, and freedom. If
we're to preserve these for our children, and for theirs, today's leaders must
demonstrate the same resolve and sense of vision which inspired Churchill,
Adenauer, de Gasperi, and Schuman.

Their challenge was to rebuild a democratic Europe under the shadow of Soviet
power. Our task, in some ways even more daunting, is to keep the peace with an
ever more powerful Soviet Union, to introduce greater stability in our
relationship with it, and to live together in a world in which our values can
prosper.

The leaders and people of postwar Europe had learned the lessons of their
history from the failures of their predecessors. They learned that aggression
feeds on appeasement and that weakness itself can be provocative.

We, for our part, can learn from the success of our predecessors. We know that
both conflict and aggression can be deterred, that democratic nations are
capable of the resolve, the sacrifices, and the consistency of policy needed to
sustain such deterrence. From the creation of NATO in 1949 through the early
1970's, Soviet agression was effectively deterred.

On Soviet Conduct

The strength of Western economies, the vitality of our societies, the wisdom of
our diplomacy, all contributed to Soviet restraint. But certainly the decisive
factor must have been the countervailing power - ultimately, military, and,
above all, nuclear power - which the West was capable of bringing to bear in the
defense of its interests. It was in the early 1970's that the United States lost
that superiority over the Soviet Union in strategic nuclear weapons which had
characterized the postwar era.

In Europe, the effect of this loss was not quickly perceptible. But, seen
globally, Soviet conduct changed markedly and dangerously. First in Angola in
1975, then, when the West failed to respond, in Ethiopia, in South Yemen, in
Kampuchea, and ultimately in Afghanistan, the Soviet Union began courting more
risks, and expanding its influence - expanding its influence through the
indirect and direct application of military power.

Today we see similar Soviet efforts to profit from and stimulate regional
conflicts in Central America. [Boos and shouts from the audience.] They haven't
been there, I have.

The ineffectual Western response to Soviet adventurism of the late 1970's had
many roots, not least the crisis of self-confidence within the American body
politic wrought by the Vietnam experience.

But just as Soviet decision-making in the earlier postwar era had taken place
against a background of overwhelming American strategic power, so the decisions
of the late 70's were taken in Moscow, as in Washington and throughout Europe,
against a background of growing Soviet and stagnating Western nuclear strength.
One might draw the conclusion from these events that the West should reassert
that nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union upon which our security and our
strategy rested through the postwar era.

That is not my view. We cannot and should not seek to build our peace and
freedom perpetually upon the basis of expanding nuclear arsenals. In the short
run, we have no alternative but to compete with the Soviet Union in this, in
this field, not in the pursuit of superiority, but merely of balance. It is thus
essential that the United States maintain a modern and survivable nuclear
capability in each leg of the strategic triad - sea, land and air-based.

It is similarly important that France and Britain maintain and modernize their
independent strategic capabilities.

The Soviet Union, however, does not share our view of what constitutes a stable
nuclear balance. It has chosen, instead, to build nuclear forces clearly
designed to strike first, and thus disarm their adversary. The Soviet Union is
now moving toward deployment of new mobile Mirved missiles which have these
capabilities, plus the potential to avoid detection, monitoring, or arms control
verification.

Soviet Is Accused

In doing this, the Soviet Union is undermining stability and the basis for
mutual deterrence. One can imagine several possible responses to the continued
Soviet build-up of nuclear forces. On the one hand, we can ask the Soviet Union
to reduce its offensive systems through equitable, verifiable arms control
measures. We are pressing that case in Geneva.

Thus far, however, we've heard nothing new from the other side. A second
possibility would be for the West to step up our current modernization effort to
keep up with constantly accelerating Soviet deployments, not to regain
superiority, but merely to keep up with Soviet deployments.

But is this really an acceptable alternative? Even if this course could be
sustained by the West, it would produce a less stable strategic balance than the
one we have today. Must we accept an endless process of nuclear arms
competition? I don't think so. We need a better guarantee of peace than that.
And fortunately, there is a third possibility. It is to offset the continued
Soviet offensive buildup in destabilizing weapons by developing defenses against
these weapons.

In 1983 I launched a new research program - the Strategic Defense Initiative.
The state of modern technology may soon make possible for the first time the
ability to use nonnuclear systems to defeat ballistic missiles.

The Soviets themselves have long recognized the value of defensive systems and
have invested heavily in them. Indeed, they have spent as much on defensive
systems as they have on offensive systems for more than 20 years.

Now, this research program will take time. As we proceed with it, we will remain
within existing treaty constraints. We will also consult in the closest possible
fashion with our allies.

And when the time for decisions on the possible production and deployment of
such systems comes, we must and will discuss and negotiate these issues with the
Soviet Union. Both for the short and long term, I am confident that the West can
maintain effective military deterrence.

More Than a Truce

But surely we can aspire to more than maintaining a state of highly armed truce
in international politics. During the 1970's we went to great lengths to
restrain unilaterally our strategic weapons programs out of the conviction that
the Soviet Union would adhere to certain rules in its conduct - rules such as
neither side seeking to gain unilateral advantage at the expense of the other.

Those efforts of the early 1970's resulted in some improvements in Europe, the
Berlin Quadripartite Agreement being the best example. But the hopes for a
broader and lasting moderation of the East-West competition foundered in Angola,
Ethiopia, Afghanistan and Nicaragua.

The question before us today is whether we have learned - have we learned from
those mistakes and can undertake a stable and peaceful relationship with the
Soviet Union based upon effective deterrence and the reduction of tensions? I
believe we can. I believe we have learned that fruitful cooperation with the
Soviet Union must be accompanied by successful competition in areas -
particularly third world areas - where the Soviets are not yet prepared to act
with restraint. [Some members of the audience walked out at this point.] You
know, I've learned something useful. Maybe if I talk long enough in my own
Congress, some of those will walk out.

Policy Toward Moscow

Let me talk about the reflections which have molded our policy toward the Soviet
Union. That policy embodies the following basic elements:

* While we maintain deterrence to preserve the peace, the United States will
make a steady, sustained effort to reduce tensions and solve problems in its
relations with the Soviet Union.

* The United States is prepared to conclude fair, equitable, verifiable
agreements for arms reduction, above all with regard to offensive nuclear
weapons.

* The United States will insist upon compliance with past agreements both for
their own sake and to strengthen confidence in the possibility of future
accords.

* The United States seeks no unilateral advantages, and, of course, can accept
none on the Soviet side.

* The United States will proceed in full consultation with its allies,
recognizing that our fates are intertwined and we must act in unity.

* The United States does not seek to undermine or change the Soviet system nor
to impinge upon the security of the Soviet Union. At the same time it will
resist attempts by the Soviet Union to use or threaten force against others, or
to impose its system on others by force.

Ultimately, I hope the leaders of the Soviet Union will come to understand that
they have nothing to gain from attempts to achieve military superiority or to
spread their dominance by force, but have much to gain from joining the West in
mututal arms reduction and expanding cooperation.

I have directed the Secretary of State to engage with the Soviet Union on an
extended agenda of problem solving.

Yet even as we embark upon new efforts to sustain a productive dialogue with the
Soviet Union, we are reminded of the obstacles posed by our so fundamentally
different concepts of humanity, of human rights, of the value of a human life.

The murder of Major Nicholson by a Soviet soldier in East Germany, and the
Soviet Union's refusal to accept responsiblity for this act, is only the latest
reminder.

If we are to succeed in reducing East-West tensions, we must find a means to
insure against the arbitrary use of lethal force in the future -whether against
individuals like Major Nicholson, or against groups, such as the passengers on a
jumbo jet. It is for that reason that I would like to outline for you today what
I believe would be a useful way to proceed.

'Four Practical Steps'

I propose that the United States and the Soviet Union take four practical steps.

First, that our two countries make a regular practice of exchanging military
observers at military exercises and locations. We now follow this practice with
many other nations, to the equal benefit of all parties.

Second, as I believe it is desirable for the leaders of the United States and
the Soviet Union to meet and tackle problems, I am also convinced that the
military leaders of our nations could benefit from more contact. I therefore
propose that we institute regular, high-level contacts between Soviet and
American military leaders, to develop better understanding and to prevent
potential tragedies from occurring.

Third, I urge that the Conference on Disarmament in Europe act promptly and
agree on the concrete confidence-building measures proposed by the NATO
countries. The United States is prepared to discuss the Soviet proposal on
nonuse of force in the context of Soviet agreement to concrete
confidence-building measures.

Fourth, I believe a permanent military-to-military communications link could
serve a useful purpose in this important area of our relationship. It could be
the channel for exchanging notifications and other information regarding routine
military activities, thereby reducing the chances of misunderstanding and
misinterpretation. And over time, it might evolve into a ''risk reduction''
mechanism for rapid communication and exchange of data in times of crisis.

These proposals are not cure-alls for our current problems. They will not
compensate for the deaths which have occurred. But as terrible as past events
have been, it would be more tragic if we were to make no attempt to prevent even
larger tragedies from occurring through lack of contact and communication.

'Much to Do'

We in the West have much to do -and we must do it together. We must remain
unified in the face of attempts to divide us and strong in spite of attempts to
weaken us. And we must remember that our unity and strength are not a mere
impulse of like-minded allies, but the natural result of our shared love for
liberty.

Surely we have no illusions that convergence of the Communist system and the
free societies of the West is likely. We are in for an extended period of
competition of ideas.

It is up to us in the West to answer whether or not we will make available the
resources, ideas and assistance necessary to compete with the Soviet Union in
the third world. We have much in our favor, not least the experience of those
states which have tried Marxism and are looking for an alternative.

We do not aspire to impose our system on anyone, nor do we have pat answers for
all the world's ills. But our ideals of freedom and democracy - [Boos and
shouts.] Is there an echo in here?

Our ideals of freedom and democracy and our economic systems have proven their
ability to meet the needs of our people. Our adversaries can offer their people
only economic stagnation and the corrupt hand of a state and party bureaucracy
which ultimately satisfy neither material nor spiritual needs.

Freedom and Peace

I want to reaffirm to the people of Europe the constancy of the American
purpose. We were at your side through two great wars. We have been at your side
through 40 years of a sometimes painful peace. We are at your side today
because, like you, we have not veered from the ideals of the West - the ideals
of freedom, liberty and peace.

Here in Western Europe, you have created a multinational democratic community in
which there is a free flow of people, of information, of goods and of culture.
West Europeans move freely in all directions, sharing and partaking of each
other's ideas and culture.

It is my hope that in the 21st century - which is only 15 years away -all
Europeans, from Moscow to Lisbon, will be able to travel without a passport and
the free flow of people and ideas would include the other half of Europe.

You are, today, a new Europe on the brink of a new century - a democratic
community with much to be proud of. We have much to do. The work ahead is not
unlike the building of a great cathedral. The work is slow, complicated, and
painstaking.

It is passed on with pride from generation to generation. It's the work not only
of leaders but of ordinary people. The cathedral evolves as it is created, with
each generation adding its own vision - but the initial ideal remains constant,
and the faith that drives the vision persists.

The results may be slow to see, but our children and their children will trace
in the air the emerging arches and spires and know the faith and dedication and
love that produced them.

'The Cathedral'

My friends, Europe is the cathedral, and it is illuminated still.

And if you doubt your will, and your spirit, and your strength to stand for
something, think of those people 40 years ago - who wept in the rubble, who
laughed in the streets, who paraded across Europe, who cheered Churchill with
love and devotion, who sang the ''Marseillaise'' down the boulevards.

Spirit like that does not disappear, it cannot perish. It will not go. There's
too much left unsung within it.

I would like to just conclude with one line if I could, and say we've seen
evidence here of your faith in democracy, in the ability of some to speak up
freely as they preferred to speak, and yet I can't help but remind all of us
that some who take advantage of that right of democracy seem unaware that if the
government that they would advocate became reality, no one would have that
freedom to speak up again.

Thank you. Thank you all for your graciousness on this great day. Thank you and
God bless you all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of protestors of Presient Reagan's speech (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 9, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thai Forces Drive Out Vietnamese Troops

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 113 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 8


Thai forces backed by air strikes and artillery barrages today repulsed most of
the 800 Vietnamese soldiers who had intruded in pursuit of Cambodian guerrillas,
a navy spokesman said.

The spokesman, Rear Adm. Sakchai Kaewjinda, said a combined force of marines,
border police and army rangers recaptured an area in the Ban Chamrak village
earlier seized by the Vietnamese. The village is 175 miles southeast of Bangkok
in Trat Province, on the Cambodian border.

The admiral said a Thai ranger was killed and eight others were wounded by
Vietnamese-planted landmines in five days of military operations.

He said the bodies of eight Vietnamese troops were found in the area.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 9, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE DROPS 281 INDIVIDUAL SUITS AGAINST MAKERS OF AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. FRIED

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 424 words


A Federal judge in Brooklyn yesterday dismissed suits against Agent Orange
manufacturers that had been brought by 281 Vietnam veterans who charged that
they had been harmed by the herbicide's use in Vietnam.

The 281 had chosen to wage their own separate suits rather than be part of a
class-action suit against the seven companies in which thousands of other
Vietnam veterans and their families made the same charge.

The class action resulted last May in a settlement in which the companies
established a $180 million fund to aid the veterans and families who had
remained in that suit.

Because the 281 veterans had ''opted out'' of that action - the phrase court
papers used to describe their move -they were not scheduled to share in the fund
that eventually was established. And yesterday's ruling dismissed their own
claims on the ground, among others, that they had failed to ''present credible
evidence of a causal link between exposure to Agent Orange and the various
diseases from which they are allegedly suffering.''

Special Court Master

The ruling was issued by Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court
in Brooklyn.

Later yesterday, an aide to Judge Weinstein in the Agent Orange litigation,
Kenneth R. Feinberg, said that while the veterans whose suits were dismissed
yesterday cannot, ''as a technical matter,'' return to the class action and
share in its resulting settlement, ''my own personal judgment is that the court
would be likely to let them back in if they so desired.''

Mr. Feinberg, a Washington lawyer, was named by Judge Weinstein as a special
court master to help him with various tasks related to the long and complex
litigation, which dates from the late 1970's.

An attorney whose firm represented most of the 281 veterans whose cases were
dismissed yesterday said the veterans would in ''no way'' seek to return to the
class action but instead would continue pressing their own suits by appealing
Judge Weinstein's dismissal of them to higher courts.

The lawyer, Wayne Mansulla of the Washington firm of Ashcraft & Gerel, said the
281 had ''opted out of the class'' because they thought the class-action
litigation would lead to an ''inadequate'' outcome. The $180 million settlement
fund, he held, was in fact ''not sufficient.''

Yesterday's dismissal of his client's suits was a ''judicial disgrace,'' Mr.
Mansulla held, because ''the plaintiffs were entitled'' to have their claims
decided in a jury trial rather than having them dismissed in a pretrial ruling
by the judge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 9, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Tons of Emotion

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 159 words


Ticker-tape tonnage cannot measure emotion.

Even if it could, sealed windows in modern skyscrapers have dramatically reduced
the tide of paper thrown onto Broadway. Ticker tape itself is scarce; it has to
be improvised or imported.

But the Sanitation Department's day-after tonnage report is almost as
established a tradition as the ticker-tape parade itself.

On Tuesday, 468 tons of ticker tape and shredded debris fell on the parade for
Vietnam veterans. It was cleaned up by 342 workers using 154 pieces of
equipment, under 42 supervisors, at a cost of about $51,000.

The record, by far, was set by the V-J Day parade in August 1945, when 5,438
tons of ticker tape and other stuff was thrown throughout the city. These are
the figures for more recent parades:

* Mets World Series victory, October 1969 - 1,254.5 tons.

* Return of the hostages from Iran, January 1981 - 1,262.3 tons.

* America's Olympic medalists, August 1984 - 325 tons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 9, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Novel About Soldiers Wins Faulkner Award

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 122 words


''The Barracks Thief'' by Tobias Wolff, published by the Ecco Press, has won the
$5,000 PEN/Faulkner award as the best work of fiction published in 1984. The
novel is set in an army camp, among a group of soldiers about to be sent to
Vietnam.

Mr. Wolff, who teaches English at Syracuse University, is the author of a
collection of stories, ''In the Garden of the North American Martyrs,'' also
published by Ecco. A new collection, ''Back in the World,'' will be published in
the fall by Houghton Mifflin. Bantam Books will publish a paperback collection
of Mr. Wolff's work, including ''The Barracks Thief,'' next February.

The award ceremony will be held at the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington
on Saturday, May 11.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGES SAYS U.S. NEED NOT AID AGENT ORANGE FUND

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. FRIED

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 929 words


A Federal judge ruled yesterday that the United States Government could not be
forced to contribute to a $180 million fund to aid Vietnam War veterans who say
they were harmed by Agent Orange.

But the judge held that while the Government ''is within its legal rights in
refusing to contribute'' to the fund set up by Agent Orange manufacturers, its
position ''may be cruel to the veterans who served their country and feel that
the government has turned its back on them in this litigation.''

The judge, Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, who has been
presiding over the long and complex Agent Orange litigation, also said the
Government's position ''may be shortsighted in its refusal to assist contractors
who voluntarily produced at Government request what amounted to critical war
supplies during a foreign crisis.''

Judge Weinstein declared: ''Undoubtedly, the United States will pay a high price
for its present position. In the future many contractors will require
indemnification, and increased insurance costs will be added to the price of the
goods the Government purchases. There will be lingering resentment by veterans
and their families who believe that the Government has let them down.''

The judge characterized the approach of the Justice Department, which has
represented the Government in the litigation, as one of ''benign detachment from
this aftermath of the Vietnam War.''

But he said the Government was legally correct in fighting the lawsuit brought
by the Agent Orange manufacturers. They were trying to force the Government to
finance part of the fund they agreed last year to set up.

Dismissing the suit, Judge Weinstein said that ''matters of good faith and
equity'' regarding the Government's relations with veterans and contractors were
not ''considerations that the court may take into account under the Federal Tort
Claims Act.'' For damages to be recovered from the Government under the act, he
said, ''some form of misfeasance'' by the Government must be proved. And, he
said, the veterans and their families claiming harm from Agent Orange have
failed to ''offer any proof of a causal connection between Agent Orange'' and
their injuries.

Judge Weinstein said the Government also holds that Agent Orange cannot be shown
to have caused any injury to any Vietnam veteran or any member of a veteran's
family.

The chemical companies similarly deny that Agent Orange was responsible for the
harm the veterans and their relatives blame it for. But the companies say they
agreed to create the $180 million fund to settle a class-action suit brought
against them by the veterans and their relatives because, among other things,
they wanted to avoid years of litigation.

Aid for Veterans' Families

A spokesman for the Justice Department, Dean St. Dennis, said his agency had no
comment on Judge Weinstein's ruling. ''The decision will have to be studied
carefully,'' he said.

The seven chemical companies that created the fund had sought to have the
Government help finance that portion of it that is to aid veterans' wives and
children who have suffered from miscarriages, birth defects and similar harm
they attribute to the veterans' exposure to Agent Orange in Vietnam.

Exactly how much of the fund is to go for such injuries is not certain because
Judge Weinstein has not yet approved a plan to distribute the money.But the
portion going for such purposes could total tens of millions of dollars,
according to those involved in the case.

Much of the remainder is to go to the veterans who say they were personally
harmed by their exposure to Agent Orange. Many veterans contend that the
exposure has caused such ailments as cancer and nerve damage.

The United States military used the herbicide to defoliate jungle and roadside
areas.

A spokesman for the Dow Chemical Company, one of the Agent Orange manufacturers
that created the fund, said the company would ''evaluate the possibility'' of
appealing Judge Weinstein's decision.

Speaking of the Government, the spokesman, Lisa Ziettlow, said: ''It's been our
position they should be involved as a responsible party.'' She said the
Government had ''set the specifications'' for manufacturing the herbicide and
had ''determined how it would be applied, by whom and where.''

An attorney for Dow Chemical, Charles Carey, said the seven companies would have
liked to seek Government reimbursement for the entire $180 million fund. But
previous court rulings, he said, had made it necessary to limit the suit to the
part of the fund that is to go for claims by veterans' wives and children.

The other companies involved are the Diamond Shamrock Corporation, Hercules
Inc., the Monsanto Company, T. H. Agriculture and Nutrition, the Thompson
Chemical Corporation and Uniroyal Inc. #200,000 Claims Many Vietnam veterans and
their families claiming harm from Agent Orange also have wanted the Government
to contribute substantially to efforts to help them, arguing that the Government
had an obligation to do so because the illnesses resulted from the veterans'
service in war.

But as Judge Weinstein noted yesterday, the ''veterans' direct claims against
the Government'' had previously been dismissed by the courts because of a 1950
Supreme Court ruling that the Government is not liable for injuries to service
people arising out of their military activities.

A number of veterans and their lawyers have charged that the fund - now nearly
$200 million with interest - is inadequate, given the more than 200,000
individuals who have filed claims.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Thanks From a Vet

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 65 words


To the Editor:

Thanks, New York! On behalf of the women veterans who marched in our Welcome
Home parade down Broadway we want to say Thanks! Your warmth, enthusiasm,
excitement and genuine joy at saying thanks to us and welcome home were
marvelous and moving. We really felt wanted and loved. SARAHLEE MCGORAN National
Board Member Vietnam Veterans of America Washington, May 8, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam, Off Camera

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 413 words


The party is over in Vietnam, where American networks lent their cameras to a
self-serving celebration of Hanoi's only real achievement: conquest. Parades
make pictures. What got scant attention was the off-camera horror of Vietnam's
unrelenting persecution even of former comrades. Some victims risked their lives
by talking to The Times's Barbara Crossette and other reporters. Their story is
appalling, their fate a major obstacle to any reconciliation with the United
States.

One category of victims is pilloried for middle-class origins, Western education
or past involvement with Americans. Ten years after Hanoi's conquest of the
South, the regime concedes it still holds 10,000 people in ''re-education''
camps, but the actual number is probably 40,000. Reporters admitted to a special
visitors' center were blandly told the prisoners clamor to remain in detention.
Then why keep these camps off-limits, and off camera?

A second category of victims is accused of ''backwardness,'' insufficent zeal
for Hanoi's Prussian brand of Communism. At least 5,000 are held in five work
camps. Also jailed or under house arrest are outspoken Buddhists, Catholics and
Protestants. Thich Tri Quang, the Buddhist monk who did so much to discredit
former Saigon regimes, is an internal exile; so is Quang Do, a Nobel Peace Prize
nominee in 1979.

Similarly consigned to jail or limbo are leaders of the South's Communist Party,
whose agitations once swayed American hearts and minds. Their star fell with
Saigon. Tran Van Ta, once commander of the Viet Cong forces, has not been seen
since 1982. Another leader, Nguyen Thi Binh, was among the few scheduled to take
part in victory celebrations. She never turned up, the cryptic explanation being
that she was ''out of the country.''

All residents of Ho Chi Minh City live under constant surveillance of
neighborhood cadres. The penal system cries out for the United Nations
investigation requested by the Vietnam Committee for Human Rights, a Paris-based
group. What lends urgency to this plea are signs that Hanoi intends to step up
its campaign to eliminate remaining traces of Southern heterodoxy.

The only positive gleam caught by the cameras was the desire of Vietnam's
leaders to reach out for American respect. They seem unaware that Hanoi has
squandered its moral credit by conquests and oppressions that cannot be
attributed to colonialism. When those policies change, so will American feelings
about reconciliation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOAT CHILDREN FROM VIETNAM ARE GETTING A'S IN ASSIMILATION

BYLINE: By DEIRDRE CARMODY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1532 words


The 12th grader's report card arrived home the other day from Freeport (L.I.)
High School. It read as follows: History, 95; Humanities, 93; Social Studies,
94; Advanced Placement Physics, 91; Math, 99.

There was no line on the report card, however, to record the most remarkable
fact of all: Three years ago the boy did not speak a word of English.

The boy, Ngoc, a slim 18-year-old with intense black eyes and a ready smile, is
one of 563 Vietnamese boat children who have been placed in foster homes in the
New York metropolitan area.

These are the children who fled from the Communist Government in Vietnam,
leaving their families behind and setting out in overcrowded fishing boats
across the South China Sea for refugee camps in Hong Kong, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore and Indonesia.

''The families in Vietnam turned to the oldest and the brightest of their
children - the ones they felt were most able to succeed,'' said Beverly Gross,
director of the city's Refugee Entrant Assistance Program for Unaccompanied
Minors.

She said the families of the youngsters had ''paid heavily in gold to get the
children aboard fishing boats, and they were subject to piracy, starvation and
death before they even got to the refugee camps.''

''These are the survivors,'' she said. ''These are the kids who have made it.''

An Ordeal at Sea

Take Ngoc, for instance, whose last name and the last names of other refugees
are not being used in this article in order to protect their families in
Vietnam.

Ngoc comes from a middle-class family in Da Nang, where his father was a teacher
until the Communists took over in 1975.

Four years ago, Ngoc, who was then 14, and his 15-year-old brother, Nga, set off
in the middle of the night with 16 other people on an 18-foot fishing boat.

''The trip very terrible and the ocean very bad with small boat, but thank God,
I am still living,'' Ngoc said in an account of the trip taped by his foster
father a few months after his arrival in this country.

After 13 days, the boat reached Hong Kong, and Ngoc and Nga were taken to a
resettlement camp where they stayed for a year.

Three years ago they finally reached the United States under the Unaccompanied
Minors Program and were placed with Richard Panneitz, a computer specialist, and
Richard Carpenter, a retired embalmer, in a large house in Freeport. The two
men, whom the boys refer to as Dad and Uncle, have taken in six Vietnamese boys
in all.

Life at the house in Freeport is bustling. The boys help with the housework and
the garden, do their homework, play soccer and go roller-skating with their
American friends. Nga is at college now and Ngoc will be going next year. They
have been joined in the house by Tac and Long, two 15-year-olds.

''Most of my boys learned English within three months,'' said Mr. Carpenter, who
taught them himself, although tutors are available under the program. ''I teach
them 10 new words a day. I started off with nouns - table, ashtray - and then we
went into adjectives and then verbs.''

''It's a very rapid transition from Vietnamese refugee to American student,''
Mr. Carpenter added smiling.

In 1979 Joseph Califano, who was then Secretary of Health, Education and
Welfare, asked all states to develop programs for minors in refugee camps.

That year New York City took in 90 of the minors. Since then 686 children have
come in under the program - 565 Vietnamese and ethnic Chinese from Vietnam, and
an assortment of Cambodians, Laotians, Iranians and Ethiopians.

Reunification of Families

One of the major aims of the program is the reunification of families. The
children are encouraged to sponsor their own families and bring them to the
United States under what is officially known as the Orderly Departure Program.

So far, according to Mrs. Gross, about 65 of the children who live in the New
York area have been reunited with their parents.

All the New York children without their families, most of them teen-agers, are
in the custody of the City Human Resources Administrator. Placement in foster
homes for the federally financed program is made through six voluntary social
agencies, which keep a close watch on the children and their foster families.

Not all the youths live with families. Some of them, like 17-year-old Quoc,
first moved in with a foster family and then asked to move on to a group home.

There are 12 Vietnamese boys, 17 to 19, at the Mission of the Immaculate Home on
Staten Island. ''I love it,'' Quoc said as he prepared a mixture of Chinese
vegetables, rice, noodles and beef for dinner for the residents of the home.
''Nobody bothers me.''

A Typical Teen-Ager's Room

Quoc shares a room on the second floor with another boy. It does not look much
different from the room of any other teen-age boy in the country. The walls are
decorated with pictures of rock stars and Quoc's Long Island soccer awards: All
Star, Most Valuable Player 1982, Most Valuable Player 1984.

''These kids are very good,'' says Carmen Hellman, the group home supervisor.
''They come here with a purpose - the purpose of making something of themselves.
They have the goal of someday bringing their families here.

There are very few behavior problems, she said. ''There's very little truancy
and they have a lot of pride in what they do,'' she said. ''They know their
parents made a big effort to send them here.''

Mrs. Hellman says that most of the youths who have been in the home have 75 to
80 averages in school and that 40 to 50 percent of them go on to college. Most
of the others go to vocational schools, she said.

Presumably not all the Vietnamese youths who have come here have had success
stories. Mrs. Hellman was asked to talk about the failures she had encountered.

''Out of 30 or 40 that have been here, I can only think of one,'' she said. ''He
followed the wrong crowd and after he was discharged, I heard from other kids
that he had had some problems. But now he's got a job. He's working in a Chinese
restaurant as a waiter and I think he has straightened himself out.''

Mr. Carpenter and Mr. Panneitz tell about the first Vietnamese boy they took
into their home. His name was Tam and he arrived four years ago at Kennedy
International Airport with no shoes and no English. A social worker from the
Sheltering Arms Children Service was there to interpret and make introductions.
Everyone was nervous.

Last Link to Homeland

The social worker left and the two men carried Tam to the car. But it soon
became evident that he was concerned about something but did not know the words
to tell them what it was. He became increasingly worried, and they finally
telephoned the interpreter the next morning to have him talk to the boy.

Tam, it turned out, had a suitcase containing a bolt of material he had bought
to send home to his parents. It was his last link to his former life and he
thought it was gone forever.

The two men immediately put Tam in the car, drove to the airport and recovered
the suitcase.

There is a dead-end residential street in West Babylon, L.I., lined with neat
one-story houses and flowering azaleas. A 10-year old girl, cuddling a Cabbage
Patch doll, comes skipping down the street, her ponytail bobbing. She is smiling
to herself.  Her name is Huong and she is an Amerasian child from an orphanage
in Vietnam. She has come to live with the Lopez family, who have been married 21
years and always wanted a daughter. They have four sons of their own and now -
they look rather bemused as they tell the story - they have three new Vietnamese
sons in addition to Huong.

''The agency called last fall and told us they had an emergency,'' Mrs. Lopez
said. ''They asked us to watch two boys for the weekend and said they would pick
them up Monday. The boys, who are 16 and 17, came in Friday evening, very scared
and very quiet. By Monday we knew we could never let them go.''

It turned out that one of the boys had a brother in a refugee camp in the
Philippines. He has also come to live with the Lopezes. Every night they sit
down 10 to dinner and Mr. and Mrs. Lopez look just as pleased as they can be.

''In the beginning they do go through periods of depression, but then, for the
most part, their experiences are put behind them,'' Mrs. Lopez said.

A Harrowing Boat Trip

Danh, who is 17, said he had left Vietnam after having escaped from prison. He
said he had fled on a fishing boat that ran out of oil and drifted for 52 days
during which 19 of the 65 passengers died.

He jumps up from the sofa after his recital, leaves the room and returns with a
snapshot. It is a picture of a large group of Vietnamese. Danh explains that
these are the ones who survived the boat trip. Matter of factly, he then points
to one after another and tells how many relatives each lost during the trip.

What is most affecting about the picture is how very normal these people look.
They could be a group of Vietnamese enjoying a pleasant day in the country.
Indeed, that is what is most striking about the Vietnamese teen-agers living
here: not the scars left by their journeys but the will to put all that behind
and to get on with the living of their lives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Vietnamese refugees (NYT/Vic DeLucia)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 622 words


FRIDAY, MAY 10, 1985



International

President Reagan, in Lisbon, told Portugal's Parliament that he had ''heard the
voice of the 20th century'' on his 10-day visit to Europe and that Communism was
losing out to democracy. ''Everywhere we turn,'' he said, ''there is an uprising
of mind and will against the old cliches of collectivism.'' [Page A1, Column 1.]

The Soviet Union marked V-E Day with parades after a year of commemorations that
confirmed the ''Great Patriotic War'' as a primary event in Soviet history.
[A1:2-3.]

Nicaraguan rebels have been hurt by Washington's unexpected imposition of a
trade embargo, according to opposition leaders and diplomats who monitor their
status. [A8:3-6.]

A House panel rebuffed the President and voted to continue a ban on all military
aid to the Nicaraguan rebels for an additional year. [A8:3-4.]

National

The President has agreed to a cap on military spending, according to Senator Bob
Dole, the majority leader. Mr. Dole said Mr. Reagan had agreed to a 1986 budget
that would limit the military spending increase to the inflation rate and
eliminate the Social Security cost-of-living increase for one year. [A1:5-6.]

A ''mercy killing'' led to conviction of a 75-year-old retired engineer in Fort
Lauderdale, Fla. The accused man, Roswell Gilbert, contended that he fatally
shot his 73-year-old incurably ill wife, Emily, in an act of love. The jury
deliberated for 4 hours and 15 minutes before finding him guilty of first-degree
murder. [A16:4-6.]

Edmond O'Brien died at the age of 69. The actor played a wide range of character
roles and won an Academy Award as best supporting actor for his 1954 performance
as a press agent in ''The Barefoot Contessa.'' [D22:3.]

Preventing pilot error is stressed in a sweeping plan drafted by the Federal
Aviation Administration to increase aviation safety. The plan calls for pursuing
a list of specific objectives to meet 30 ''human factor'' issues ranked in order
of importance by a panel of experts. [A1:3-5.]

Metropolitan

New York is using its leverage in an effort to preserve the Federal income tax
deduction for state and local taxes. Governor Cuomo and a number of business,
labor and civic leaders have been talking to members of Congress and trying to
mobilize a lobbying campaign by voters in New York and other states that have
high state and local taxes. [A1:4.]

Jerseyans would get a tax break of 10 percent on their 1985 incomes, up to a
maximum of $75, under a proposal by Governor Kean. Assembly Speaker Alan J.
Karcher, Democrat of Sayreville, criticized the plan as a gimmick intended to
help Mr. Kean win re-election this year. [B2:3.]

Agent Orange litigants lost a monetary dispute but won a moral one. A Federal
judge ruled that the Government could not be forced to contribute to a $180
million fund created by manufacturers of the herbicide to aid Vietnam War
veterans who say they were harmed by Agent Orange. But the judge held that the
Government's refusal to contribute to the fund ''may be cruel to the veterans
who served their country.'' [A1:4-6.]

A police hit-run suspect was arrested and charged with hitting and slightly
injuring a young woman riding a bicycle in Brooklyn last week. The accused
officer is 37-year-old Ernest Bryant, a member of the police force for nearly 16
years. [B3:6.]

State investigators of the leasing of three office buildings in New York City by
state officials have uncovered evidence of irregularities, according to
officials of the State Commission of Investigation. The commission announced it
would study the suspected violations in two days of hearings, beginning on
Monday. [B1:1.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 904 words


ORION CLASSICS, the division dealing with art-house films and foreign imports,
will soon be distributing five new titles that further establish Orion's
pre-eminence in the field. The classics divisions launched enthusiastically by
most of the major studios beginning with UA Classics five years ago have fallen
on hard times. Orion retains autonomy from its parent company and continues to
thrive, with Columbia's Triumph its closest competition. Triumph has Lina
Wertmuller's ''Sotto Sotto,'' Maurice Pialat's ''Police'' and Jean-Luc Godard's
highly controversial ''Je Vous Salue, Marie'' (''Hail, Mary'') on its agenda.

The most important new acquisition of Orion Classics is ''Ran,'' a big-budget
''Samurai version of 'King Lear' '' directed by Akira Kurosawa, who has made
only five films in the last 20 years. It may be shown at the New York Film
Festival and will open at Cinema I at Christmastime. Another new title is ''Dim
Sum,'' the second feature by Wayne Wang, who made ''Chan Is Missing.'' ''Dim
Sum'' is currently being shown at the Directors' Fortnight at Cannes and will
open here late this summer. A fall title will be ''Colonel Redl,'' reuniting the
director (Istvan Szabo) and star (Klaus Maria Brandauer) of ''Mephisto''; it is
being shown at Cannes, too. Orion also has picked up Eric Rohmer's ''Le Rayon
Vert'' and ''One Woman or Two,'' which stars Gerard Depardieu, Sigourney Weaver
and Dr. Ruth Westheimer, the television sex therapist, and is being directed by
Daniel Vigne, who did ''The Return of Martin Guerre.''

Decisions at Orion Classics are made by three vice presidents, Donna Gigliotti
(acquisitions), Michael Barker (sales) and Tom Bernard (marketing and
distribution) on a two-votes-out-of-three basis. All three moved from UA
Classics, where they had distributed ''The Last Metro'' and ''The Night of the
Shooting Stars,'' in 1983. Since then, Orion Classics' titles have included
''Pauline at the Beach,'' Carlos Saura's ''Carmen'' and ''Sugar Cane Alley.''

The division has a five-step method of selecting films, Miss Gigliotti said:
''One, we see whether we like it; two, we try to second-guess the critics;
three, we look at the director's track record; four, we decide what the hook is;
five, we see what the deal will be like.

''In the final analysis, that's the only way to buy movies.'' Mr. Bernard added,
''It's almost like we've marketed the film before we buy it.'' From the Other
Side Of the Camera When the film director and television kingpin Garry Marshall
was approached by Albert Brooks to play a casino manager in ''Lost in America,''
he didn't get a chance to refuse. '' 'No, no, I only see you, I don't see
anybody else,' '' he said Mr. Brooks told him. ''When a guy has that kind of
thing in his head, you can't stop him, especially Albert. He also knew my price
wouldn't be a problem.'' Mr. Marshall's fee, he said, was ''scale and a
sandwich.''

Part of the fun for Mr. Marshall, who was in the midst of directing ''The
Flamingo Kid,'' was knowing that the film's problems were not his own. ''When a
light broke in the middle of one scene, I thought about what it was costing and
got a stomach ache,'' he recalled. ''Then I realized it was his picture. So I
asked him what do the actors do now, and he said they go get a doughnut.''

Mr. Marshall, who is preparing to shoot ''The Ties That Bind,'' a dramatic
comedy starring Tom Hanks, does other small acting jobs from time to time, ''but
only when somebody gets sick.'' He made a brief appearance in ''The Escape
Artist'' and sometimes works under the pseudonym Samuro Mitzubi. In the early
60's, he had a few jobs in motorcycle movies, playing narcotics agents. When
Jack Nicholson recently complimented him on his latest performance, Mr. Marshall
asked, ''Was I better than when I used to arrest you?''

His own assessment is: ''I guess that truthfully, as a director I would have cut
me a little bit. But as an actor I loved it. The first time I saw the scene, I
forgot Albert was even in it.'' A Sequel Specialist Who's Wary of the Genre
Sequels are getting to be a specialty with James Cameron, who became an
overnight sensation after the success of ''The Terminator,'' for which he was
director and co-author. His next directorial project will be ''Aliens,'' which
will bring back Sigourney Weaver in a follow-up to Ridley Scott's ''Alien'' and,
he says, will be a lot less gruesome. There may also be a second ''Terminator,''
although Arnold Schwarzenegger was blown to bits at the end of the first.
''Well,'' said Mr. Cameron, ''he's a machine. And machines are mass-produced, so
there might be another one in the warehouse. And there's time-travel in the
storyline - that has possibilities, too.''

Mr. Cameron says he is wary of follow-ups: ''Whenever you see a 'II' you get the
sense that Picture X did so much business that there's a financial imperative to
make a sequel, no matter how bad it is.'' Still, he also has a co-author credit
on ''Rambo,'' the sequel to ''First Blood.'' Before directing ''The
Terminator,'' he wrote three drafts of a story for Sylvester Stallone, who then
wrote his own version, retaining perhaps half of Mr. Cameron's material. ''It
picks up a few years after the first one, and he takes on a dangerous, possibly
suicidal reconnaissance mission in North Vietnam in return for getting out of
the slam,'' Mr. Cameron said. ''It's kind of a 'Dirty Dozen' for one.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 11, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW VIETNAM DEBATE: TRAUMA AS LEGAL DEFENSE

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 3067 words


The war in Vietnam, which ended for the United States a decade ago, is being
recalled with increasing frequency and vividness in courtrooms around the
country as veterans charged with crimes cite their traumatic Vietnam experiences
as their prime defense.

In the past five years, hundreds of Vietnam veterans, maintaining that war in
the rice paddies and jungles of Southeast Asia left them with profound
psychological scars, have said they should not be held accountable for such
crimes as murder, rape and drug dealing.

They have maintained, in effect, that they thought they were back in Vietnam
when they committed the crimes, that stress induced by the trauma of the war
touched off by particular events in this country made them temporarily insane.

Psychiatrists call this condition post-traumatic stress disorder. It achieved
legal currency in 1980, when the American Psychiatric Association listed the
syndrome in its revised manual of mental disorders. The manual defines the
disorder as a condition induced by a traumatic event ''outside the range of
usual human experience,'' touched off by conditions resembling or symbolizing
the original trauma.

Defense lawyers seized upon the disorder to help those of their clients who were
Vietnam veterans, a group long over-represented in the nation's prisons and
police blotters.

In the last five years the defense has helped at least 250 Vietnam veterans
receive shorter sentences, get treatment instead of incarceration, or win
acquittals.

But the defense has divided judges, psychiatrists and the veterans themselves,
and it has encountered growing resistance from juries in the past several years.


Symptoms Familiar to Veterans

For thousands of veterans of America's most unpopular war, particularly those
who saw heavy combat, the symptoms of the disorder are painfully familiar. They
include nightmares, depression, sleep loss and flashbacks touched off by sights,
sounds and smells reminiscent of Vietnam.

Some veterans have cited the roar of helicopters or the smell of rice cooking as
factors prompting the condition. Others have blamed memories rekindled this
month by the wave of commemoration surrounding the tenth anniversary of the
American withdrawal from Vietnam.

Since it is linked so closely to the Vietnam War, the stress disorder defense
has permitted lawyers to introduce reminiscences of a struggle a decade or more
ago and half a world away. In the process, it has turned dozens of trials into
miniature, often painful re-enactments of America's Vietnam experience.

In 1981, for example, a jury in Shreveport, La., found Charles Heads, a Vietnam
veteran who used the stress disorder defense, not guilty by reason of insanity
in the killing of his brother-in-law. In 1982, Jearl Wood of Chicago, who had
shot his foreman at a Ford assembly plant, was acquitted for the same reason -
only the third time in the previous 10 years that a Cook County jury had
accepted an insanity plea.

Gaining Official Recognition

Veterans' rights advocates say that because the stress defense was not
officially recognized until 1980, thousands of veterans convicted of crimes in
the 1960's and 1970's have not had their day in court. In addition, as the
defense has gained legitimacy in veterans' cases, lawyers say that the use of it
can be extended to victims of rape, battering and other traumatic experiences,
thereby changing ideas about criminal culpability generally.

''The notion of whether someone meets the traditional tests of insanity is going
to be much clouded by what we're finding out about post-traumatic stress and the
extent to which human beings have or haven't control over their own behavior,''
said John Russell Smith, a psychologist and Vietnam veteran who is now director
of the Center for Stress Recovery at the Veterans Administration Medical Center
in Cleveland.

In the past couple of years, however, juries have rejected an increasing
percentage of stress-related defenses.

''It seems there was more receptivity five years ago,'' said John P. Wilson, a
psychologist at Cleveland State University who has testified as a defense expert
in more than 50 cases throughout the country. ''My batting average was once
about .900 but now it's dropped.''

Some prosecutors involved in the cases attribute this change to overreaching
defense lawyers, who have sought, largely without success, to apply the strategy
to conspiratorial crimes like drug dealing instead of to random acts of
violence. Even jurors who believe a veteran has the disorder are often
unconvinced that he was unable to differentiate between right and wrong at the
time of the crime.

Many lawyers and psychologists on both sides of the issue say that the stress
defense has been caught in a backlash of sorts against all forms of the insanity
defense, fomented by the acquittal of John W. Hinckley Jr. in the shooting of
President Reagan. In addition, because prosecutors have been less prone to try
those persons who have bona fide stress defenses, many involved in such cases
say that the ones now going to court are generally more tenuous.

Defining the Disorder

Some psychologists also say that the current definition of post-traumatic stress
disorder is overly broad and fails to differentiate between those in the process
of overcoming their problems and those who are not. Psychologists say that most
veterans who do suffer from the stress disorder do so privately, never
committing a crime. A 1982 study by Stephen Frye, a psychologist with the
Veterans Administration, found that 47 percent of a recent graduating class at
the officer training school in Fort Benning, Ga., is afflicted with the
disorder.

''There may be individuals who meet the diagnostic criteria who are not
disordered, and just because one is disordered doesn't mean the disorder is
exculpatory,'' said Mr. Smith. ''There still is a great deal of imprecision, and
one needs to be very careful about making the diagnosis.''

Some of the sharpest divisions over the stress defense are found among Vietnam
veterans. Many of the veterans who have been using the disorder as a defense
were represented by lawyers who are also veterans and admit to having some of
the same symptoms. Conversely, Vietnam veteran's prosecutors and jurors are
often among the severist critics of such defense.

These divisions were reflected in a case this year in Phoenix, in which the
prosecutor, defendant, and expert witness all served in the same military unit:
Lima Company of the Fifth Marine Regiment, which saw heavy fighting southwest of
Da Nang.

The jury rejected the defendant's contentions that he had fallen into a
''dissociative state'' and thought he was actually attacking two North
Vietnamese soldiers at the time he killed two teen-agers in 1973.

''There are legitimate P.T.S.D. cases, but they are few and far between,'' said
Michael Ryan, the deputy prosecutor of Maricopa County, who tried the case. Mr.
Ryan, a former captain, has been confined to a wheelchair since 1968 when he was
struck by a blast from a North Vietnamese AK-47 rifle.

''Some bad apples are trying to use the disorder to escape criminal
responsibility,'' he said. ''This stigmatizes all Vietnam veterans, because it
convinces people that we're all crazy.''

Fear of Symptons

A second member of Lima company who appeared as an expert witness for the
defense, Tom Williams of Denver, disagreed.

''I think many Vietnam veterans who are doing well today are afraid of P.T.S.D.
because they have symptoms but are denying it,'' said Mr. Williams, a former
infantry company commander who specializes in the problems of Vietnam veterans.
''They have an investment in saying that it's bull.''

The debate over the disorder and its uses in court seems certain to continue
long after the veterans' parades and memorial dedications have ceased. Many
health care workers who treat Vietnam veterans predict that symptoms will
continue for some time to come, particularly as veterans encounter the crises of
middle-age.

''We're still getting guys out of the backwoods of Vermont, Maine and New
Hampshire who've never been treated anywhere for anything,'' said Richard J.
Sette, director of the post-traumatic stress unit at the Veterans Administration
Hospital in Northhampton, Mass. ''They're starting to hit 40, and their suicide
rate is going up.''

In some ways post-traumatic stress disorder is just a new label for a condition
that has been recognized since ancient times. Virgil wrote about it in the
Aeneid. The traumatized victims of early train wrecks were said to have railway
spine. For Union soldiers, the condition was called nostalgia, comparable to the
shell shock of World War I and the battle fatigue of World War II.

''With every massive influx of victims, we've tried to pretend that we've
discovered this condition anew,'' said Dr. Emanual Tenay, a professor of
psychiatry at Wayne State University in Detroit who has worked extensively with
both Holocaust survivors and Vietnam veterans. ''We indulge in a fantasy that
when it comes to our minds, we're invulnerable.''

But many psychologists who have studied the effects of war contend that Vietnam
was different. It has been described as America's first teen-age war: the
average combat soldier was only 19 years old, seven years younger than his World
War II counterpart. It was fought for body counts rather than territory. And it
evoked opposition among many Americans. In its wake, the psychologists say, the
war left thousands whose names will never be carved in granite anywhere, yet are
casualties nonetheless.

According to a study by the Ralph Bunche Institute of City University released
this year by Mayor Koch's Vietnam Veterans Memorial Commission, for example, 41
percent of the Vietnam veterans in New York have serious employment or financial
problems. The rate of divorce or separation for veterans who saw heavy combat
was 65 percent, as compared with 39 percent for the veterans of the Vietnam era
who served elsewhere. Nearly half of the heavy combat group reported having at
least four symptoms of post-traumatic stress in the last year.

Violence of Veterans

A disproportionate number of Vietnam veterans turn to violence. The Federal
Government's main study of the effects of the war on veterans, ''Legacies of
Vietnam,''surveyed more than 1,000 veterans in 1981 and found that 24 percent of
those who saw heavy combat were later arrested for criminal offenses, as
compared to 17 percent of other veterans from the Vietnam era and 14 percent of
the nonveterans.

Before the American Psychiatric Association included the stress disorder in its
diagnostic manual of mental disorders, those who stood trial had to find other
defenses.

''The defense literally wasn't available,'' said Chaim Shatan, a New York
psychiatrist who has worked extensively with Vietnam veterans. ''It was a hole,
a lacuna, an empty space in the diagnostic manuals.''

''The very real problems experienced by Vietnam veterans were often
misdiagnosed, unrecognized and untreated for almost a decade after the end of
the Vietnam war,'' according to C. Peter Erlinder of William Mitchell College of
Law in St. Paul. ''Veterans were often misdiagnosed as psychotic,
substance-dependant or malingerers who suffered from a fictional malady.''

Eagerness of Lawyers

When the defense became available, lawyers previously frustrated in their
attempts to prove that the seemingly random violence of Vietnam veterans was
causally related to their wartime experiences quickly seized on it, and scored
some impressive victories.

''It's just a matter of educating a jury,'' said David F. Addlestone of Vietnam
Veterans of America Legal Services in Washington. ''Once it is all laid out,
it's not strange and off-the-wall like most insanity defenses.''

The legal implications of the disorder extend beyond criminal law. It helped,
for instance, to explain why a Rochester veteran with a perfect work record
suddenly began missing work and was dismissed: his own son was about to turn 15,
the age of a Vietnamese the man had killed as a soldier. The man, citing the
syndrome in an administrative hearing, won his job back. In another case, a
Vietnam veteran in Los Angeles used the disorder to explain why he refused a
police officer's demand to take a breathalyzer test: the last time he had
followed orders from someone in uniform, he stepped on a Viet Cong booby trap.

First Use of Defense

The first successful use of stress disorder as a defense in a murder trial came
in the case of Mr. Heads, a 30-year old Houston man who underwent a second trial
in 1981 for killing his brother-in-law in Shreveport, La., after his previous
conviction had been overturned on a technicality.

Mr. Heads's experiences in Vietnam, where he had served as a member of a Marine
Corps reconnaissance team patrolling the jungles near Da Nang in 1967, went
largely unmentioned in his first trial. Before his second trial began, the
stress disorder was officially recognized by the psychiatry association, and it
became the focus of his defense.

''Maybe it was still true that in some final and ultimate sense that, as Vietnam
veterans have repeatedly told all of us who will listen, 'No one who wasn't
there will ever understand,' '' wrote Mr. Heads's trial lawyer, Wellborn Jack
Jr. of Shreveport.

''But this jury had come about as close to understanding as any group of nonvets
is ever likely to. We gave them eyewitness accounts of what Charles did, saw,
smelled, heard and felt as a 19-year-old Marine in Nam,'' he added. ''It wasn't
a pretty picture. Sometimes one or more jurors appeared on the verge of throwing
up.''

After six hours of deliberations, the jury found Mr. Heads not guilty by reason
of insanity.

Question of Insanity

The defense has not prevailed, however, in some similar cases. Last year Gary
Place, a native of Concord, N.H., who had spent three months loading helicopters
near Khe Sahn, was convicted of murdering his girlfriend. The jury apparently
did not accept Mr. Place's claim that shortly before the killing he went briefly
insane because of factors like Vietnam-like weather and the smells from a nearby
Chinese restaurant.

Similarly, the jury in the Arizona murder case rejected claims made by the
defendent, Shawn Jensen, that he believed he was battling North Vietnamese
regulars in the bush when he shot the two teen-agers, Kathy Koger and James
Burgoyne, in the desert near Saghuaro Lake in 1973. Mr. Jensen was sentenced to
life in prison.

''It was a total fraud and fabrication on his part,'' said Mr. Ryan, who
prosecuted Mr. Jensen. ''I had so many Vietnam veterans coming up to me
afterwards to say 'this is garbage' and that they were happy the case turned out
the way it did.''

''Given a choice between finding him sociopathic and keeping him in jail or
finding him not guilty, it chose the former,'' Mr. Jensen's lawyer, Victor
Aronow, said. ''Jurors don't want to be responsible for turning 'crazed' Vietnam
veterans back onto the street.''

Knowing Right From Wrong

Even jurors convinced of the traumatizing impact of the Vietnam War are
reluctant to acquit veterans of heinous crimes, as was shown at the 1981 murder
trial of Wayne Robert Felde in Louisiana.

Mr. Felde, an Army veteran charged with murdering a police officer in 1978,
described to the jury how he had picked up the arms and legs and disembowled
organs of his fellow soldiers killed in his first firefight near Kontum, and
later told how American soldiers attacked a nearby village. ''We wasted the
women and the kids and the old men and the dogs,'' he said.

He was nonetheless convicted of first degree murder, and sentenced to death. He
remains on Death Row in Louisiana State Penitiary in Angola pending further
appeals.

''We feel that the trial of Wayne Felde has brought to the forefront those
extreme stress disorders prevalent among thousands of our veterans,'' the jury
said in a statement. ''This trial will forever remain indelibly imprinted on our
minds, hearts and consciences. But after long and careful deliberation, through
exposure to all evidence, we felt that Mr. Felde was aware of right and wrong
when Mr. Thompkin's life was taken.''

Use in Drug Cases

Perhaps the most notable beneficiary of the Vietnam stress defense was Michael
Tindall, who convinced a Boston jury in 1980 that his involvement in a drug
smuggling scheme stemmed from anger and an addiction to action left over from
his days in combat.

More recently, however, such a defense has proved less successful. ''You can
understand a stress defense where some guy watching TV goes berserk and grabs a
gun,'' said Raymond Edwards Jr. of the United States Attorney's office in San
Diego, a Vietnam veteran who successfully prosecuted John Early, another
veteran, on drug charges. ''But Early was trying to take advantage of his
stature as a Vietnam veteran, and that was wrong. Greed was his motive, not a
need for action.''

Even where it fails as an absolute defense, the stress syndrome can often be a
mitigating factor in sentencing. In other instances, it has helped convicted
veterans bypass prison altogether. In one such case, a judge sentenced a veteran
from Washington state to ten years in prison for blowing up a house, but agreed
to let him report to a psychiatric treatment unit at the Veterans Administration
hospital in Menlo Park, Calif., the largest of 13 such centers around the
country.

Some Vietnam veterans convicted before 1980 have had their cases reopened,
either on the grounds of incompetence of trial counsel, failure of the courts to
take mitigating circumstances into account in sentencing, or because the stress
syndrome was deemed to be new evidence requiring further consideration of their
cases.

Robber Is Released

In 1983, Albert Dobbs, who faced seven and a half years of hard labor for
robbery, had his sentence reduced to time served, and was released, also because
of new evidence relating to the stress disorder.

Mr. Dobbs, however, had appeared on a national television program on imprisoned
Vietnam veterans.

''The only thing unique about Dobbs was that he got media attention,'' said
Barry Levin of Los Angeles, Mr. Dobbs's lawyer and a Vietnam veteran. ''There
are many, many Dobbses in prison that need to have their cases reviewed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Shawn Jensen (AP); Photo of Michael Ryan (NYT/Tim Koors)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 11, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 381 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 50. 1. There is much more to this card than meets the eye. Explain. 2.
Hecklers in the audience booed, laughed and shouted ''Nicaragua.'' What were the
circumstances? 3. Senator Pete Wilson of California received a standing ovation
as he entered the Senate chamber in a wheelchair. What were the circumstances
and what affect did his presence have on the proceedings? 4. A ceremony in lower
Manhattan illuminated a translucent glass-block wall, 70 feet long and 16 feet
high. What wall is it? 5. Telephone rates around the country are going up
because of ''long-distance hoppers.'' What are they? 6. Peter V. Ueberroth, the
commissioner of baseball, announced that all baseball personnel, with one
significant exception, would have to undergo testing for drug abuse. What
exception did he make and what was the reason? 7. ''To be a little bit alone in
Bonn does not mean being alone in the world,'' said a participant at the
economic summit conference in West Germany who had isolated himself from the
rest of his colleagues. Who is he and on what two issues did he dissent? 8. A
number of leading physicists are beginning to suspect that everything in the
universe is made of tiny (blobs/dots/rods/strings). 9. The nominating committee
for the Tony Awards voted to drop three categories: leading actor in a musical,
leading actress in a musical and choreography from this year's presentations.
This was the (first/second/third) time in the award's history that any
categories were dropped. 10. According to a New York Times/CBS News poll, 41
percent of the respondents said President Reagan should have visited the German
military cemetery at Bitburg, and (21/31/41/51) percent of the respondents said
the President should not have gone. 11. Paintings in the art collection of
Norman Watt and William M. Goodacre of Vancouver, British Columbia suffer a
dubious distinction. What is the reason? 12. Saying the United States Government
had practised ''benign detachment from this aftermath of the Vietnam War,'' a
Federal judge in New York ruled that the Government (could be forced/could not
be forced) to contribute to a $180 million fund to aid veterans who say they
were harmed by Agent Orange.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of card

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 11, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Sends Troops To Cambodian Border

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 191 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 10


Vietnam has sent a fresh battalion of 600 soldiers into combat with Thai
soldiers near the Thai-Cambodian border, Thailand's naval commander said today.

Vietnamese and Thai troops have been battling in Thailand's southeastern Trat
Province since late last month, when Hanoi's forces crossed into Thai territory
in pursuit of Cambodian guerrillas.

Thailand's naval commander, Adm. Nipon Sirithorn, said the situation could lead
''to outright war'' if the Vietnamese did not leave Thai territory.

Hanoi's forces have resisted repeated Thai attempts to force them back across
the border into Cambodia and have set up a temporary base about a mile inside
Thailand, military sources said in Bangkok. ---- WASHINGTON, May 10 (AP) - The
State Department said today that it ''strongly condemns'' the recent incursion
of up to 1,200 Vietnamese troops into Thai territory. The department's deputy
spokesman, Edward P. Djerejian, said. ''The Vietnamese sweep into an area which
is clearly Thai sovereign territory, and their determined effort to retain Thai
territory has led to great danger and hardship for the civilian population of
the area.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 11, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Disciplinary Panel at Harvard

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 460 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., May 10


Harvard University after a surge in campus protests has reactivated a committee
that in the Vietnam War era disciplined students accused of disrupting
''essential processes.''

The committee, created in 1970 after the violent takeover of University Hall,
has not heard a case since 1975, and students had boycotted membership for
years. It is intended to include seven faculty members and six students.

Students met college officials today to discuss boycotting the reactivated
committee, but no decision is expected until next week, said Brian R. Melendez,
chairman of the Undergraduate Council, the student government.

With or without students, the new panel, the Committee on Rights and
Responsibilities, is to meet next week to consider action against students in
two recent protests against South Africa's policy of racial separation and
university investments in companies that do business with South Africa.

The committee's decisions cannot be appealed or overruled by the Faculty Council
or school officials, and students said today that they feared the committee
would be used to silence political dissent and punish protesters.

In reactivating it Harvard officials said the panel body was needed to consider
violations of its the Resolution on Rights and Responsibilities, approved by the
faculty in 1970.

A Harvard statement defended the right of students to protest, but it added:
''Interference with members of the university in performance of their normal
duties and activities must be regarded as unacceptable obstruction of the
essential processes of the university.''

Anthony A. Ball, a junior member of the South Africa Solidarity Committee, said
criticized the renewal of the disciplinary panel.

''The only time it is activated is when there are students who say they are
opposed to what the university is doing,'' he said. ----7 Protesters Arrested
Seven demonstrators were arrested yesterday after spending the night in the
Indianapolis offices of Senator Richard Lugar to protest the Reagan
Administration's trade embargo against Nicaragua.

Those arrested were Earlham College students and members of Pledge of
Resistance, a group that opposes the embargo and Mr. Lugar's stance against the
Sandinista regime in Nicaragua.

Meanwhile, demonstrations on South African policies continued yesterday on
several campuses. About 200 protesters at Rutgers University staged a mock
funeral procession to symbolize the deaths of blacks in the unrest in South
Africa, and the Rutgers Board of Governors agreed to re-examine conditions in
South Africa.

At the University of Maryland, a regents committee approved a proposal to divest
from companies that have not signed principles requiring equal treatment of
South African workers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 11, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 857 words


SATURDAY, MAY 11, 1985

International

At least 45 Indians were killed and 150 were wounded in a series of attacks and
bombings by Sikh extremists, officials announced. They said the attacks occurred
in buses, a train and crowded neighborhoods in New Delhi and three northern
states. The authorities called out the Indian Army to patrol sensitive areas of
the capital. [Page 1, Column 4.]

New efforts to capture Josef Mengele were set. The United States, West Germany
and Israel vowed to improve communications at both the investigative and
prosecutorial levels with the aim of bringing the Nazi death camp doctor to
trial for ''crimes against humanity.'' [1:1.]

George P. Shultz, in Jerusalem, laid a wreath at Israel's memorial to the six
million Jews killed by the Nazis. The Secretary of State declared that ''Israel
is the true witness to the Holocaust and the truest symbol of the victory of
good over evil.'' [7:1-2.]

President Reagan returned home from a 10-day European trip, urging ''significant
reductions in nuclear arms.'' Mr. Reagan asserted there was considerable
evidence that Moscow was not abiding by the 1979 strategic arms limitation
treaty and said that Washington might not extend its observance of the
unratified pact. [1:2-3.]

Warsaw accused Washington and other Western Governments of sponsoring political
subversion in Poland. The charges were made in Parliament by the Interior
Minister, Gen. Czeslaw Kiszczak. [3:4-6.]

National

President Reagan defended his shift on the 1986 military budget. He said he had
agreed to limit the military spending increase to the inflation rate after
receiving a Senate pledge that he could seek additional money if he found the
budget cuts were harming the national security. Last week, Mr. Reagan said that
passing such a military budget would be ''irresponsible.'' [1:6.]

The President hailed the budget accord worked out in the Senate as an important
signal to financial markets. Mr. Reagan agreed to a one-year freeze in
cost-of-living increases for Social Security beneficiaries because the
Administration was unable to muster enough votes to continue the benefits next
year. [10:1-3.]

Vietnam veterans accused of crimes have often argued that they should not be
held accountable for them because of profound psychological scars they suffered
from the fighting. The defense has proved successful for some Vietnam veterans,
but it has divided judges, psychiatrists and the veterans themselves, and it has
encountered increasing resistance from juries. [1:3-5.]

Conservative rabbis indicated anger at 51 members of Israel's Parliament that
voted in January in support of proposed changes in the Israeli law of return
that would have ruled only Orthodox conversions to Judaism valid for those
seeking to enter Israel as Jews. The proposals were defeated, but the
Conservative Rabbinical Assembly announced that the 51 legislators, including
Ariel Sharon and Yitzhak Shamir, were no longer welcome as speakers or honorees
at the 850 Conservative congregations in the United States. [9:6.]

Party switches in Massachusetts are uncommon in a state that has long been
heavily Democratic. Nonetheless, two prominent former Democrats and a current
one, former Governor Edward J. King, may run as Republicans in next year's
elections for the three top statewide offices. The two other possible
candidates, who changed their party registration last year, are L. Joyce
Hampers, a former state Revenue Commissioner, and Edward Harrington, a former
United States Attorney. [8:1-3.]

Lawyers for Claus von Bulow lost their effort to dismiss one of two assault
charges against him, but they won their struggle to permit a Newport (R.I.)
Hospital doctor to tell the jury that lack of oxygen rather than an insulin
injection caused Mr. von Bulow's wife, Martha, to suffer a first coma in 1979.
[8:4-5.]

Metropolitan

Favoring New York grapes is unfair, according to a Federal appeals court that
struck down the state law authorizing the sale of wine coolers in state
supermarkets and grocery stores only if they were made with New York State
grapes. The court upheld a lower Federal court ruling that held that the state
law unconstitutionally discriminated against similar products from other states.
[1:5.]

A widening of the Jersey Turnpike is scheduled for the 35-mile-stretch between
New Brunswick and the northern end of the toll road. Turnpike officials said the
more than $1 billion project was scheduled to be completed by 1991. [27:1.]

A state prison will not be built in New York City, the Cuomo administration
announced. Officials said that the cost of constructing a maximum-security
prison in the city was too high and that they would look for a site elsewhere in
the state. [28:1-2.]

Mother's Day generates frenzy in Manhattan's flower district, centered on 28th
Street between Broadway and Seventh Avenue, and for the people who work there.
The tribute tomorrow, maybe the biggest flower-giving day of the year, brings in
multimillion dollars in sales for the longtime flower dealers. [1-2.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 11, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 233 words


Questions appear on page 14. 1. Using laser technology, the card can be encoded
with the equivalent of 800 pages of information about the carrier's medical
history. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Maryland is distributing the card to its
members and nationwide adoption is expected in a few years. 2. Leftist
legislators heckled President Reagan as he addressed the European Parliament, 3.
Republicans brought Senator Wilson from a hospital a day and a half after his
appendix was removed so he could vote on the 1986 budget. His presence resulted
in a tie vote, broken by Vice President Bush. The approved budget limits
military spending increases to the inflation rate and eliminates the Social
Security cost-of-living increase for one year. 4. The Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
5. A new category of cheats, people who jump from one long-distance telephone
company to the next, leaving unpaid bills. 6. All major league players were
excluded by Ueberroth's order because of their union representation. 7. Francois
Mitterrand, the President of France, refused to set a date for the start of
negotiations to eliminate barriers to free trade, and he also rejected President
Reagan's proposal for a space-based defense against missiles. 8. Strings. 9.
First. 10. 41. 11. They collect what they consider to be the world's worst
paintings, oils and acrylics that cost $5 or less. 12. Could not be forced.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FUGITIVE IN $1.6 MILLION BRINK'S HOLDUP CAPTURED

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1718 words


Marilyn Jean Buck, one of the last fugitives in the $1.6 million Brink's robbery
in Rockland County in 1981 in which two police officers and a guard were slain,
was captured yesterday in a suburb north of New York City.

Lee Laster, an assistant director in charge of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation's New York office, said Miss Buck and Linda Sue Evans, a companion
who the authorities said had harbored her, were arrested at 10 A.M. outside a
diner in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., in Westchester County.

The arrest took place less than 10 miles from Nanuet, N.Y., across the Hudson
River in Rockland County, where a band of people that included members of the
Weather Underground and the Black Liberation Army robbed a Brink's truck on Oct.
20, 1981.

Miss Buck, now 38 years old, drove one of the getaway cars, the authorities
said, and Miss Evans, also 38, was accused of having harbored her recently. Miss
Buck had been a fugitive for eight years.

Acting on a tip from what was described as a confidential source, members of the
F.B.I. and the New York City Police Department's Joint Terrorist Task Force
first spotted Miss Buck and Miss Evans Friday in New York City. A ''massive
surveillance'' ensued Friday night and yesterday, agents said.

The suspects were followed while they drove around the city and its suburbs, Mr.
Laster said, as the authorities waited for the best time to make an arrest so
the danger of injuries to the officers and the suspects could be minimized.

Between 5 P.M. and 6 P.M. Friday, Mr. Laster said, the women were at what he
described as a safe-house apartment on Giles Place in the Kingsbridge Heights
section of the Bronx. They spent Friday night at a motel near Dobbs Ferry, which
Mr. Laster declined to identify.

Apparently unaware they were being observed, the two women came out of the motel
yesterday morning and drove north on Route 9 to the Mayflower Diner, a brick and
blue-aluminum structure on Broadway in Dobbs Ferry, which is about 15 miles
north of midtown Manhattan.

F.B.I. agents and New York City police detectives then moved in, and the two
women were seized outside the diner, Mr. Laster said.

Witnesses said that about 10 unmarked F.B.I. cars and vans converged as the
women drove up to the diner and that, after their light blue car was hemmed in,
Miss Evans tried to flee on foot and was captured down the street.

Miss Buck, clad in a rust-colored shirt and blue jeans, was carrying a loaded
.38-caliber revolver and Miss Evans was carrying a loaded 9-millimeter automatic
pistol, Mr. Laster told a midafternoon news conference at the F.B.I. office at
26 Federal Plaza. The weapons were concealed in the women's purses, he said.

Neither suspect said anything when taken into custody, the official said. Both
were taken away in handcuffs, witnesses said.

While Miss Evans was said to have harbored Miss Buck, an F.B.I. spokesman,
Joseph Valiquette, said it was unclear how long the two women had been together.
He said Miss Evans's last known job was with a Connecticut printing
establishment.

Miss Evans was said to have been a part of a ''support apparatus'' that helped
members of the Brink's robbery gang with hideouts, false identification papers,
communications and other assistance. She was said to be a member of the May 19
Communist Movement, described as a support group for fugitives.

Mr. Laster and other F.B.I. officials said it was unclear where Miss Buck had
hidden in recent years, though the F.B.I. had determined that she had lived in
New Haven in 1983 and 1984.

Mr. Laster said the two suspects would be arraigned tomorrow. Miss Buck faces
Federal charges of conspiracy and racketeering, and New York State charges of
murder and robbery in the Brink's case, he said. Miss Evans, a former member of
the radical group known as the Weathermen, faces Federal charges of conspiracy
to harbor a fugitive.

Miss Buck also faces 1984 charges in New Jersey in connection with two
robberies, a $105,000 holdup at Bamberger's in Paramus in 1979 and a $200,000
armored car robbery at the Livingston Mall in 1978. She also faces Federal
fugitive charges for a California escape eight years ago.

Bomb Squad Sent to Apartment

Members of the F.B.I. and Police Department's Joint Terrorist Task Force
yesterday searched the Bronx apartment, which is on the second floor of a
five-story, red-brick building at 3451 Giles Place. The search turned up little,
according to Lieut. Kevin Hallinan of the task force. He would not disclose
what, if anything, officers found.

A manager of the building, just east of the Jerome Park Reservoir, said the
four-room apartment had been rented two years ago to a couple under the name of
Kenneth Abrams. The manager, Peter Cuanovic, said the woman identified Mr.
Abrams as her brother and said he would stay temporarily. Her husband, she said,
would join her from Israel. But Mr. Cuanovic said he was not sure a man had ever
lived in the apartment. Neighbors said last night that they seldom saw the
residents of the apartment, L-12.

The woman, who identified herself as a teacher, walked with a limp and wore a
different wig every month when she paid the rent, he said.

Miss Buck, one of the nation's most-sought criminal suspects, is believed to
have walked with a limp since shooting herself during the Brink's robbery.

She has been described by law-enforcement officials as the only white member of
the Black Liberation Army, which claimed responsibility for killing police
officers, setting off bombs and other violence in the racial turmoil and antiwar
protests of the 60's and 70's.

Miss Buck is suspected of driving one of the getaway cars in the holdup of the
Brink's armored car in which a guard was killed at the Nanuet Mall. She sped
away from pursuing police cars, authorities said, after a roadblock shootout
that left two Nyack police officers dead.

In the confusion and bloodshed, authorities said, Miss Buck accidentally shot
herself in the leg. Her car, a white Oldsmobile, was later found abandoned in
Pelham, N.Y.. There was blood on the seat but no trace of Miss Buck, a tall,
small-boned woman with brown hair.

Safe Houses Discovered

Through the license plate of the getaway car, which had been registered by Miss
Buck under the name Nina Lewis, authorities were led to an East Orange, N.J.,
apartment that had been rented by Miss Buck under the same false name and had
been used by the holdup gang.

Bomb plans, bomb-making materials, weapons, disguises and floor plans for police
stations and court houses in New York City also were found.

Later investigation showed that Miss Buck, using an alias, had rented other
places for the gang in the Bronx and Mount Vernon, N.Y.

Four suspects in the robbery were seized immediately and others were taken into
custody later. One suspect, Samuel Smith, was killed in a shootout with the
police in Queens several days after the robbery. In trials in New York City and
upstate, most of the other suspects were convicted.

Suspects Convicted

Five were convicted in 1983 and 1984 for the murders of a Brink's guard, Peter
Paige, and Officer Waverly Brown and Sgt. Edward O'Grady.

Samuel Brown, David Gilbert, Judith Clark and Kuwasi Balagoon, also known as
Donald Weems, were each sentenced to 75 years in prison. Kathy Boudin was
sentenced to 20 years after pleading guilty.

Four others were convicted in Federal court in 1983 on related charges.

Sekou Odinga and Silvia Baraldini were sentenced to 40 years each for
racketeering and conspiracy for their part in planning the holdup and for aiding
in the 1979 New Jersey prison escape of Joanne Chesimard. Cecil Ferguson and
Edward Joseph were convicted as accessories for harboring a fugitive and
sentenced to 12 years.

Several suspects are still at large, according to the authorities. Mutulu
Shakur, who authorities say planned the holdup, remains on the F.B.I.'s most
wanted list. Other fugitives are Cheri Laverne Dalton and Dr. Alan Berkman, who
is accused of having treated Miss Buck's leg wound.

After the holdup, Miss Buck went into hiding, and authorities found no trace of
her until last year, when two people linked to the Weather Underground, Susan
Lisa Rosenberg and Timothy Blunk, were arrested in Cherry Hill, N.J., unloading
weapons from a truck.

Subsequent investigation by the F.B.I. disclosed that Miss Buck and Miss
Rosenberg had lived together in an apartment in downtown New Haven from
September 1983 to September 1984. It was unclear why the two women left the
apartment last year, and there was no indication where Miss Buck went after
moving out.

Miss Buck was sentenced in Federal court in San Francisco in 1973 to 10 years in
jail after being convicted of buying weapons and ammunition for the Black
Liberation Army in California and Arizona.

During her trial, she was described by prosecutors as the radical group's
''quartermaster,'' in charge of procuring weapons, ammunition and false identity
papers. She has been a fugitive since 1977, when she was given a furlough from a
Federal prison in West Virginia and failed to return.

Miss Buck grew up in Austin, Tex., and was an honor student at St. Stevens, a
private school in Austin, where her father, Louis, was a well-known Episcopal
minister and veterinarian.

Accepted at Brown University and the Universities of Texas and California in
1964, she enrolled in September 1965 at the University of California at
Berkeley.

The trip to Berkeley was her first away from home, she told friends. Miss Buck
enrolled in a special program for gifted students at the university. During her
freshman year, however, she was deeply affected by the student movement against
racism and the Vietnam War.

By the end of the school year, she was rarely attending classes, friends said,
and she dropped out before completing her courses. Miss Buck later joined
Students for a Democratic Society and the Black Liberation Army.

Miss Evans, a native of Fort Dodge, Iowa, who was a member of the national
committee of Students for a Democratic Society in the late 1960's and later
joined its Weathermen faction, was indicted in Chicago on charges growing out of
a demonstration, and in Detroit on Federal charges of conspiracy to bomb targets
in New York, Chicago, Detroit and other cities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Marilyn Jean Buck (UPI)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADORAN REBELS, IN NEW TACTICS, ARE KIDNAPPING OR KILLING MAYORS

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1178 words

DATELINE: SAN JORGE, El Salvador, May 11


In a sharp shift in tactics, leftist guerrillas have killed 2 newly elected
mayors, kidnapped 8 others and burned 32 mayors' offices in recent weeks,
according to a Salvadoran Army spokesman and Government officials.

The campaign, waged by the Marxist People's Revolutionary Army factions of the
rebel Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, has spread fear among towns in
rebel areas in eastern El Salvador. It is the first time the guerrillas have
attacked a series of local government officials in areas of rebel operations.

The guerrilla radio, Venceremos, announced today that the People's Revolutionary
Army had begun to seize mayors because it considers them to be part of
''counterinsurgency plans financed and advised by the United States.''

The kidnapped officials are among 262 mayors selected in national elections on
March 31. One of those kidnapped was released after being warned not to take
office.

Army Weighs Response

The Salvadoran Government announced Friday that it was moving city records from
five other mayors' offices in the eastern part of the country to more secure
sites protected by army troops. An army spokesman said, however, that the army
could not secure every town and was considering how to respond to the attacks.

Besides kidnapping and killing mayors, rebel gunmen have stepped up
assassinations in San Salvador. In a widely reported incident last month,
members of the Marxist Popular Liberation Forces rebel faction killed 12 unarmed
civilians and executed at least 6 members of the local civil defense force in
the town of Santa Cruz Loma.

Rebel Soldiers' Worst Year Ever

The new tactics are evidence of the increasingly bitter struggle by the rebels
to maintain or extend their influence in the face of improving army and
Government performance. The guerrillas have had their worst year on the
battlefield and have been forced onto the defensive by constant army operations.

The rebels suffered a political setback as well after the electoral victory last
month of the Christian Democratic Party of the Salvadoran President, Jose
Napoleon Duarte.

The rebel radio said today that the People's Revolutionary Army would not permit
mayors to take office in zones where the guerrillas operate and added that the
group considered the mayors it had seized to be prisoners of war, ''implicated
in a counterinsurgency plan against our forces and our people.''

The broadcast concluded that the future of the mayors would depend on the
treatment of two rebel commanders that the rebels contend are in Government
hands. The Government has denied it is holding the two commanders, Janet Samour
and Maximina Reyes.

The attacks on mayors and local government offices have shaken residents of
outlying villages, most of which are not protected by Government troops.

Villagers in the town of San Jorge, 60 miles east of the capital in the
Department of San Miguel, said that on April 29 leftist guerrillas kidnapped
their newly elected mayor, releasing him a day later with a warning not to take
office.

The Mayor, Edgar Mauricio Valenzuela, did not heed the rebels' advice. Two days
later, the guerrillas returned at 7 in the evening, dragged Mr. Valenzuela from
his home and killed him with a single shot to the head, several villagers said.
The guerrillas assassinated a previous mayor earlier in the year, they added.

'He Was a Good Man'

Mr. Valenzuela, 35 years old, was a popular man, well known in the area as the
physical-education instructor in local schools, they added. He had been
threatened in the past, villagers said, by a local government army commander who
did not like Mr. Valenzuela's liberal views. The Mayor was a member of President
Duarte's Christian Democratic Party.

''I don't know why they killed him,'' said Irma Valenzuela, sister of the slain
Mayor. ''The whole town can tell you he was a good man.''

The Mayor's wife and his two children fled town after the killing, villagers
said. A small shrine of flowers and candles has been built in the Mayor's
abandoned house. The villagers added that they had never supported the
guerrillas and were now more afraid of them than ever.

''We're upset,'' said a villager who would give his name only as Felipe. ''They
killed someone without reason.'' The empty Mayor's office in San Jorge is
covered with guerrilla graffiti telling villagers to join the rebels. A note on
the front wall says, ''Attention, the Mayor's office suspends its activities for
lack of supplies.''

Mayor in San Jorge Flees

Last week, a guerrilla unit also kidnapped the Mayor of San Rafael Oriente, just
a few miles down the dirt road from San Jorge. The Mayor, Lorenzo Arevalo, was
released after being told not to take office, according to local residents. On
hearing of the assassination in San Jorge, Mr. Arevalo fled town, they added.

In El Transito, a mile from San Rafael Oriente, Mayor Tomas Erasmus Campos says
he has watched the treatment of his two neighboring Mayors with growing concern.

Mr. Campos said that the guerrillas considered the mayors to be the first step
in renewed Government control in the area and that if he, too, was threatened he
might quit.

''There is always worry,'' Mr. Campos said. Now, he added, ''there is a litte
more.''

In the town of Tejutla, in northern Chalatenango Province, villagers said they
could not understand why the guerrillas suddenly decided to burn their Mayor's
office last month. The villagers said that their town had survived five years of
war without serious damage, but that now they had lost most of their property
and family records.

In the town of Tejutepeque, in Cabanas Province, about 40 miles northeast of San
Salvador, the two leading candidates for mayor told a reporter on election day,
six weeks ago, that they were so worried by the rebels' response to the
elections that they had asked the local guerrilla commander for permission to
run.

The rebels blew up the Mayor's office in Tejutepeque just before the election,
but they have so far not seized its Mayor.

The campaign against local officials appears to have caused some debate among
the many factions of the rebel movement. The guerrillas are composed of five
armed groups in the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front and a handful of
tiny political parties whose leaders serve as the rebels' political and
diplomatic spokesmen under the banner of the Democratic Revolutionary Front.

A senior official in the Democratic Revolutionary Front said in a recent
interview that he had opposed attacks on mayors' offices, but that he had failed
to convince the People's Revolutionary Army faction to stop carrying them out.
The official predicted the attacks would prove politically counterproductive.

The guerrillas, who once spoke of taking power within a few years, have recently
said that they have decided they face a long war of attrition. One sign of the
changed attitude is a new program on the rebel radio depicting the Vietnam War
as a 20-year struggle against ''the same imperialist North American enemy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WORLD WAR II'S 'FORGOTTEN FORGOTTEN' GATHER

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 11


In this year of 40th anniversary commemorations of the end of World War II,
several hundred of the self-described ''forgotten forgotten'' gathered here
recently to reminisce about a part of the war they feel has been neglected: the
China-Burma-India theater.

''History does not know what happened over there,'' said Pauline Hendershot
Reece, a nurse, who at the age 20 followed Gen. Joseph Stilwell's troops in and
out of the jungles of China and Burma. ''We were at the forgotten center of the
world.''

But although Mrs. Reece and 300 other veterans at a reunion of the
China-Burma-India Veterans Association grumbled a bit at the lack of
recognition, they did so with humor and pride.

''When you saw the old newsreels of the war, they showed how the war was going
in Europe and in the Pacific,'' said Ludwig Baumgarten, last year's national
commander of the association. ''Then they would have a little flash of something
about the C.B.I. It was at the end of the supply line, and there was not too
much news about us back in the Land of the Big PX.''

Mr. Baumgarten, who also served in the Korean and Vietnam Wars, went to China as
a medic but ended up carrying supplies through mountains on pack horses and
training Chinese to use and conserve ammunition.

General Stilwell's troops, together with Chinese, British and Indian forces,
first fought a losing campaign against the Japanese in Burma in 1942, and then
counterattacked in 1943-44 to drive the Japanese out. American activities in the
region included the construction of the Ledo Road, a military highway from Assam
into northern Burma, and a supply airlift over ''the Hump,'' the southeast
ranges of the Himalaya Mountains.

According to the the Army, 7,000 Americans were killed or wounded in the
China-Burma-India theater, 3,700 of whom were fliers.

''One of my proudest memories is my 10-man crew who flew over 50 bombing
missions together,'' said Charles F. Linamen, current national commander of the
association. Other veterans surrounded him to hear, one more time, the story of
the man who ''blew up the bridge over the River Kwai.''

Mr. Linamen, a first lieutenant in the United States Army Air Force, was 19
years old when he flew one of six bombers in a mission that destroyed the
Kanchanaburi bridge in Thailand, west of Bangkok.

The bridge was used by a Japanese supply railroad from Thailand into Burma,
built in 1943 by Allied prisoners of war along a river called the Khwae Noi, the
Lesser Khwae. It became popularized through the book and movie ''Bridge Over the
River Kwai.''

''The author of the book claims the book is fictional,'' Mr. Linamen said.
''Well, we claim that over 95 percent of it is fact. The only difference is, in
real life, that bridge was not destroyed by a British colonel, or by Allied
forces. The bridge was actually destroyed by B-24 bombers.''

Lieutenant Linamen's own plane was badly damaged by antiaircraft fire, and he
had to land on a beach after flying 600 miles with a clipped wing. ''That was a
rocky ride,'' he said.  He left China at the age of 21, having flown more than
50 bombing missions and more than 30 supply trips over the Himalayas.

During the war, several Americans from the Middle West traded addresses and
telephone numbers, promising to reunite at home if they made it out. Today, the
China-Burma-India Veterans Association has 7,000 members. It will hold its
annual dinner in Boston in July.

Alice Todd Lambert, a wartime nurse who says she was the first American woman in
uniform to set foot in China, said she had not missed the dinner since 1959.

''We were a team, and we had a great feeling of unity,'' she said, noting there
were other nurses at the party that evening whom she had met on the ship to
India in 1942. ''Sometimes we thought we were the forgotten theater, but we kind
of laughed and joked about it. This is why our organization is so tight and
loving today.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thai Jets Strafe Vietnamese Troops

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 131 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 11


Thai jets strafed Vietnamese troops entrenched in Thai territory and Hanoi
reinforced its force with 800 soldiers, Thai military officers said today.

A Thai Navy officer said the jets struck in Trat Province about half a mile from
the Cambodian frontier on Friday against hundreds of Vietnamese soldiers who
intruded last month to pursue Cambodian guerrillas. The officer said the two
sides continued to exchange artillery fire and grenades.

The Hanoi radio said today that the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry had denied the
reported incursion. The broadcast, monitored in Bangkok, repeated Vietnam's call
for the establishment of a ''safety zone'' along the Thai-Cambodian border.

The Thai Foreign Ministry said it would protest to the United Nations about the
reported incursion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILIMING A WAR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 30, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 167 words


To the Editor:

R egarding John Corry's article, ''TV's Legacy From the Vietnam War'' [April
21], the following facts are offered, not to refute his thesis that still
photographs of Vietnam atrocities linger in the mind, but as supplementary
information for the two photographs that he mentions.

The murder on-camera of a Viet Cong prisoner was filmed by Visnews
cinematographer Neil Davis and broadcast on TV worldwide. The murder, a bullet
to the head of the handcuffed prisoner from the pistol of a Saigon police chief,
was so horrendous as live-action that perhaps it is only the milder still shot
by the Associated Press photographer Eddie Adams that is now recalled.

Similarly, regarding the nude 9-year-old Vietnamese girl, Kim Phuc, covered with
napalm burns, who runs from her village, that famous scene was filmed
live-action by waiting news cinematographers and has appeared in many
documentaries, including Peter Davis's ''Hearts and Minds.''

GORDON R. HITCHENS

New York City

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letters

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IS TV UNPATRIOTIC OR SIMPLY UNMINDFUL?

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1348 words


This is the charge: that the television networks are left, liberal, unpatriotic,
or a sebaceous mixture of all three. CBS is the usual target, although ample
censure is left over for NBC and ABC. Didn't Ted Turner say that ''the greatest
enemies America has ever had, posing a greater threat to our way of life than
Nazi Germany or Tojo's Japan, are the three television networks''? Didn't
Senator Jesse Helms speak about network people who, ''if they do not hate
America first, certainly have a smug contempt for American ideals and
principles''? Censure grows; fervor rises, while the networks, for the most
part, stand on their injured dignity. In fact, the argument is too serious to be
left to partisans of either side.

For one thing, we are a long way from the time when Walter Cronkite, say, or
Chet Huntley narrated documentaries produced by the Pentagon. Television's old
assumptions have fled. We once heard about the ''Communist menace'' routinely.
Now television is above that sort of thing. It is no longer national; it is
supranational. Last week it commemorated the 40th anniversary of VE-Day; the
week before that it commemorated the 10th anniversary of the fall of Saigon. The
first was an American victory, the second an American defeat. The networks march
on evenhandedly. Hanoi today, the Bitburg cemetery tomorrow, and if it's Tuesday
we must be in Johannesburg.

There is nothing intrinsically left, liberal or unpatriotic about this. Usually,
there is no perspective at all. This is part of the problem. Events are without
meaning, the way most of the recent television coverage from Vietnam was without
meaning. Totalitarianism hid itself. The networks, entranced by their own
technology, only knew they were there. The anniversary parade in Ho Chi Minh
City, formerly Saigon, began at 7:52 A.M., the same time, 10 years before, that
the last Marine was lifted from the roof of the American Embassy by helicopter.
It was obvious whom the Vietnamese Government was celebrating a victory over; it
was a victory over us. In an interview on ''Nightline,'' Henry A. Kissinger said
it was ''demeaning'' to have all three networks cover the parade. He should have
called it mindless. Hanoi scored a public relations, if not a propaganda, coup.

On television, a totalitarian state doesn't look totalitarian; it only looks
exotic. During the two weeks, give or take a few days, that Vietnam was recently
seen on the news programs, it didn't even look militaristic. Vietnam has been
the scene of one war or another for generations; it supposedly has the
fourth-largest army in the world. Some print journalism tried to put this into
perspective. Television showed us mostly mud-splattered oxen and peaceful
peasants. Why did the boat people flee? Why are so many Vietnamese trying to
leave their country now? We had the impression Vietnam was poor; people probably
wanted a higher standard of living. We didn't see much on television that
suggested anyone fled oppression.

The most strident of the network critics insist that omissions like that are
calculated, a sure sign that correspondents and producers are captives of the
left. They may indeed be captives, although not the way the critics think. Dan
Rather, for example, is most often singled out as the symbol of all that is
anti-American on television. This is the same Dan Rather who, while anchoring
the CBS coverage of Ronald Reagan's inauguration, choked up and got teary as he
watched the flags and marching bands go by. It is unlikely that Mr. Rather, or
very many of his colleagues, want to tear down the Great Republic.

Nonetheless, they do reflect the dominant journalistic-literary-political
culture. The left wins battles there by default. It is a matter of how it gets
us to look at things. In the television coverage of the Democratic and
Republican National Conventions last summer, for instance, Senator Jesse Helms
and his associates frequently, even routinely, were characterized as right wing;
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, say, or the Rev. Jesse Jackson were never
characterized as left wing. This is more than a matter of of semantics.

The culture attaches something like moral opprobrium to the right wing; it is
racist, imperialistic and cruel. Meanwhile, the left wing is presumed not to
exist, even though its ideas make up the moral and intellectual framework for
the culture. The center does not generate ideas; it only absorbs them. The left
becomes the only game in town this way, while the right, isolated by the moral
stigma assigned to it, becomes the enemy of all good things.

Television news fails when it accepts the culture or allows its values to
dictate the news agenda. The values mean only that one must oppose the right
wing: Support the nuclear freeze and press for affirmative action; oppose
apartheid and rally against missiles. The culture knows what it favors because
it knows what its enemies are against. Issues become indivisible. Journalism is
supposed to make clear they may be separated. It is possible, for example, to
oppose apartheid, even to campaign against it, and still call for missiles.

Give the critics their due on this; journalism may seem suspect. The right wing,
for example, opposes the Sandinistas. Therefore, the culture insists, the
Sandinistas should be supported, or, at the very least, accommodated. A recent
story in The New York Times, however, noted that the Sandinistas had uprooted
some 30,000 people, mostly poor farmers, in northern Nicaragua. The 30,000
people, thought to be sympathetic to the contras, were resettled. If the
relocation had been carried out in El Salvador, say, more attention might have
been paid. Commentators would have declared that El Salvador was not winning the
hearts and minds of people.

Television becomes an accomplice of the left when it allows the culture to
influence its news judgment. The critics' fantasies are fulfilled. As it is,
much of the coverage is restricted anyway. The networks are not allowed into
Afghanistan to report on Soviet bombing. They are not allowed to accompany
Cuban, North Korean or East German military advisers wherever they may be. On
television, our picture of the world is skewed to begin with. This is a point
that upholds the critics.

It is unlikely, however, that it is as skewed as the most extreme critics claim.
Ideology does stain news programs, but not because there is a conscious
conspiracy. Mr. Helms and, to a lesser degree, Mr. Turner may say that
television does unspeakable things, but they are never generous in offering
specifics. Few critics are. Reed Irvine of Accuracy in Media is better than the
rest because he cites individual stories and then says the facts are wrong, but
he loses his advantage by going on and assailing the motives of correspondents.
Indeed, one striking thing about the argument is how little of it involves
journalism. Both sides spend their time competing in goodness.

A recent ABC ''Viewpoint,'' for example, matched six debaters - three pro, three
con - who discussed, among other things, whether ''newsmen have a mind-set that
is basically unpatriotic.'' Some of the participants became genuinely angry.
William Rusher, the publisher of National Review, choked on his own indignation.
Sam Donaldson, the ABC White House correspondent, was beside himself. Did it
matter that a survey of prominent journalists - print and television, the
''media elite'' -found that the overwhelming majority voted for liberal
candidates? Mr. Donaldson's side said it did not. Mr. Rusher's side countered
with an accusation: The phrase Stars Wars was a conscious liberal smear; the
correct term was Strategic Defense Initiative or High Frontier. Neither side
gave an inch.

As television, this was entertaining. As a search for truth it wasn't much.
Meanwhile, new voices, many of them pietistic, are now being heard. They say the
networks are moving to the right in a headlong retreat from liberal thinking.
This argument holds up less well than anything even Mr. Helms has said. There is
still the culture that shapes television.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AGAIN, SIGNS OF PRESIDENTIAL 'SECOND-TERM BLUES'

BYLINE: By Harrison E. Salisbury

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 748 words


There's a popular belief - usually shared by Presidents - that when they win a
second term they are home free and can dictate a national agenda of their own
choosing. Not so. Experience shows that second-term Presidents more often than
not run into heavy weather -even if they win by landslides.

It is not unusual that Ronald Reagan, having won a second term by an
extraordinary margin, is now encountering serious problems in Congress and
public antagonism over such matters as Bitburg and Nicaragua.

The same thing happened to Frank-Harrison E. Salisbury is author of the
forthcoming book ''The Long March: The Untold Story.'' lin D. Roosevelt when he
won his second term in 1936, carrying every state but Maine and Vermont. His
victory launched him into the political fight of his life over his
''court-packing'' plan by which he hoped to override Supreme Court opposition to
New Deal legislation. F.D.R. lost in spite of his enormous majorities in
Congress. Only the outbreak of World War II enabled him to win a third term and
thus obscure political defeats he suffered in his second.

There are more recent, striking examples of ''second-term blues.''

Richard M. Nixon defeated George

McGovern by a margin almost as great as that by which Mr. Reagan trounced Jimmy
Carter. This remarkable victory led directly into the Watergate disaster and Mr.
Nixon's resignation.

Lyndon B. Johnson enjoyed extraordinary success in serving out John F. Kennedy's
unexpired term. But after his tidal wave swamped Barry Goldwater in 1964
everything seemed to go wrong. In March 1968, he said he would not run again.

Harry S. Truman skated to a narrow victory over Thomas E. Dewey in 1948, but his
term proved an agony, with Republicans frustrating him at almost every turn.

Woodrow Wilson won his second term by no very wide margin over Charles Evans
Hughes, quickly took the country into the war he had pledged not to enter and by
the end of his term was an ill, broken man, defeated in almost all his
idealistic objectives.

The only recent President whose second term did not skirt disaster was Dwight D.
Eisenhower. He won by a landslide (more second terms than not are landslides)
and sailed through the second four years with no more difficulty than during his
first four. His experience may provide a clue to the ''second-term blues.'' When
re-elected, he had no new agenda to put before Congress. Both terms were based,
essentially, on collaboration and cooperation between a Republican White House
and a Democratic Congress - a smoothly working team, by and large.

Wherein lie the pitfalls of the second term? They seem to stem from the
political psychology of the White House. A first-term President, whatever his
party or philosophy, usually begins to run for his second term the day he is
sworn in. He tends to postpone or compromise troublesome issues that might cost
him votes four years hence. He uses compromise and conciliation in dealing with
an antagonistic Congress. Once re-elected, particularly if by a landslide, he
tends to go for broke, as F.D.R. did with the court-packing plan. Often he
reorganizes his staff, tightens control, shucks off experienced aides (as did
Mr. Nixon), leaving himself more vulnerable to misreading of public and
political trends.

The landslide second-term President feels, not unnaturally, he has been given a
mandate for his personal goals, forgetting he has probably purposely fuzzed
their sharp edges to attract the broadest public support.

No longer a candidate, the second-termer, abetted by his staff, has a tendency
to ''let Reagan be Reagan.'' The second-termer has four more years in which to
put his mark on history, and tends to throw caution to the winds. He does not
perceive, as fellow politicians do, that from the moment of re-election he is a
lame duck: he has lost much of the power to reward and punish, an essential
ingredient of practical politics.

If, as in Woodrow Wilson's case, the opposing party controls Congress, the
second-termer may head into heavy weather. Mr. Truman, in this situation,
narrowed his aims but, even so, was often frustrated. And Mr. Johnson, as
skilled a Congressional operative as the White House has ever seen, could not
prevail in his own Congress when he persisted in a Vietnam policy that much of
the nation opposed.

It is too early to predict the outcome of the Reagan Presidency, but the first
symptoms of ''second-term blues'' have begun to show their tell-tale mark.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
U.S. Let Off On Agent Orange

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman and Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 207 words


A Federal court judge ruled last week that the United States Government could
not be forced to contribute to a fund set up to aid the families of Vietnam War
veterans who say they were harmed by Agent Orange. But he added that a refusal
to contribute ''may be cruel to the veterans who served their country and feel
that the Government has turned its back on them in this litigation.''

Judge Jack B. Weinstein, who has been presiding over the complex Agent Orange
litigation, also warned that the Government's position ''may be shortsighted in
its refusal to assist contractors who voluntarily produced at Government request
what amounted to critical war supplies during a foreign crisis.''

Manufacturers of Agent Orange have been trying to force the Government to
finance part of the $180 million fund that they agreed to set up last year, but
Judge Weinstein ruled that the Government was not liable because no proof had
been offered of a causal connection between the herbicide and the injuries to
veterans and their families. The judge also dismissed suits last week against
Agent Orange manufacturers by 281 veterans who had chosen not to participate in
the class-action suit that was settled with the establishment of the aid fund.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Louis Malle And 'Alamo Bay'

SECTION: Section 6; Page 102, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 102 words


John Culhane notes that a number of viewers have found Louis Malle's new film
''Alamo Bay'' to be '' 'anti-American' - and, particularly, anti-Texan.''
However, nowhere in the article is it mentioned that an essential tie binding
these ''Anglo'' fishermen together - their ''belonging,'' to use Mr. Culhane's
word and theme - is the fact, established in the film's opening hitchhiking
scene and repeatedly borne out, that these men are veterans of the Vietnam War,
which gives quite a different, credible and far larger dimension to their
outrage and that of the film itself. WILLIAM GADDIS Wainscott, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS;
May 12, 1985

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1362 words

                                                                     Weeks
This                                                        Last        on
Week      FICTION                                           Week      List

1         THINNER, by Richard Bachman. (NAL Books,             1        11
          $12.95.) In this pseudonymous novel by
          Stephen King, a young lawyer finds his body
          mysteriously wasting away.

2         CHAPTERHOUSE: DUNE, by Frank Herbert.                5         4
          (Putnam, $17.95.) A new world rises from the
          Old Empire's ashes in this volume of the
          ''Dune'' series.

 3        INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk.                     4         8
          (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A traditionalist
          Jew's quest for identity in glittery
          contemporary America.

 4        IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon.                2        16
          (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman destroys the
          crime lords who got her an undeserved prison
          term.

 5        THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom                     3         8
          Clancy. (Naval Institute Press, $14.95.) A
          Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the
          United States with the Soviet Union's most
          advanced nuclear secrets.

 6        FAMILY ALBUM, by Danielle Steel.                     7        10
          (Delacorte, $16.95.) A married couple with
          five children cope with the crises of
          contemporary America.

 7        THE CLASS, by Erich Segal.                          10         3
          (Bantam, $17.95.) What happened to five
          members of the class of 1958 after they left
          Harvard Yard.

 8        THE LONELY SILVER RAIN, by John D.                   6         6
          MacDonald. (Knopf, $15.95.) A yacht's
          disappearance, a debutante's murder and
          other puzzles Travis McGee must solve to
          save his life.

 9        QUEENIE, by Michael Korda. (Linden           8         4
          Press/ Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The
          glamorous career of Dawn Avalon, whose life
          was not unlike that of the late Merle
          Oberon.

10        GLITZ, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House,             11        14
           $14.95.) The escapades, romantic and
          melodramatic, of a cop on the lam after a
          murder in Miami.

11        PROOF, by Dick Francis. (Putnam,                     9         8
          $16.95.) A young wine merchant gets caught
          in a scam involving murder and vengeance.

12        2MEN AND ANGELS, by Mary Gordon.                    12         2
          (Random House, $16.95.) The nature of love
          and motherhood reflected in a household
          dominated by two women.

13        A CREED FOR THE THIRD MILLENNIUM,                              1
          by Colleen McCullough. (Harper & Row,
          $17.95.) A man and a woman set out to
          salvage a spiritually exhausted America in
          the not-too-distant future.

14        THE SICILIAN, by Mario Puzo.                                  23
          (Linden Press/ Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A
          fictional life of Salvatore Giuliano, the
          Sicilian bandit of the 1940's.

15        THE FINISHING SCHOOL, by Gail                                 11
          Godwin. (Viking, $16.95.) A young girl's
          relationship with an older woman leads to
          her mentor's downfall.

          Nonfiction

 1        IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee                    1        28
          Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
          $19.95.) The rise of the automobile
          executive from immigrants' son to top jobs
          at Ford and Chrysler.

 2        SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell             3         6
          Cowan and Melvyn Kinder. (Clarkson N.
          Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists
          analyze the successes and failures of modern
          women in looking for acceptable men.

 3        BREAKING WITH MOSCOW, by Arkady N.                   2        11
          Shevchenko.
          (Knopf, $18.95.) The autobiography of the
          highest-ranking Soviet official ever to
          defect.

 4        LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia.                 5        37
          (Slack/Holt, $13.95.) Suggestions for
          ''setting our priorities right in order to
          enjoy life to the fullest.''

 5        ONCE UPON A TIME, by Gloria                          8         2
          Vanderbilt. (Knopf, $16.95.) Memories of the
          first 17 years of a ''poor little rich
          girl.''

 6*       THE COURAGE TO CHANGE, by Dennis                     4        13
          Wholey. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.)
          Conversations with two dozen people about
          their problems with alcoholism.

 7        THE SOONG DYNASTY, by Sterling                       6         4
          Seagrave. (Harper & Row, $22.50.) The
          tangled lives of Charlie Soong and his six
          children, who shaped much of China's modern
          history.

 8        THE BLOOD OF ABRAHAM, by Jimmy Carter.               7         3
          (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The problems of
          the Middle East and what can be done about
          them, as seen by the former President.

 9        THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard                9        36
          Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The author of
          ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' tells of his
          search for love.

10        A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom                               1
          Peters and Nancy Austin (Random House,
          $19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in
          management.

11        ''SURELY YOU'RE JOKING, MR. FEYNMAN,''              10         9
          by Richard P. Feynman. (Norton, $15.95.) A
          Nobel laureate in physics recounts his
          curious misadventures inside and outside his
          profession.

12        A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.          11       129
          (Harper & Row, $13.50.) Light verse and
          drawings.

13        MOSES THE KITTEN, by James Herriot.                           30
          (St. Martin's, $9.95.) A waif kitten is
          adopted by a pig; illustrated.

14        SON OF THE MORNING STAR, by Evan S. Connell.        15        22
          (North Point, $20.) A biography of Custer
          that is also a history of the Plains Indian
          wars.

15        NO MORE VIETNAMS, by Richard Nixon.                            1
          (Arbor House, $14.95.) The former
          President's view of 10 years of change in
          American foreign policy.

          Advice and Self-Help

 1        NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen.                    1        23
          (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
          estate with little or no money; revised
          edition of a 1980 book.

 2        DR. ABRAVANEL'S BODY TYPE PROGRAM                    3         3
           FOR HEALTH, FITNESS AND NUTRITION, by
          Elliot D. Abravanel and Elizabeth A. King.
          (Bantam, $15.95.) ''A total health program
          tailored for the individual.''

 3        WEIGHT WATCHERS QUICK START PROGRAM                  2        17
          COOKBOOK, by Jean Nidetch. (NAL Books,
          $17.95.) A cuisine that slims.

 4        WHAT THEY DON'T TEACH YOU AT HARVARD                 4        34
          BUSINESS SCHOOL, by Mark H. McCormack.
          (Bantam, $16.95.) ''Street-smart'' notes and
          tips.

 5        THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.                   5         6
          (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for delicious
          dishes prepared at moderate cost.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.
In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales
in this category are not generally large enough to make a longer list
statistically reliable. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its
sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

HOME TRUTHS: Sixteen Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $17.95.) Set
mostly in the 1940's and 50's, these stories are sensitive to place, history and
identity and to the notions of exile and return that keep popping up in this
Canadian writer's work.

CHOOSING ELITES, by Robert Klitgaard. (Basic Books, $19.95.) An economist's
study of admissions to Harvard shows that important discriminations are made
with little or no policy or rationale.

KRUGER'S ALP, by Christopher Hope. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $15.95.) A South
African's very angry novel in the form of a dream allegory about - or against -
apartheid, doublethink, authoritarian power and the South African way of life.

SELECTED LETTERS OF E. M. FORSTER: Volume Two, 1921-1970, edited by Mary Lago
and P. N. Furbank (Harvard, $20.) As a novelist, Forster fell silent after 1924
and ''A Passage to India,'' but in his correspondence he fought to the end an
urbane rear-guard action in support of friendship, liberalism and culture.

A HISTORY OF ARCHITECTURE: Settings and Rituals, by Spiro

Kostof. (Oxford, $45.) The broader theme of this long and brilliant guided tour
from prehistoric caves to the present is the embodiment in architecture of the
culture, economy, politics, technology and ideas of its time and place of
origin.

REASONS TO LIVE, by Amy Hempel. (Knopf, $11.95.) Spare, tough, elliptical and
sometimes wrenching short stories about grieving, dying, feeling numb or just
drifting about California.

DUST TRACKS ON A ROAD: An Autobiography, by Zora Neale

Hurston. (University of Illinois, Cloth, $22.95. Paper, $8.95.) A new edition,
with previously unpublished material, of the 1942 autobiography of the black
anthropologist and novelist whose classic standing has only lately been widely
recognized.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Frederika Randall

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 301 words


DAYS BETWEEN STATIONS. By Steve Erickson. (Poseidon, $15.95.) Sometime in the
not too distant future, the planet Earth is rapidly going to the dogs. Los
Angeles is swept by sandstorms that darken the sky and send dunes crawling up
the buildings. A pall of smoke hangs over Paris, where the lights have gone out
and bonfires burn out of control. The canals of Venice have inexplicably dried
up, and the streets, smelling of garbage, are periodically plunged into deep
fog. The landscape is fabulous, bleak; the lovers who travel through it, Michel
and Lauren, are just the opposite - romantically alienated and drunk on their
own eroticism. There is a healthy dose of cinematic surrealism in the Los
Angeles writer Steve Erickson's moody first novel, along with a decidedly
unhealthy dose of overwrought ''Fleurs du Mal'' bad dreams. Lauren, wife of a
Vietnam veteran and world-class cyclist named Jason, stumbles into an adventure
with the estranged, degenerate Michel (or Adrien - a victim of amnesia, he isn't
sure which). Tortured by the past he cannot remember, with only a reel of film
for a clue, he makes a voyage via flashbacks to Paris of the 1920's, where his
grandfather is filming an epic of the death of Marat. With the magical ease of a
movie that floats back and forth in space and time, the author at one point sets
Lauren adrift on a houseboat from the Seine out onto the Atlantic, through the
straits of Gibralter to meet Jason in the desiccated Venice. She arrives wearing
a large gold ring on her ankle; she doesn't remember why. The hapless and often
witless characters in this richly convoluted story finally prove far less
interesting than the vision of a world where cultural memory has dried up and
there is nothing left but a series of powerful, disconnected celluloid images.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By New gate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 697 words


A man in a subway car shoots a punk and disappears. The news media make a big
thing of it. The Mayor of New York demands that the killer be brought to
justice. But public opinion is strongly on the side of the killer. Sound
familiar? It should. You read about it in Brian Garfield's ''Death Wish,''
published in 1972, and then millions saw the film starring Charles Bronson. But
those two were make-believe. In the case of Jerry Oster's SWEET JUSTICE (Harper
& Row, $13.95), life seems to have imitated art. The book was written before
Bernhard Goetz shot those youths in a New York subway car when he thought, or
claims he thought, he was being threatened.

''Sweet Justice'' starts with three punks in a subway car molesting a young
woman. A bystander tells them to stop. When they start dragging the woman from
the train, he shoots and kills the leader. Then he vaults from the train, which
is pulling out of the station, and disappears.

The book is a New York City police procedural. Two very competent detectives are
put on the case. They are taken off and reassigned when an even more
attention-getting murder takes place - the killing of a brilliant, beautiful,
tough, unscrupulous anchorwoman on a nightly news show. Two sets of murders
ensue. One, the ballistics experts determine, was committed with the same gun
used to kill the subway molester. The other set, in which the killer leaves
messages, is obviously the work of a psychotic.

As it turns out, the two cases are related, and both have their roots in
Vietnam. The plotting is a bit complicated, but Mr. Oster knows exactly what he
is doing, and at the end things fall beautifully into place.

''Sweet Justice'' is a superb piece of work. It is realistic, with some pretty
rough language, but the author has a faithful ear, and all the dialogue sounds
unforced. The writing moves with an air of supreme confidence. In the big, fat
Lieut. Jacob Neuman, the author has created a really memorable New York cop - a
man with ideals, yet a pragmatist who understands the system within which he
operates. Perhaps he talks too much - but, then again, he admits it.

The other characters in the book are fleshed out with equal conviction,
especially the subway killer (for whom, clearly, Mr. Oster has more than a
sneaking sympathy). Altogether, ''Sweet Justice'' is one of the most brilliant
procedurals of the last few years, and it will be a scandal if it is not put up
next year for an Edgar nomination.

Jacob Asch is big, tough, cynical and very much the man of action. THREE WITH A
BULLET by Arthur Lyons (Holt, $13.95) is the eighth Asch book (the series
started in 1974 with ''At the Hands of Another''), and it displays the Western
private eye at his best.

Here he is looking into the Los Angeles rock music scene. He has been hired by a
promoter who thinks he is being sabotaged by somebody in his organization. The
murder of an unattractive character who had been a rock star follows, and Asch's
client is suspected of being the killer.

Along the way, a good deal of information is provided about the ins and outs of
popular music. Mr. Lyons has done his homework, and his facts are accurate. He
has no illusions about the worth of most of the music or its practitioners.
There is some hectic action in ''Three With a Bullet,'' but it never degenerates
into sadism or mayhem for the sake of mayhem. And the writing is as stylish as
in the previous Asch books. This is one of the best in the series.

Gerald Petievich attracted attention about four years ago with his first book
about Treasury agents. He followed up with two books, and now his fourth, THE
QUALITY OF THE INFORMANT (Arbor House, $14.95), is out. Again we have Charles
Carr and his sidekick, Jack Kelly, chasing after counterfeiters. Again we have
slice-of-life dialogue and hit-and-run sex. Again we have the detested
protect-your-back, go-by-the-book superior. Again Carr bends the law a bit.

The formula seems to be wearing thin. There is little in ''The Quality of the
Informant'' that has not been probed in the previous Petievich books, and
perhaps the time has come for the author to take stock before repeating himself
once more.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lynn Redgrave (NYT/Jack Manning)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE COMMUNIST WERE STUNNED TOO

BYLINE: By Fox Butterfield; Fox Butterfield, the chief of the Boston bureau of
The New York Times, was a Times correspondent in Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1322 words


THE FALL OF SAIGON Scenes From the Sudden End of a Long War. By David Butler.
Illustrated. 510 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $17.95.

FOR those of us in Saigon on April 29, 1975, our day began at 4 A.M. with a
North Vietnamese artillery and rocket barrage against Tan Son Nhut Airport and
ended ignominiously with our flight by helicopter to Navy ships in the South
China Sea. In a span of hours, America had lost its first war. When I clambered
into a United States Air Force CH-46 helicopter that afternoon, I felt a mixture
of relief, exhaustion, fear (not long before, I had seen a South Vietnamese
plane shot down by a Communist heat-seeking missile, a bad omen) and anger. The
anger was directed at the American Ambassador to South Vietnam, Graham A.
Martin, who I believed had betrayed many Vietnamese by stubbornly delaying their
evacuation while he vainly hoped to avoid defeat.

A decade has now passed, a ''decent interval,'' in Henry Kissinger's phrase, for
reaching judgment about why South Vietnam collapsed and how Americans handled
their defeat. David Butler was another witness who couldn't forget, and he has
offered his own account in ''The Fall of Saigon: Scenes From the Sudden End of a
Long War.'' Mr. Butler left his job as an editor of Playboy and moved to Saigon
in 1974, well after the glory days for journalists, where he worked as a
stringer for NBC radio. In ''The Fall of Saigon,'' he has written a detailed and
at times poignant journalistic re-creation of those terrible last 55 days,
beginning with the North Vietnamese attack on Ban Me Thuot in the Central
Highlands that unleashed the debacle.

Imitating the format employed so successfully in ''Is Paris Burning?'' by Larry
Collins and Dominique Lapierre, Mr. Butler presents some extraordinary vignettes
from what he aptly describes as the Fellini-like atmosphere of that sad country.
There is Gen. Homer Smith, the head of the United States Defense Attache's
office, driving over to see Gen. Cao Van Vien, the chairman of the South
Vietnamese Joint General Staff, after the Communist seizure of Ban Me Thuot in
early March, the worst loss since the Tet offensive of 1968. General Smith
inquired about the effect of the battle, but General Vien did not even mention
that President Nguyen Van Thieu had secretly ordered his forces to abandon the
entire Central Highlands. It was the most momentous and miscalculated decision
of the entire war. The Highlands commander, Gen. Phan Van Phu, didn't tell his
own troops either. He just flew out, setting off the panic that would spread
like a contagion and cause cities to collapse before the Communists even
attacked.

Then there is Capt. Do Duc Cuong, a decent, even heroic South Vietnamese
intelligence officer whose family had been killed by the Vietcong when he was a
boy. His commanding officers kept deserting their troops, at Hue, Danang and
finally near Saigon, but Captain Cuong kept trying to find someone to report to,
to rally any soldiers he came across. In the end, disgusted by the loss of Hue
without a fight, he said, ''Our generals gave it to the dogs and the chickens.''

Or there is Big Minh, Gen. Duong Van Minh, the supposedly neutralist leader who
was made South Vietnam's President two days before the end in hopes of arranging
a negotiated settlement. When on the morning of April 29, with North Vietnamese
troops in Saigon's outskirts, the French Ambassador encouraged him to declare a
unilateral cease-fire, the French-trained General Minh replied: ''No. . . . I am
a French general. Your military code does not permit me to surrender under these
conditions.''

There is also the final act, the last 11 marines left on the roof of the
American Embassy. For some reason it took almost two hours to send one last
helicopter to rescue them as dawn broke on the morning of April 30, and they
grew apprehensive that they had been abandoned. As so many Vietnamese were.
Vietnamese on the street were sniping at them, and when other Vietnamese tried
to reach through a door to the roof, the marines grabbed their arms and jammed
them against the broken glass. When a helicopter finally arrived, the marines
tossed tear gas grenades over the edge of the building. They forgot that a
chopper's blades suck up air. ''So the last official Americans out of Vietnam,''
Mr. Butler writes, ''all flew blind out of Saigon.''

But despite these marvelous anecdotes, there is something missing in ''The Fall
of Saigon.'' As the book's subtitle suggests, Mr. Butler contents himself with
mere snapshots and falls short of any real analysis. Too many of the vignettes
are trivial; for example, Mr. Butler seems infatuated with a Vietnamese rock
band called The Uptight. The book also suffers from a certain lack of
originality. Much of the most important part - the dramatic cable traffic
between Ambassador Martin and Secretary of State Kissinger, for instance, and
the squabbling within the American mission over the evacuation - was recounted
by Frank Snepp, the former Central Intelligence Agency officer in Saigon, in
''Decent Interval,'' published in 1977. A little-publicized 1983 book by Arnold
R. Isaacs, ''Without Honor,'' offered a more thoughtful and coherent account of
the end of the Vietnam War.

In retrospect, there are no big mysteries about who lost Vietnam. Everyone had a
hand in it. Mr. Kissinger, for one. After the Paris Peace Accords of 1973, for
which he accepted the Nobel Peace Prize, the United States had no real policy
toward Vietnam, only the pretense of one, based on a paradox. We had withdrawn
our armed forces from Vietnam, and the public had lost any interest in Vietnam's
future, but officially we were still committed to preserving South Vietnam. It
was an untenable situation, and Hanoi saw through it.

Congress deserves its share of the blame too. In cutting military aid to Vietnam
from $2.5 billion in fiscal 1973 to a projected $700 million in 1975, it reduced
Saigon's forces to only 2 percent of the funds and supplies American soldiers
had got in 1968. The cuts bred defeatism among South Vietnamese.

The largest slice of responsibility rests with the South Vietnamese themselves.
It was their system's inherent weaknesses - poor leadership, corruption, the
lack of any unifying goal beyond the Confucian ideal of the family - that were
suddenly exposed after President Thieu ordered the Highlands abandoned. S TILL,
given the rout - which, Mr. Butler shows, the C.I.A. station chief recognized
from the beginning - there remains a troublesome question. Why did Ambassador
Martin so vigorously oppose efforts to evacuate Vietnamese whose ties to the
Americans put them at risk? He has always claimed he wanted to prevent the panic
that would have been caused by starting the pullout too soon. But even as late
as the afternoon of April 29, with the helicopters already in action, the
embassy deliberately failed to notify Vietnamese employees that there were two
huge barges waiting on the Saigon River capable of taking out 16,000 people. In
the end the barges left half-empty, filled only with people who found them by
accident. The embassy's planning for the evacuation was so slipshod that when I
walked to the apartment building where newsmen had been instructed to gather
discreetly, the doors were locked. We had to wait outside in the street,
attracting a crowd of Vietnamese, some of whom crammed into a convoy of American
military buses with us when they finally arrived. Our driver proceeded to get
lost in Saigon's streets.

In the aftermath, the Communists were almost as stunned by their victory as the
South Vietnamese were by their defeat. David Butler quotes a North Vietnamese
soldier as asking a Saigon resident, ''How could an army from a city like this
not fight for it?'' Another North Vietnamese soldier remarked: ''Why did you let
us win? It will be terrible now. We can never understand a society like this.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of American punching a Vietnamese trying to board an overloaded
plane in Nha Trang, Vietnam, in 1975 (United Press International)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 FAMILIES KEEP ARCHIE IN STEP WITH ERA

BYLINE: By JUSTINE KAPLAN

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 21, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1376 words

DATELINE: MAMARONECK


ON an industrial side street of this tree-lined town, tucked between storage
warehouses and beverage shipping plants, the two-story brick and cement
headquarters of Archie Enterprises looms, unassumingly. Downstairs, old artist
page proofs depicting the ageless Archie comic-book characters lie stuffed in
manila envelopes amid an assortment of employees' sports cars and twine-wrapped
piles of cartoons.

Upstairs, beyond the welcoming cardboard statue of the company's namesake,
history is in the making.

For 44 years, two families have brought contemporary America to America's youth
- hula hoops and miniskirts, peace marches and peer pressure, punk music,
feminism, drugs and divorce.

Archie Andrews, the bewildered teen-age Lothario inspired by the Andy Hardy
movie series of the 1930's, has junked his 40-year-old, rickety, red jalopy and
is now driving a 1967 Mustang convertible. Recently, Big Moose, the
not-too-swift Riverdale High School lunkhead who floored any male that came near
his girlfriend Midge, was found to suffer from dyslexia, a reading impairment
that causes him to be learning disabled, not stupid.

American social progress is historically documented on the shelves of the
gray-walled offices here, bound in thick green volumes growing yellow with age.
Archie and the gang still appear in the same malt shop, on the same beach and at
the same school as they did during World War II, but the transformation of time
is reflected in their dress, their language, their hairstyles and their fads.

They have peacefully protested against the Vietnam War, faced the drug culture,
worked to stamp out pollution and inflation, joined the computer revolution,
discussed negotiations between the superpowers and subtly commented on racism,
prejudice and famine.

Archie comics were found in foxholes during World War II and can be found today
in classrooms, doctors offices and even on the office wall of a former Internal
Revenue Service commissioner who requested a copy of one comic strip that poked
fun at the I.R.S. and tax shelters.

''If cardigan sweaters are in, Archie will be wearing cardigan sweaters; if
young people are wind surfing, Archie will be, too,'' said the chairman and
co-publisher, Michael Silberkleit, who joined his father, Louis, and his
father's partner, John Goldwater, the founders of Archie Enterprises, as soon as
he graduated from college.

''We don't lead kids astray, we never have and we never will'' said Richard
Goldwater, the president and co-publisher, who joined his father, John, upon
graduation. ''Archie is not Robert Redford, and he survives very well.''

David Silberkleit, the marketing director, endearingly referred to by his father
and his partner as ''vice president of prodding and pushing,'' leans forward
from his reclining chair and grimaces. ''Everyone knows the real Archie goes
home and reads The Wall Street Journal. His innocence is just a trick to get the
girls.''

Laughter is what keeps Archie Comics Publications Inc. going. Three generations
of Silberkleits and Goldwaters work under the same roof, sharing ideas and a
wily sense of humor with a staff of artists, editors and writers, who comb
contemporary magazines for fashion trends and furniture styles and scan letters
written to the company by readers to stay abreast of contemporary concerns.

Archie was born in 1941, during the golden age of comic books featuring
superheroes like Superman, Batman and Captain Marvel. ''Superman is Superman, he
flies through the air,'' said Richard Goldwater. ''My father thought, what about
a normal man character. Archie is not from outer space.''

With a concept firmly in place (John Goldwater had a school friend named Archie
''with an affinity for girls''), John Goldwater and Richard Silberkleit, who
already operated a comics business in Manhattan that became Archie's original
headquarters, turned to their staff and asked them to come up with an Archie
strip.

John Goldwater wanted it set in his homeland, middle America, in a small town
where a winning high school football team drew every resident. Vic Bloom was
selected as the writer and Bob Montana, a former vaudeville performer, was
chosen as the artist. He drew a bucktoothed, wavy-haired, knicker-clad, carrot
top who carried a slingshot in his pocket - a crude but no-less-impulsive
version of the 17-year-old Archie we know today.

Born also was the sweet and demure and blond Betty Cooper; Betty's rival for
Archie's attentions, the sophisticated and fickle debutante Veronica Lodge and
her stuffy millionaire father; wise-guy Reggie Mantle; the strict and aging
teacher Miss Grundy; Riverdale High School principal Mr. Weatherbee; Coach
Kleats; Pop Tate, owner of Pop's Choklit Shoppe; Miss Beazly, the cafeteria
worker; Mr. Svenson, the Swedish janitor; Big Ethel; the less than attractive
girl who longs for girl-hater, food-lover Jughead Jones; Jughead's oversized
canine, Hotdog; Archie's perpetually perturbed parents Fred and Mary Andrews;
Big Moose and Midge. In an effort to keep Archie contemporary, a host of
minority characters were injected into the strip in the 1970's.

The Archie comic books were an instant success.

In 1945 a radio show was broadcast that lasted for seven years and in 1968
Warner Brothers released ''The Archie Show,'' which featured a TV
cartoon-sequence singing group, The Archies, that received gold records for the
singles ''Sugar Sugar'' and ''Jingle Jangle.'' The Archies were actually studio
musicians and the group lasted on CBS for eight years. Also included in the
show, which was later called ''The Archie Comedy Hour,'' was Sabrina, the
teen-age witch, and Josie and the Pussycats.

''The Archie comic strip filled a niche,'' said Michael Silberkleit, ''the need
for the girl-next-door type of believable, character.''

''Americana,'' said Richard Goldwater, ''Archie is Americana.''

The Archie empire then published Archie comic digests, educational and religious
Archie comic books, and daily and Sunday comic strips that now run in more than
600 newspapers.

When Glamour magazine published the results of a survey in which female readers
were asked whether they would rather be Betty or Veronica, Veronica won ''by a
mile,'' said the elder Mr. Goldwater.''

''Who wouldn't want to be rich and beautiful and have the attention of all the
men?'' said John Goldwater. But, when asked who Archie would choose if forced to
make a decision between the two girls, Mr. Goldwater sighed. ''If you met my
wife, you would know the answer. She is a blonde.''

Merchandising efforts are growing strong now. Capturing 10 percent of the
comic-book industry (Marvel Comics has 50 percent and DC Comics 30 percent;
another 10 percent among other publishers) by selling three million comic books
internationally every two months, the multimillion dollar privately owned
company is selling Archie toys, games, clothing, greeting cards, makeup and
movie rights.

A full-page advertisement in The Wall Street Journal a few years ago used a
large picture of Jughead Jones with the heading, ''Do you ever get the feeling
this is who is handling your insurance overseas?'' The lazy pal of Archie
appeared again with Archie and Veronica on the cover of a 1980 issue of Atlantic
Monthly, nonchalantly declaring the Scholastic Aptitude Tests to be culturally
biased.

The company's most recent venture, which will reach the newsstands later this
month, will be full-page public-service announcements in its comic books showing
photographs of missing children. In the effort to locate missing children, these
messages follow the lead of ads on dairy milk cartons, highway toll tickets,
subway posters and natural-gas bills. The Archie characters will be seen hanging
over the photographs, asking readers to help find the missing children and
offering safety tips about strangers.

''If these ads help to find just one of these children, it's money well spent,''
said Michael Silberkleit. He emphasized that safety advice given to children in
the ads was couched in light terms. ''You can't preach to children,'' he said.
He pointed a finger at his son, David. 'The only way I got him to do anything
when he was a kid was to make it fun and to let him think it was his idea.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Goldberg and Silberkleit families (NYT/Joyce Dopkeen);
Photo of some comic books the families have created; Photo of Dan DeCarlo, a
staff member since the 1950's

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FLORIDA JOURNAL;
A BRIDGE, BIG INSECT AND TAXES

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, May 12


Five years ago this month the Summit Venture, a 608-foot freighter, was sliding
through a Tampa Bay shipping channel in a blinding squall when she struck and
collapsed a central piling on the Sunshine Skyway Bridge.

A 1,400-foot section of the bridge fell, and 35 people died when their cars and
trucks plunged into the bay.

Now a new bridge is being raised, and this graceful, cable-stayed superstructure
is likely to become a landmark and a tourist attraction.

The design, by Jean Muller, is similar to his Brotonne Bridge in Normandy, which
opened in 1977 with a 1,050-foot central main span. Mr. Muller's Skyway bridge,
which will be illuminated at night once it opens next spring, has a main span of
1,200 feet.

Settlers move to Florida at a pace estimated by demographers at 788 a day. Those
now arriving are usually mentally prepared to face the months of hot, humid
weather.

But once transplanted Northerners come face-to-antenna with a hulking Florida
cockroach, or more precisely a Palmetto bug, they are stricken with instant
nostalgia for the breed of German roaches back North, which seem wee and cuddly
by comparison. The discovery that these behemoths fly can be breathtaking,
especially if it occurs within the confines of a small space like a food pantry.

There are also surprises like fire ants with incendiary bites, citrus-attacking
Medflies and families of small lizards that take on the status of domestic pets
after one finds that they consume other bugs. Having a few of these small
reptiles around the house is as good as having a good mouser in other climes.

As if things were not bad enough, scientists now report that a ''super termite''
that first appeared in Florida several years ago has firmly established itself
in infestations in condominium corridors between Miami and Fort Lauderdale.

The Formosan termite can chew its way through almost anything to get to wood,
including plaster, plastic, lead, copper and asphalt. According to one report,
they have invaded 19 of 25 high-rise condominiums in one beach community since
being discovered in 1980. In one tall building they started at the roof and ate
their way to the ground floor. A colony can grow to two to three million members
within a 300-foot area.

Formosan termites have been spotted in other states and may soon spread through
the Southeast, according to entomologists.

In Orlando there are signs that a spider considered more poisonous than the
black widow may have arrived. Discovery of a few Mediterranean recluse spiders
has led to concern that their more venomous cousin, the brown recluse, is
around, University of Florida scientists say. Victims suffering brown
recluse-type bites have been hospitalized, but no one has produced a specimen of
the spider.

With all the veterans' groups meeting to celebrate the ends of wars in Europe
and Vietnam, the somber gathering at Fort Lauderdale could have been another
weary, battle-scarred legion of front-line warriors.

Between mugs of beer and barbeque sandwiches, they talked about the casualties
of the latest campaign and dreaded the next.

''For these men it was six-day weeks of constant pressure, dealing with drunks,
complaints, traffic -right there on the front line,'' said Mike Doran, a
District Chief in the Fort Lauderdale police, who was in charge of the beach
strip in the onslaught of 350,000 collegians on spring break this year.

At the party for members of his force, Police Chief Ron Cochran handed out
T-shirts reading, ''We Survived Spring Break.''

Seminole Indians were not indigenous to south Florida when the first white men
came in 1567 and found a placid village of Tequestas, a shell-gathering tribe,
on the shores of what is now Miami. Seminoles were pushed deeper into the
Florida swamps from the north by Andrew Jackson's troops and later, in the
Second Seminole Wars, by troops sent to move them into Indian territories in the
West.

Since 1970, when the Indian Claims Commission awarded $12 million to the 1,500
Seminoles still living in Florida as compensation for land taken from the tribe,
peace has reigned.

Now the Seminoles are up in arms again, this time because some political leaders
want to repeal a 1979 decision exempting cigarettes sold on Seminole
reservations from state taxes. Behind the move is the realization that the state
is losing $15 million in taxes while the tribe is getting $3.5 million in
profits.

Non-Indian middlemen awarded contracts by the tribe to supply and operate some
of the 20 smoke shops on two Seminole reservations are pocketing $12 million,
according to legislators who want to limit the tax-exemption to cigarettes sold
to the Indians. Non-Indians and tourists account for most of the purchases at
the smoke shops, buying cartons at $2.10 less than the normal price.

James Billie, chairman of the tribe, told legislators recently that before the
tax exemption most Seminoles lived in squalor. ''I was out there wrestling
alligators, my wife was selling trinkets,'' he told them, adding that the $3.5
million profit goes to improve reservation schools, housing and social services.

So far no compromise has been worked out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 14, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

POLICE DROP BOMB ON RADICALS' HOME IN PHILADELPHIA

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1982 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, May 13


A state police helicopter this evening dropped a bomb on a house occupied by an
armed group after a 24-hour siege involving gun battles.

A 90-minute shootout this morning came after a week of growing tension between
the city and the group, known as Move. Residents in the western Philadelphia
neighborhood had complained about the group for years. The only known survivors
from within the house were a woman and a child.

The fire spread to 50 to 60 other houses in the neighborhood, said the Fire
Commissioner, William Richmond. He declared the fire under control about 11:40
P.M.

Aimed to Hit Bunker

The Police Commissioner, Gregore Sambor, said tonight that it was was his
decision to drop the charge, a square package of explosives designed to destroy
a bunker atop the house and drop it through to the second floor. He said the
charge succeeded in eliminating the threat from the roof, but touched off the
fire.

Steve Harmon, a resident of the area, said: ''Drop a bomb on a residential area?
I never in my life heard of that. It's like Vietnam.''

The Move group, which says it disdains modern technology and materialism and the
establishment, was involved in a confrontation with the police in August 1978.
One police officer was killed in that shootout. Nine members of the group were
convicted on murder charges and are in prison. The group has been demanding
their release.

The Police Commissioner said that the authorities did not know whether there
were any bodies in the house.

One Officer Injured

Commissioner Sambor said that one police officer whom he did not identify was
bruised in the back by gunfire. ''And the only thing that saved him was his body
armor,'' the Comissioner said.

The police said earlier that at least three officers had suffered slight
injuries, including smoke inhalation, exhaustion and hyperventilation.

No other casualties were reported, but the whereabouts of some occupants of the
house were unknown.

Mayor W. Wilson Goode said this evening that a 9-year-old left the building with
a woman, identified as Ramona Africa, shortly after the fire began. The child,
who was taken to a hospital, told the police there were four or five adults and
four or five children in the house when the bomb was dropped, the Mayor said at
a City Hall news conference. The child was not identified, but the police said
the woman was in custody.

Leo Brooks, the City Managing Director, said tonight at the scene that one of
the first things the authorities wanted to do Tuesday was to search the charred
area.

A Fire Department officer, who requested anonymity, said the authorities did not
know where the other children were.

Mayor 'Saddened' by Fire

The Mayor said that three armed adults had been in an alley behind the house,
where they were firing at the police. He said there were no known deaths and
that he was heartened by that, but he was ''saddened'' by reports that many
homes had been destroyed by the blaze spreading from the house that was bombed.

A Fire Department officer at the scene this evening had said houses burned on
both sides of the street in the 6200 block of Osage Avenue, where the Move
headquarters was situated, and houses in the block behind it on Pine Street.

The Mayor, when asked why the bomb was dropped, said, ''It was an attempt to
remove the bunker,'' the structure on the roof of the house.

He repeatedly took responsibility for the outcome, although he said he had given
his department heads complete freedom to decide on the tactics they thought
best. ''As Mayor of this city I accept full and total responsibility,'' Mr.
Goode said. ''There was no way to avoid it. No way to extract ourselves from
that situation except by armed confrontation.''

Arrived With Warrants

Mr. Brooks, the City Managing Director, said tonight that the police arrived at
the house this morning with arrest warrants for four individuals and asked them
to come out of the house. He said the police had promised them there would be no
firing.

Commissioner Sambor, according to Mr. Brooks, gave them 15 minutes to come out.
They refused, Mr. Brooks said, and responded with ''vitriolic talk'' over a
loudspeaker and then started firing.

''We took a significant number of rounds in our positions,'' said Mr. Brooks.

In the siege this morning, Commissioner Sambor said, the police started
returning the fire, with frequent lulls. He said the Move people refused all
overtures of family, friends and clergy to mediate and to attempt to talk them
into coming out. ''At no time did the police fire in an offensive posture,'' he
said. He said the bunker on the roof had wooden beams and steel plates, and that
it would not budget despite the authorities' use of water cannon.

Commissioner Sambor said the bomb was dropped to flush out people who were
firing at the police. ''If you were in a firefight and the opposition held the
higher ground,'' he said, ''what would you do?''

Fire Starts to Spread

Fire engulfed the house hit by the bomb and spread to neighboring row houses,
but firefighters delayed attempts to battle the blaze for at least an hour out
of fear that they would become targets of any surviving members of the heavily
armed group.

''There is no question in my mind that from the time the fire started until this
time there was a real danger'' for the firefighters, the Mayor said at the news
conference.

Mr. Brooks said that four people came out of the back of the Move house during
the blaze. Two of them were the woman and the child. He said they were with
another woman and a man.

The man fired at the police, Mr. Brooks said. He said the police did not return
the fire, and the man and the woman disappeared back into the smoke.

Commissioner Sambor said earlier that the police were looking for three armed
men who might be in alleys or tunnels dug from under the house.

After the fire broke out, the police reported gunshots from houses behind the
one under siege. Police officers kicked down doors and searched houses in the
four-block area around the Move group's house, which had been evacuated Sunday
after the police began trying to evict the armed group.

The police were acting to clear the group out in response to neighbors'
complaints of filthy conditions in the house and nightlong amplified lectures
from Move members.

After the bomb was dropped at 5:27 P.M. the fire sent thick dark smoke that
could be seen throughout the city this evening for two hours after the charge
was dropped.

Helicopter Circles House

The state police helicopter circled the house once, then dove toward it. The
bomb, dropped by a city police officer, according to the police, fell near the
structure on the roof of the house. Seconds later it exploded, sending pieces of
wood and metal flying through the air. Flames began immediately. Within minutes
the roof was ablaze.

Mr. Richmond, the Fire Commissioner, said tonight that at the fire's peak it was
rated six alarms with about 60 pieces of equipment in use.

As he stood on the sidewalk on this humid night within sight of the dying
flames, Mr. Richmond said he had been in the Fire Department 25 years and never
had he seen so many houses ''totally destroyed'' in a single fire.

He said the worst fire in Philadelphia was an 12 1/2-alarm fire in an occupied
eight-story apartment building on Jan. 1, 1963.

Mr. Richmond said the fire today was ''one of the toughest I ever fought.'' He
said it was one where a firefighter would fear for his life.

''We came out here with the very purpose of not getting anybody hurt,'' he said.
''We regret what happened, but we are not going home with any firefighters with
bullet wounds tonight, and I thank God for that.''

The confrontation became violent a few minutes before 6 A.M. when members of
Move fired on officers, the police said. The first sporadic shots soon gave way
to an incessant rattle of automatic and semi-automatic gunfire that echoed
through the neighborhood.

Thick clouds of smoke and tear gas coursed through narrow streets while bullets
glanced off buildings and whizzed overhead.

Bystanders, who had been watching the police assemble their firepower, ran for
cover coughing and sneezing.

Residents said they were threatened with arrest if they refused to leave. Most
were reported to have been moved to a shelter in the area.

Police officials and community activists have negotiated intermittently with the
group for the last two days, but Move leaders refused repeated requests from the
police to leave the house.

Michael Nutter, an assistant to a city councilman who is a member of the team
that had been negotiating with the group, said, ''They've said they're willing
to die for whatever happens.''

''This is a group of people whose philosophy is based on conflict and
confrontation,'' Mr. Nutter added. Before the confrontation, Mr. Goode said: ''I
am totally convinced the group is bent on violent confrontation. I pray to
Almighty God the children will not be hurt.''

Theodore Price, 50, a retired military man who lives on Pine Street, said the
police asked his family, including his wife and three children to vacate on
Sunday. he said they went to the Green Valley Inn to spend the night. He had
planned to go back to the house this morning to get clothes, but was not
permitted to pass the police lines.

He said he was not concerned but this afternoon he pointed out to a firefighter
that the fire appeared to be spreading. His wife and daughter were a friend's
home in the nieghborhood, and his two sons were wandering about.

The hard part, Mr. Price said, was losing the personal items, including thing he
had brought back from his years overseas.

Until the fire he said he thought the city was handling the situation properly.

Tensions in Neighborhood

Three years ago the group moved into the neat neighborhood of tree-lined
streets, one block east of the leading edge of Philadelphia's western suburbs.

Responding to growing pressure from neighborhood residents, the city has been
seeking to evict the group from the two-story house.

A number of neighbors complained that the house is infested with rats and
roaches. Some nearby residents alleged that members of the group have beaten
several neighbors.

The neighborhood's anger was aggravated last year when Move members blocked
residents' access to an alley behind their house by building an animal shelter.
Next they fortified the front windows with wooden slats and built the pillbox on
the roof.

Lectures Amplified at Night

The group then installed powerful electric bullhorns and began what soon became
daily lectures, that neighbors said often lasted through the night.

''All last year and the year before it has been a lot of aggravation,'' said Dee
Peoples, the owners of Dee's Food Market, a small general store less than two
blocks from the Move house. ''All you hear is aggravation. You sleep with it,
you wake up with it, you live with.''

Mayor Goode, who had tried to avoid a confrontation with the group, said a year
ago that he preferred ''to have dirt and some smell than to have blood.''

In recent weeks, residents became more outspokesn and last week the Mayor called
the situation ''very, very explosive.''

Founded in 1972

Since its founding in 1972 by a former handyman, Vincent Leaphard, and a student
activist, Donald Glassey, the group's most serious clash with police occured in
August 1978 when Mayor Frank L. Rizzo ended months of negotiations by ordering
the police to storm the house that was the group's headquarters at that time.

During the ensuing shootout then, which lasted several minutes, Officer James
Ramp Sr. was shot in the neck and killed. The nine Move members were convicted
in Officer Ramp's death.

The group has said it disdains the conveniences of modern technology, such as
electricity and artificial heat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of houses burning in Philadelphia (UPI) (page A16); map of
Philadelphia highlighting site of seige (page A16); photo of woman surrendering
to police (Bruce Kanis)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 14, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

F.B.I. SAYS IT FOILED PLOT BY SIKHS TO ASSASSINATE GANDHI IN THE U.S.

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1366 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 13


The Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that it had foiled a plot by Sikh
terrorists to assassinate Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India during his visit
to the United States next month.

William H. Webster, director of the F.B.I., said in a statement here that the
bureau had penetrated a plan to ''train a group of Sikhs in the use of firearms
and explosives'' and that the group had planned ''guerrilla-type operations''
against the Indian Government.

In addition to the purported plot against Mr. Gandhi, Mr. Webster said, the Sikh
terrorists had also planned to assassinate Bhajan Lal, Chief Minister of the
Indian state of Haryana, who was in New Orleans for medical treatment. #5
Detained in New Orleans Five of the seven men identified by the F.B.I. as part
of the purported conspiracy are in custody in New Orleans. The two others are
being sought in the New York area.

Mr. Gandhi is scheduled to begin a state visit here on June 11. The State
Department said today that it did not expect any changes in his schedule as a
result of the disclosure by the F.B.I.

Mr. Gandhi is the son of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, who was assassinated last
Oct. 31 at her residence compound in New Delhi, and authorities said the gunmen
were two Sikh bodyguards. Her assassination touched off riots in which 3,000
people died.

More Autonomy Sought

The Sikhs, who number 14 million out of India's 750 million people, are
demanding more autonomy in the Punjab, their home region.

At least 80 people were killed and 150 were wounded in bomb blasts in northern
India on Friday and Saturday that were attributed to Sikh extremists. In New
Delhi today, sporadic violence was reported in a strike called by the opposition
to protest what it said was the Government's failure to prevent the attacks.
[Page A11.] State Department and F.B.I. officials declined to speculate on
whether the alleged conspirators named today were directly linked to the recent
violence in India. A State Department spokesman said Sikhs in this country had
not been singled out for special attention before Mr. Gandhi's visit. At a
demonstration in Manhattan the day after Mrs. Gandhi was assassinated, members
of a militant Sikh youth organization, the Dashmesh Regiment, shouted their
approval of her death and chanted slogans such as ''Who's the next? Rajiv
Ghandi.''

But Hardan Singh Azad, chairman of the Sikh Association of America, said tonight
that the overwhelming majority of Sikhs living in this country condemn such
violence and are concerned about being branded as terrorists because of the
actions of a few extremists.

The purported plot against Mr. Gandhi was outlined in an affidavit filed in the
United States District Court in the Eastern District of New York by the F.B.I.
and the Secret Service. The affidavit identified the source for the information
as ''a former U.S. Navy Seal who has been known to the F.B.I. for five and
one-half years.''

The affidavit alleges that Gurpartap S. Birk, Lal Singh and Ammand Singh
conspired to kill Mr. Gandhi, to take part in a military expedition against
India, and to receive machine guns and plastic explosives. Mr. Birk and Lal
Singh are also accused of attempting to solicit another individual to kill Mr.
Gandhi.

According to the United States Attorney's office in Brooklyn, Mr. Birk, 33 years
old, is a resident of Brooklyn and an engineer employed by Automated Tolls Inc.
in Mount Vernon, N.Y. He is in custody in New Orleans. Still being sought by the
F.B.I. are Lal Singh, 25, who was identified as a resident of Queens, and Ammand
Singh, for whom authorities said they had no futher identification.

Indictment in New Orleans

In a separate indictment issued last Thursday, a Federal grand jury in New
Orleans accused five Sikhs of plotting to kill Mr. Lal, the Chief Minister of
Haryana. Four of the alleged conspirators, including Mr. Birk, were arrested by
the New Orleans Police Department on May 4 outside the hotel where Mr. Lal was
staying. The fifth was arrested by F.B.I. agents on Sunday.

Those indicted, aside from Mr. Birk, were identified as Virinder Singh, 25, of
New York City, Jasbir Sindhu, 25, of Manhattan, Sukhwinder Singh, 25, of the
Bronx and Jatinder Singh Ahluwalia, 29, a cab driver in New Orleans.

Mr. Lal was in New Orleans for treatment at the Louisiana State University Eye
Center.

An affidavit presented in court on the Gandhi case named Thomas Norris, a
special F.B.I. agent, as an undercover agent who had been in contact with one of
the Sikhs involved in the New York case. Officials at the United States
Attorney's office in Brooklyn refused to confirm or deny that Mr. Norris was the
unidentified undercover operative mentioned in that case.

The undercover operative, who is referred to throughout the affidavit as ''A,''
is described as a recipient of the Medal of Honor for his service in Vietnam and
as ''an expert in urban guerrilla warfare, including the use of explosives and
automatic weapons.''

According to the affidavit, the undercover operative was introduced to Mr. Birk
and Lal Singh at a hotel room in New York City and posed as ''someone from the
state of Alabama with expertise in explosives and weapons.''

Bombing Plans Disclosed

The affidavit charges that at that meeting the two men told the undercover
operative that they represented a group whose purpose was to ''cause the
revolutionary overthrow of the present Government of India'' and that they
intended to do so in part by creating ''a loss of confidence in the present
Indian Government through the bombing of strategic locations in India.'' These
locations allegedly included a nuclear power plant, bridges, hotels and
government or public buildings.

At the same meeting, according to the affidavit, the two men also asked the
undercover operative to provide their group with military-type training in the
United States, specifically in the use of explosives and automatic weapons,
chemical warfare and urban guerrilla tactics. The affidavit said the two also
asked if the undercover operative could obtain C-4 plastic explosives and
machine guns to be smuggled into India for the group's use and false United
States passports to help them enter and leave India.

The January meeting and two subsequent encounters with the undercover operative
were monitered with electronic surveillance equipment, the affidavit said.

No Money Changed Hands

At a news conference in Brooklyn today, Raymond J. Dearie, the United States
Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, said no explosives or weapons
were passed to the alleged terrorists by the undercover operative and no money
changed hands.

The affidavit detailed two other meetings between the undercover operative, Mr.
Birk, Lal Singh and on these occasions Ammand Singh. At a meeting on Feb. 20 in
a hotel in Westbury, L.I., the affidavit said, the undercover operative asked
how much explosives the group needed. According to the affidavit, Mr. Birk
replied, ''Enough to blow up a bridge the size of the Triborough, Brooklyn or
Queensboro Bridge and also enough for a large 36-story buiding.''

Mr. Birk allegedly told the undercover operative that his group also wanted to
be supplied with the Ingram 9-millimeter Mach-10, a type of machine gun, and
eventually would need grenade launchers. The affidavit said the undercover
operative replied that he could supply such items.

At the same meeting, Mr. Birk also purportedly presented the undercover
operative with seven photographs of male Indians and asked if false United
States passports could be obtained for them. Among the photographs were those of
Mr. Birk, Lal Singh and Ammand Singh, the affidavit said.

Third Meeting Described

The affidavit described a third meeting, on April 27, in which the undercover
operative and Mr. Birk and Lal Singh drove to ''a location in Columbia, N.J.''
that had allegedly been selected by the two Sikhs as a training site for the
group's activities. According to the affidavit, Mr. Birk and Lal Singh told the
undercover operative that their group was looking for someone to assassinate
Prime Minister Gandhi during his trip to the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Kartar Singh Narang (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 14, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AS ARMS BUILDUP EASES, U.S. TRIES TO TAKE STOCK

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 4115 words


A new political reality has begun to sink in at the Pentagon: The biggest
peacetime military buildup in modern American history is coming to an end, and
the nation is asking whether it has been getting its money's worth.

After four years and appropriations of more than $1,007,900,000,000 - that is,
one trillion, seven billion, nine hundred million dollars - Defense Secretary
Caspar W. Weinberger says he has resigned himself to supporting a level of
military spending he describes as ''maintenance.''

Both houses of Congress have, in effect, told him in recent days that he would
fall considerably short of that because the popular mandate for higher military
budgets has disappeared.

Preparation Seen as Better

The Senate voted early Friday not to let military spending increase in 1986
beyond the level of inflation, and members of the House Budget Committee say
they plan to hold spending lower than that.

As Congress prepares to take up authorization bills when its budget resolutions
are complete, there are deep disagreements about what a doubling of the annual
military budget has accomplished, about who is to blame for the evident collapse
of popular support and about how to curb spending without undermining national
security.

By most accounts, the United States is a good deal better prepared to fight a
war than it was in the spring of 1981, when the new Reagan Administration
charged that the nation's military machine was being starved into inferiority.

Questions Are Pervasive

In interviews in Washington with military leaders, analysts and members of
Congress, the Administration was widely praised for filling the armed forces'
ranks with better-educated and more experienced soldiers, for beginning to
rebuild depleted stockpiles of spare parts and ammunition, for rebuilding morale
and dispelling a national sense of self-doubt.

But there are also pervasive questions about the arcane practices of the
military industry, the costs of an all-volunteer military, the role of Congress
in handling or mishandling military spending, and the difficulties in carrying
out prescriptions for changing the system.

Other questions have been raised about whether the money bought all it should
have, and those questions have been aggravated by allegations of fraud and
outlandish overhead costs -country club and kennel fees, lavish meals and
gratuities, even executive haircuts - billed to the Government by military
vendors.

The latest such incident produced a guilty plea from the General Electric
Company yesterday to a charge that it had defrauded the Government of $800,000
on a Minuteman missile contract. The company was given the maximum fine,
$1,040,000.

Allegations of fraud aside, a new study by the Congressional Budget Office,
which used the Pentagon's own standards to measure changes in the fighting
forces, found a ''lack of marked improvements'' in such indicators as the number
of combat units, the modernization of equipment and combat-readiness.

The budget office added that because of ''important limitations'' in the data,
it could not say ''whether the defense buildup has been worth the cost.''

But Senator Lawton Chiles, a Florida Democrat who has been leading Senate
efforts to freeze military spending, maintained that, on the basis of the
report, that question ''has to be answered in the negative.''

In many categories of weapons, which have consumed the largest portion of the
buildup, Soviet advantages that Mr. Weinberger found alarming four years ago
have persisted or even widened. Instead of buying more weapons, the military has
sometimes bought more expensive and more complex weapons - or the same weapons
at higher prices than planned.

Looking to 1988

The bills for these weapons will continue to come due for years. What worries
many experts is that, as military budgets are now restrained, these accumulated
debts will drain off the money needed to pay for the people, ammunition and
spare parts to keep the weapons in service.

''The worst thing that could happen,'' said Senator Dan Quayle, an Indiana
Republican who is a member of the Armed Services Committee, ''is to spend all of
this money and then in 1988 see you guys writing stories about how the American
military is a paper tiger. That is presently the road we are on.'' Some critics
of Mr. Weinberger, and, in private, some of his colleagues and supporters, say
that if this happens, the Administration will have mainly itself to blame.

These people, friends and foes alike, say that by championing the military
budget while other programs suffered and the deficit ballooned, by insisting on
vast increases rather than rallying support for more modest, sustained growth,
and by force-feeding money into a system that was bound to waste some of it, the
Administration invited a backlash that might have been avoided.

One architect of the buildup, a senior Administration official, said: ''No
Administration in recent history has been more supportive of the military. Given
all that, it would be quite an ironic twist if part of the Administration's
legacy is that it squandered the mandate to rebuild the military.'' Out of Post-
Vietnam Trough By the time Jimmy Carter left office in January 1981, military
spending had begun to pull gently out of its post-Vietnam trough.

After the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and the taking of American hostages
in Iran, polls taken in 1980 and early 1981 showed that 60 percent of the
American electorate believed military spending should be increased.

Mr. Carter left behind a budget that proposed an increase of 10 percent after
allowing for inflation.

But the military advisers to the President-elect had bigger plans.

William Schneider Jr., a key member of Mr. Reagan's national security transition
team who became the associate director for national security at the Office of
Management and Budget, recalled that the group identified these five priorities:

* A major renovation of the nuclear arsenal.

* A restoration of combat forces that had been widely deplored as unfit.

* An expansion of the Navy and of air transport to project power into remote
areas in line with what the new Administration described as a ''global
commitment.''

* A sweeping program to modernize nonnuclear weapons.

* A heavy investment in communication systems.

Weinberger as Salesman

From the beginning, Mr. Weinberger was less the architect than the salesman. On
March 4, 1981, the new Secretary of Defense appeared before the Senate Armed
Services Committee to outline the proposal for rearming America.

''If we continue at anything like the levels of expenditure of the recent
past,'' he said, ''by the middle 1980's we will clearly be second in military
power to the Soviet Union.''

Congress, for the most part, cooperated.

True, after the heady first year Congress cut an average of $18 billion a year
from Mr. Weinberger's requests. But 90 percent of the cuts came from postponing
purchases a year or two and from ''financing adjustments'' such as re-estimates
of inflation and fuel costs.

According to the Office of Management and Budget, Mr. Reagan has got 97 percent
of the military purchasing power he requested, when inflation is accounted for.

Scant Attention to Strategy

Congress, some members say, gave its blessing to budgets with little discussion
of the underlying strategy.

''The Pentagon announced it wanted a 600-ship Navy and sent up a succession of
budgets consistent with that,'' said Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin,
chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. ''But as far as I know, we never
gave 15 minutes' debate to the subject of a 600-ship Navy.''

Adjusted for inflation, the military budget has grown an average of nearly 9
percent a year. The Central Intelligence Agency estimates that Soviet military
spending, adjusted for inflation, has grown about 2 percent a year since 1976.

The spending by the United States was heavily skewed to equipment. From 1980 to
1985, ''investment,'' which includes weapons procurement, research and military
construction, grew 92 percent, even after adjusting for inflation. It now
consumes 47 percent of the military budget.

By comparison, military pay increased 12 percent. The Reagan Spending Spurt When
the first Reagan military budgets were added to Mr. Carter's last proposal,
there was a powerful spurt of spending. In the first two years military spending
leaped 25 percent faster than inflation.

''It had nothing to do with a strategy, nothing to do with a program of what we
needed for defense,'' said Richard A. Stubbing, who was deputy chief of the
national security division at the Office of Management and Budget. ''It was the
services' shopping lists.''

Mr. Schneider, the transition team member and now Under Secretary of State,
strongly disagreed.

The idea, he said, was to take advantage of the favorable mood by
''forward-funding'' as many programs as possible. Money would be committed to
multiyear weapons contracts. This would assure the industry of a steady flow of
business for years to come, thus encouraging it to gear up for more efficient
production.

However, several studies by Congress and the Pentagon have found that companies
have not increased their investment in plant and equipment during the buildup,
despite higher profits and a variety of incentive programs.

Trying to Measure Waste

There is no official barometer of waste, but one statistic suggests the trouble
the industry had spending the money pumped at it. The Defense Department has a
record $280 billion ''backlog,'' money appropriated by Congress but not yet
spent.

Many critics, led by a cadre of conservative Republicans in Congress, argue that
in its haste to spend, the Pentagon had little time to police. They say it
allowed excessive overhead charges and unregulated profits.

''As long as Defense has more money than it knows what to do with, then it
doesn't have much incentive to spend it well,'' said Mr. Stubbing.

Others, like Senator Quayle and Representative Aspin, who is chairman of the
House Armed Services Committee, said the buildup did not so much create waste as
draw attention to it.

''You couldn't pay the press to write a waste story back in 1979,'' said Mr.
Aspin. ''But there was just as much waste then as now.''

Stance Is Aggressive

Recently the Pentagon has taken a more aggressive public stance against major
contractors. The General Dynamics Corporation saw $244 million in payments
withheld as restitution for alleged overbilling, and the Pentagon's Inspector
General, Joseph Sherick, urged that the company's top officials be suspended
from Government business. The General Electric Company, after its fraud
indictment, was temporarily barred from contracts, and in the wake of its guilty
plea could be forbidden from bidding on new defense contracts for three years.

So far these efforts seem to have done little to restore diminished confidence
in the Pentagon's ability to spend wisely.

Mr. Weinberger complained that the Pentagon's early ''management initiatives,''
especially a push for more competition, received little press attention while
articles about overpriced pliers proliferated.

''They damaged us very badly,'' he said. ''It's the one thing that many people
remember, and it's particularly galling because it isn't so.'' Gauging
Improvements Analysts agree that it is tricky to assess how much improvement Mr.
Reagan bought with his first $1 trillion.

Much of the money went into areas such as communication, intelligence and
research, which are inherently hard to measure. Much went into classified
programs.

The Congressional Budget Office report, ''Defense Spending: What Has Been
Accomplished,'' by R. William Thomas, is one of the most complete recent efforts
to measure the indicators that do exist, and it was unable to draw a clear
conclusion.

Pentagon figures show that the military is not much larger now in terms of
personnel, but a bigger ''force structure'' was never a top priority of the
Administration.

The number of uniformed personnel, including reserves, is up 317,000, to 3.2
million, with the biggest increase in the National Guard and reserves.

Quality of Troops Cited

The Army rearranged its 16 active divisions to create a new ''light'' division
for rapid deployment without adding troops to do it. Tactical fighter squadrons
have increased from 85 to 88 in the Navy, but declined to 78 from 79 in the Air
Force in favor of expanding reserve units. The Navy, which now has 530 ships, is
growing toward a much-discussed 600-ship fleet, about 50 more ships than
President Carter planned.

The universally acknowledged success story is the quality of the people in
uniform. Studies show they are better-educated and, because of higher
re-enlistment rates, more experienced than their counterparts at the time Mr.
Reagan took office. Drug use and AWOL rates have declined dramatically, and even
the Administration's critics say morale is high.

Some say it is noteworthy that personnel showed the most dramatic improvement of
any area in the military budget with one of the smallest increases in spending.

Other measures of combat-readiness are more ambiguous, as demonstrated by the
following items from Mr. Thomas's report:

* Training, measured in flying hours, steaming days and battalion training days,
has increased only modestly, although the use of simulators and more realistic
field exercises may have raised its quality.

The percentage of aircraft, tanks and missiles that are ''mission capable'' has
improved slightly over all, with the best progress in Air Force and Navy
tactical fighters.

* Stockpiles of munitions have increased significantly for all services, but
other war reserves, especially spare parts, have fallen behind. That is
attributed to the advent of new weapons that require costlier spare parts.

Procurement Is Troubling

Administration critics say the biggest disappointment has been in the area of
highest spending: weapons procurement.

Spending for nuclear weapons has grown fastest, nearly tripling since 1980. The
Administration revived the B-1 bomber, spent heavily on the little-noticed area
of command and control systems and inaugurated a research program aimed at
inventing defenses against nuclear missiles.

Critics, like William W. Kaufmann of the Brookings Institution, say these
programs amount to wasteful excess. For example, Mr. Kaufmann argues that cruise
missiles can penetrate Soviet air defenses better and more cheaply than the B-1
and that submarine-launched missiles make the land-based MX a white elephant.

The Administration counters that it has passed the best test of success: the
Soviet Union returned to Geneva to discuss limiting nuclear arms.

An Erratic Buildup

In so-called conventional forces, the pace of modernization has been erratic,
with much of the buildup still in back orders.

At the 1981 hearing before the Armed Services Committee, Mr. Weinberger held up
charts showing Soviet factories out-producing American plants 3 to 1 in tanks,
almost 4 to 1 in submarines, 2 to 1 in fighter planes and more than 2 to 1 in
armored vehicles. The ratios today are about the same, but the Administration
contends the quality of American weapons has improved.

In Mr. Reagan's first term, production increased for some weapons, such as
helicopters and air-launched missiles, and decreased for others, such as
airplanes and surface-launched missiles. A major shipbuilding program was
undertaken, although some analysts now doubt that the Government can afford to
finish it.

For example, in 1982, Congress granted the Navy's request for $7 billion to
build two new aircraft carriers. But the plans for those carriers also called
for modern escort and supply ships, aircraft, weaponry, fuel and more sailors
and pilots to operate them. Much of that has not been provided for in the
President's budget.

A new study by a Congressional Budget Office naval analyst, Peter Tarpgaard,
estimates that completing the 600-ship Navy according to current specifications
will require that Navy budgets grow 5 percent faster than inflation for nine
more years.

Weapons Are Costlier

One striking feature of the buildup, the Congressional Budget Office found, was
a trend toward costlier weapons.

For example, the budgets for aircraft went up 75 percent, but the number of
planes bought went up less than 9 percent. The budget for missiles went up 91
percent but purchased only 6 percent more missiles. The Pentagon bought 30
percent more tanks, but spent 147 percent more to do it.

The budget office study and Administration officials stress that these new
weapons are more capable than the ones they replaced.

But another reason more weapons were not bought is that in the first two years
of the Administration, the ''unit cost'' of many weapons soared above Pentagon
estimates.

In part, analysts say, that may be because Reagan aides, in making their first
budgets, accepted unrealistic Carter Administration estimates of what the
weapons should cost. In part it was because the services demanded engineering
changes along the way, which entitled the contractors to raise prices.

In the last two years, costs for these weapons have remained steady. But Senator
Sam Nunn of Georgia, the senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee,
predicted in an interview that a variety of weapons programs nearing production
would crowd the budget and lead to higher prices across the board.

Discussions in Congress

''The unit cost of weapons will go up more in the future than it has in the past
four years,'' he said, ''because we now have so many weapons systems started
that we're not going to be able to maintain efficient production rates.''

In Congress, the feeling is widespread that an unacceptable share of the buildup
was diverted either by wasteful buying practices or inadequate strategy.

''We may have gotten a little more defense, but for a heck of a lot more
money,'' said Senator Charles E. Grassley, an Iowa Republican, who blames a
failure to discipline military contractors.

Senator Nunn agreed. ''I don't think we've gotten output commensurate with input
the last four years,'' he said. He blames what he considers a lack of internal
discipline, reflected in the failure to weed out low-priority weapons programs
favored by the services, and a lack of strategy, notably an unwillingness to
share more of the burden with the allies.

One Government official who has spent his career trying to evaluate Defense
Department programs said that after all the calculations were done, the votes
would be cast on the basis of feelings.

''There's no question that after $1 trillion, people now feel a lot better about
the military, not least of all the military themselves,'' said this official.
Toting up the President's next five-year spending plan, he added sardonically,
''How much better can you feel for another $2 trillion?'' Public Outlook on
Outlays Most Americans seem to believe that they feel good enough now.

Last November, as Mr. Reagan was winning re-election, a New York Times/CBS Poll
reported that only 16 percent of the voters favored an increase in military
spending. Thirty percent said the Pentagon should spend less and 51 percent said
military spending should be kept about the same. The figures were unchanged in a
poll taken in February.

Mr. Weinberger, who until a few weeks ago was insisting that military spending
must continue on a steep upward trajectory for the rest of the decade, said in
an interview that for the duration of the Administration the best he could hope
for was a growth rate of 3 percent on top of an increase to account for
inflation. That is the figure President Reagan and Senate Republican leaders
agreed upon, and it represents an abrupt, $90 billion drop in Mr. Weinberger's
expectations over the coming three years.

Moving to 'Zero Growth'

The budget he sent Congress in February called for a 6 percent ''real'' increase
next year and increases of more than 8 percent in each of the ensuing years.

There is a powerful feeling in Congress that Mr. Weinberger will get much less
than 3 percent. Such an increase is still $20 billion more than this year's
budget, and many in Congress argue that is too generous when domestic programs
are being sacrificed.

Mr. Aspin and others said there was a good possibility Congress would approve a
''zero growth'' military budget, allowing only enough for inflation, and many
members of Congress say even that is too much.

Members of Congress say there are several reasons the tide has turned against
military spending, among them reports of waste and the intransigent tactical
style of Mr. Weinberger himself.

Fears of the Deficit

Foremost, however, is the Federal deficit of $200 billion, which has set
military spending in competition with domestic programs.

''Jim Schlesinger turned out to be right,'' said Mr. Aspin, referring to the
former Defense Secretary and budget director who warned in 1981 that President
Reagan's tax cuts would set up such a scenario. ''The Reagan tax cut came back
to bite the defense budget.''

Mr. Weinberger prefers to think that his department is, in a sense, a victim of
its own success.

''Our own achievements have made it more difficult to continue doing what we
need to do,'' he said. ''There's a perception that you've done a great deal,
spent a lot of money - correct, we have - and it's hard, then, to say why we
haven't finished.''

Adm. James D. Watkins, Chief of Naval Operations, said: ''When there is a shock
to the system, as there was in Iran or Afghanistan, then we come to the fore,
and all of a sudden people begin to stand up and say, 'Yeah, we need a strong
defense.' I have to think it's going to take another one.'' Concern About
Cutbacks Even some of Mr. Weinberger's critics, however, worry that the backlash
may be dangerous if it is not handled carefully.

Mr. Aspin, for example, argues that the Pentagon ''needs'' 3 to 5 percent growth
on top of inflation, though he said he would vote for a freeze this year if it
is part of a ''serious'' deficit-reducing package.

Mr. Kaufmann, an analyst widely consulted by those who favor reductions in
military spending, said cutting below the 3 percent level ''is tough'' without
cutting into muscle.

One reason is that the surge of ''investment'' has given the budget a sort of
momentum. A growing portion of the military's annual spending, more than 40
percent, pays bills due under contracts already signed and is thus effectively
uncontrollable.

Some analysts argue that if Congress and the Pentagon follow the usual script
for a slowdown, they will refuse to eliminate duplicative weapons and instead
simply slow down all the assembly lines, which will increase the cost of each
weapon.

Gauging Effects of Curbs

Lawmakers who support a 3 percent increase worry that if Congress cuts deeper,
it may trim the less glamorous accounts for spare parts and other supplies,
which have no lobbyists to promote them.

They worry that pay freezes or manpower cuts will hit at a time when recruiting
is already slackening and there is a growing demand for personnel with good
technical skills.

They wonder what the reaction will be among the nation's allies, who have been
under intense American pressure to increase their own military spending at least
3 percent a year.

Some experts, however, hold out the hope that cutting military spending may
force some efficiencies. They point out that not until the cutting mood grew
fierce did the Defense Department institute some of its toughest measures
against military contractors.

Senator Nunn said a gentle squeeze on military spending might also force the
Pentagon and Congress to make choices they avoided in the gravy days.

'The Worm Has Turned'

In his view, these should include killing off some weapons so that others can be
built efficiently, coordinating more with allies, reorganizing the Pentagon to
reduce interservice rivalries and duplication, and rethinking many elements of
military strategy.

Senator Quayle agreed. ''The worm has turned,'' he said. ''Now we have to
rethink the whole strategy of defending our nation.''

Mr. Weinberger, however, said the nation's strategy and commitments were set by
the dangers in the world, which were only likely to increase. Budget cuts, he
said, would mean slackening the pace, but not changing the direction.

''There's no change in the idea of the things we need to do,'' he said, ''but it
will take longer, and it will cost us more.'' ------Next: The procurement
process.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Billions for Defense: The Spending Debate; First of five articles

GRAPHIC: graph of military spending from 1947 to 1985 (Source: Defense
Department) (page A20); graph of poll results on military spending (page A20);
photo of Caspar Weinberger (NYT)

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 14, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A FEW GOOD MUSICIANS

BYLINE: By DENA KLEIMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 876 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In the tense days of the Iranian hostage crisis, an embattled President Carter
would sometimes pause outside the East Room of the White House to catch the
United States Marine Band in rehearsal.

''He would linger behind the columns,'' recalled Col. John R. Bourgeois, the
director of the band. ''It was a moving thing - that we could give him some
refreshment from a hard day.''

In this kind of private Presidential moment Mr. Carter was far from alone.
Presidents as far back as John Adams have been listening to the Marine Band. In
fact, the group is known as ''The President's Own.''

At this time of year the public also has an opportunity to hear the band, which
is in full force Friday nights at the old Marine barracks at Eighth and I
Streets in Southeast Washington and next month will start Wednesday night
concerts on the steps of the Capitol and Sunday night concerts at the Washington
Monument.

The Marine Band has become synonymous with American musical tradition, a
tradition of musical excellence shaped by John Philip Sousa, its most famous
director, and by its emphasis on stirring marches and American classics.

It is a band that at once can storm an auditorium with ''Stars and Stripes
Forever'' and then gracefully shift into the delicate nuances of Charles Ives.
It is a band that understands the drama of a solitary trumpet on a darkened
stage and yet can get an audience on its feet with the Marine Hymn, a band of
ornate flourishes and ruffles that can perform anything from the most ambitious
of Gershwin and Copland to ''Yankee Doodle Dandy.''

This is the band's 185th year of public concerts. And its history is entwined
with the nation's own, with performances featured at events of celebration,
events of tragedy, events of confusion, events of pride, events that have shaped
the nation's self-image virtually since its inception.

The First Public Performance

It was on Aug. 21, 1800, at a point just about where the Lincoln Memorial now
stands that the band gave its first public performance, its members equipped
with the fife and drums that characterized music in the Revolutionary War. The
following January it made its White House debut on New Year's Day, and with
Thomas Jefferson's it became a fixture at Presidential inaugurations.

It followed Abraham Lincoln to Gettysburg and entertained at the White House
wedding of President Grant's daughter, Nellie. It lent encouragement to Herbert
Hoover as the nation grappled with economic depression and in World War II
helped bolster confidence in the nation's bonds. It provided the musical
backdrop to the trying days after the Kennedy assassination and, later, the
accompaniment to the White House recital of Amy Carter's violin class. It
assisted in the dedication of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial and the interment of
the last unknown solider.

''We're sort of like a group of Court musicians,'' said Colonel Bourgeois, 50
years old, who joined the Marine Band in 1958 and has been its director since
1979.

Like virtually all other members of the Marine Band, Colonel Bourgeois is first
and foremost a musician. He has never seen combat and has no ambition to do so.
Band members, who must come to Washington for an audition, are selected purely
on the basis of musical achievement, and competition is intense. Just last week
there were 34 applicants for a clarinet position opening. Members of the band
are not required to complete basic training in the Marine Corps; they come in as
staff sergeants. It is not unusual for them to remain 30 years or more until
retirement.

Indeed, historically the band has avoided combat. On Dec. 7, 1941, for example,
it was performing at a formal White House luncheon. President Roosevelt oddly
did not show up, and it was later explained that Pearl Harbor had been bombed.
Band members volunteered to go to war, but it was decided they could best serve
their country by doing what they did best - playing in the band, which sports
its own emblem of a lyre on its sleeves rather than a more traditional emblem
like a pair of crossed rifles.

''Rifles are their instruments,'' said Master Sgt. Frank Byrne, 30, who has
played tuba with the band since he was 19. ''The lyre is ours.''

Today the band in full costume remains an impressive sight: a sea of red coats
and white trousers, in perfect step, the airs of the Republic blasted with
particular gusto, the kind of sing-a-long oom pah pah of which patriotism is
made.

''It's the only thing I have ever wanted to do,'' said Sergeant Byrne, who is
originally from Hawaii and first heard about the band from a high school
teacher. ''It's more than just a job. We are all heirs to and stewards of a
fantastic tradition.''

Gunnery Sgt. Mike Ressler, 33, who plays the euphonium, agreed.

''I decided in the ninth grade that this is the job I wanted in my life,'' said
Sergeant Ressler, who is from New Holland, Pa. ''That wasn't real practical.
There are only four euphonium positions. But I just loved the sound of that
band. No other band sounds like that.''

Capt. John Zimmerman, 37, also from New Holland and also a euphonium player, has
been with the band 20 years. He initially joined for a different reason.

''It was my mother's idea,'' he said, smiling.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of U.S. Marine Band (NYT/George Tames); photo of John Philip
Sousa (Defense Department)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 14, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEWS;
'LADY FROM YESTERDAY,' TO BE BROADCAST ON CBS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 443 words


A RULE of commercial television: When a program is underwritten by a single
sponsor, the presentation's message is likely to be inspirational or, at the
very least, upbeat. Such is the thoroughly predictable case with ''The Lady From
Yesterday,'' being broadcast tonight at 9 o'clock on CBS as part of the
''General Foods Golden Showcase.''

The teleplay, written by Tim Maschler and Ken Pettus, offers the story of Craig
Weston (Wayne Rogers), a Vietnam War veteran who seems to be living a relatively
comfortable life in the upper social echelons of Houston. But it turns out that
instead of realizing the dream of establishing his own business, Craig has found
himself trapped working for his wealthy father-in-law, Jim Bartlett (Pat
Hingle), whipping himself up into another frenzy of impeccable good-old-boy
grossness. Craig's marriage to Janet (Bonnie Bedelia), fortified with two
daughters, has reached a stage of genteel boredom.

Suddenly there arrives a woman named Lien Van Huyen (Tina Chen). She and Craig
had been lovers in Vietnam 10 years earlier. When they were separated in the
final days of the American pullout, she was pregnant. Now she is introducing
Craig to the son he never knew he had. Problem No. 1: Will he bring his son Quan
(Bryan Price) home and thereby jeopardize his marriage? Of course, he will.
Craig is the kind of nice guy who will not run away from responsibility. And the
rest of the problems will then fall neatly into place.

''The Lady From Yesterday'' is top-heavy with noble intentions. The tone, along
with Robert Day's direction, is never less than stately. There is a volatile
issue floating around somewhere having to do with orphans and illegitimate
children and American soldiers. But little of that is evident here.

Lien is the most accommodating of women, having the good manners to be suffering
from a fatal disease that will conveniently remove her from the scene. Quan is
clearly a young genius who has no trouble winning the enthusiastic affections of
Craig's daughters. It is almost a relief when the oafish father-in-law lumbers
onto the scene, overflowing with ignorant bigotry and friendly menace. A shudder
of reality can be heard in the distance, even as he keeps calling Craig ''boy.''

With Barry Weitz as executive producer, the TV movie has a polished, unruffled
look. The passing shots of Houston are worthy of postcards. And the cast moves
things along efficiently. Miss Bedelia is especially worth noting as she brings
cool sympathy to the essentially one-note daddy's-little-girl character of the
wife. The payoff is indeed upbeat, but then there was never really any doubt
about that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Wayne Rogers and Bonnie Bedelia in the teleplay

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 15, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Rushes Weapons To Cambodian Border

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 72 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 14


Vietnamese troops have rushed Soviet-built tanks and heavy artillery to the
Thai-Cambodian border to support their sustained intrusion into southeastern
Thailand, military officials said today.

The officials said about 20 Soviet-made T-54 and T-56 tanks as well as
105-millimeter and 130-millimeter artillery pieces had been moved within range
of the Banthad mountain range, where hundreds of Vietnamese are dug into
hilltops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 15, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN VISIT FIERCELY DEBATED IN BONN

BYLINE: By JOHN TAGLIABUE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: BONN, May 14


Chancellor Helmut Kohl sought today to fend off criticism of his handling of
President Reagan's recent visit, contending that it ''further strengthened the
relationship between both nations that has emerged over many years.''

The occasion was a statement by the Chancellor to Parliament on the visit and
the recent economic summit conference. The statement opened a raucous,
uncharacteristically bitter four-hour debate.

In the debate, Mr. Kohl, whose Christian Democratic Party is smarting from a
severe election setback Sunday in populous North Rhine-Westphalia, was often
pushed into the defensive.

In a 40-minute oration punctuated by catcalls and heckling, Mr. Kohl said, ''The
overwhelming majority of the German people were deeply impressed by the attitude
of the American President, and by the fact that he did not waver'' in the face
of urgent pleas that he cancel his visit to the Bitburg cemetery.

Germans Will Not Forget

''Neither the German people nor I will forget that,'' the Chancellor went on.

American veterans' groups, Jewish organizations and majorities of both houses of
Congress asked Mr. Reagan to cancel the ceremony at Bitburg, which includes the
graves of 49 soldiers of the Waffen SS.

The Social Democratic leader in Parliament, Hans-Jochen Vogel, said Mr. Kohl's
handling of the state visit, including his insistence on the wreath-laying
ceremony at Bitburg, ''did more to harm than to help'' West German-American
ties.

To strong applause from the opposition benches, Mr. Vogel said, ''We will feel
the consequences for a long time to come.''

Mr. Vogel accused the Chancellor of subservience to American wishes at the
summit meeting. He cited the West German endorsement of ''Star Wars'' missile
defense research, which he said risked a serious split with France. He also
cited Mr. Kohl's failure to chide the Reagan Administration for making the
Nicaragua trade-embargo announcement in West Germany.

Honesty Is All That Is Owed

Recounting examples of postwar American generosity toward West Germany,
including the Berlin airlift of 1948-49, Mr. Vogel said the Social Democrats
believed Americans were owed ''not obliging obedience or zealous acclamation,
but honesty.''

''We are friends and allies of the American people,'' the Social Democratic
leader said, ''but we are not the vassals of any one administration.''

Mr. Vogel's uncharacteristic aggressiveness reflected the Social Democrats'
strong victory in North Rhine-Westphalia, West Germany's most populous state,
where the party gained 52 percent of the vote, while the Christian Democratic
share slumped to less than 37 percent, from 43 percent four years ago.

Bonn's political parties are deeply split in their assessment of Mr. Reagan's
visit. Mr. Kohl and his Christian Democrats have praised it as fostering West
German-American understanding. Volker Ruhe, the party's deputy leader in
Parliament, today accused the Social Democrats of fomenting feelings of
anti-Americanism by organizing a major protest rally to coincide with Mr.
Reagan's speech to West German students at Hambach Castle.

Brandt Enters the Fray

A measure of the bitterness came Sunday evening in a television debate after the
North Rhine-Westphalia vote, when the Social Democratic chairman, Willy Brandt,
responded to charges of anti-Americanism from Mr. Kohl by attacking Heiner
Geissler, the sharp-tongued Christian Democratic Party manager. Mr. Brandt
likened Mr. Geissler to the Nazi propaganda chief, calling him ''the worst
agitator in this country since Josef Goebbels.''

Gerhard Stoltenberg, Mr. Kohl's usually mild-mannered Finance Minister, entered
the debate today, accusing Mr. Brandt, a former Chancellor and Nobel Peace Prize
laureate, of ''total unscrupulousness'' and challenging him to retract the
comparison.

''Even the Nobel committee, with all due respect,'' Mr. Stoltenberg went on,
''has made a few mistakes in its long history.''

Facing vigorous protests from Social Democratic legislators, Mr. Stoltenberg
said his reference was to Le Duc Tho, the North Vietnamese official who was
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize with Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger for
negotiating the Vietnam War settlement. Mr. Tho declined the prize.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 15, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SEARCH FOR BODIES, AND FOR REASON, IN SMOKY RUINS

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1113 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, May 14


In the smoky mist of a smoldering neighborhood, firefighters searched today
through mounds of charred rubble at the ruined headquarters of a mysterious,
militant organization that has been a source of controversy here for more than a
decade.

The police bomb that razed the brick and frame row house Monday night, killing
at least six people and setting off a two-block conflagration, ended a 24-hour
siege that culminated years of hostility between the group that calls itself
Move, its neighbors, and the police.

As the search for charred bodies in the basement of the fortress of a house
continued, the death toll reached at least six, two or more of them children.

The authorities were also still searching the area for three Move members who
escaped from the house and engaged the police in a running gun battle.

And the search continued as well for the reasons behind the confrontation
between the group and the police that ended with a shocked and devastated
middle-class neighborhood.

Philosophy of the Group

Move was founded in 1972 by a former handyman, Vincent Leaphart, and a student
activist, Donald Glassey. The little that is known about the group's philosophy
comes largely from Mr. Glassey, who became a Federal informant. Members, all of
whom took the surname Africa, have never explained why the name Move was chosen.

Their philosophy shuns modern technology, including electricity, though it is
known that the group owes hundreds of dollars in utility bills.

Neighbors of the headquarters said that the Move members sheltered many dogs,
cats and rats, kept their children naked and out of school, were physically
dirty and preached to passersby over a loudspeaker.

Their message was an anarchistic, revolutionary doctrine that included giving
the United States back to the Indians and barring all governments. It was known
that the group stocked a number of weapons. #1978 Confrontation The city tried
in 1978 to evict the group from a Victorian-style house in the Powelton Village
section of Philadelphia. After a siege that lasted for months, a savage gun
battle erupted that killed officer James Ramp and wounded several other police
officers and firefighters.

Nine Move members were sentenced to prison terms of 30 years to 100 years each
for their part in the shootout and killing. In the siege Monday, Move members
demanded the release of those in prison.

Move's Powelton Village house was bulldozed immediately after the 1978 shootout.
Shortly thereafter, some women and children belonging to the group moved into
the row house in western Philadelphia. They were followed by male members of the
sect.

Residents soon began complaining that the new house was a health hazard,
infested with rats and roaches and strewn with garbage. They organized and
petitioned the city to evict Move. The drive grew last year when the group
blocked residents' access to an alley by building an animal shelter.

Mayor Not 'Overly Concerned'

When a man appeared last May on the roof of the Move house wearing an
executioner's mask and carrying a shotgun, more than 25 police officers
converged on the house. No shots were fired and no one was arrested.

At the time, Mayor W. Wilson Goode said he was not ''overly concerned'' by this
and similar incidents. Nonetheless, hundreds of police and firefighters were
sent to the area on Aug. 8, in anticipation of the sixth anniversary of the
group's shootout with the police.

The residents grew angrier when Move mounted a powerful public address system on
its house, which it had begun fortifying, and began nightly harangues of
politics and obscenity.

About 50 residents came to a neighborhood recreation center May 1 to demand that
Mayor Goode evict the group. They said they feared a violent confrontation. The
Mayor responded that he could not act without evidence that they were breaking
the law.

On Sunday, however, the city authorities evacuated the residents near the
headquarters. When the police tried to serve an eviction notice on Move a few
minutes before 6 A.M. Monday, the group opened fire, the authorities said.

Thousands of Shots Fired

The police shot back with automatic and semiautomatic weapons. Bullets
ricocheted through the neighborhood as thousands of shots were fired, but no
serious injuries were reported.

The shooting was steady for more than 30 minutes. It then continued sporadically
for another 90 minutes before an unofficial cease-fire went into effect. Then
about 5:30 in the afternoon, the police called in a helicopter and the bomb was
dropped.

The ensuing explosion shook the neighborhood. Flames jumped, large pieces of
wood were thrown spinning into the air, and smoke began spiraling from the
building.

The police said the bomb was intended to dislodge a fortified cubicle from the
front of the roof of the house. Members of the group held the pillbox-like
addition while they fired at the police who had surrounded them.

''I've never seen any building fortified as well as this one,'' Police
Commissioner Gregore J. Sambor said tonight. The bunker atop the house was
plated with steel on reinforced supports, he said, and the first floor had a
barricade with fire ports constructed of whole trees.

'There's Nothing Left'

Mayor Goode said today that the police needed to dislodge the cubicle to enter
the house because it was too dangerous to try to burst through the front door.

''It was the proper thing to do,'' he said. ''It would have worked if not for
the fire.''

The fire was devastating. ''I've been to both Korea and Vietnam and I've never
seen anything like this,'' Clarence Mosley, the city's Assistant Managing
Director, said this morning as he led inspectors through the two charred blocks
around the headquarters. ''There's nothing left.''

The search through the rubble went on all day and the bodies were not found
until early evening, when the police entered the house's basement.

Teams of city officials swept through the neighborhood, a few inspecting each
building and marking those damaged severly enought to require demolition. Cranes
and bulldozers were ready nearby.

The residents of four blocks who were asked to leave their homes on Sunday were
told the evacuation was for one night. Many watched from nearby in helpless
horror Monday as the fire marched down the line of row houses and firefighters
delayed trying to put out the blaze because of the danger of gunfire.

''Where do we go?'' asked Louise Cephus this morning. Her house was destroyed.
''My son comes home from college tomorrow, to what?'' she asked. ''He doesn't
have the home his mother worked two jobs to build. All he has are the bricks.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: diagram; photo of body being removed from rubble of houses (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 15, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT NEW YORK;
A RAMBLE ON THE NONCAMPAIGN TRAIL WITH KOCH

BYLINE: By William E. Geist

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words


On a day when the mayoral candidate Carol Bellamy was trying to attract some
attention to her budgetary concerns, and the other main challenger, Denny
Farrell, was talking up banking reform, Mayor Koch opened off Broadway.

And so it goes in the mayoral race of 1985. ''Let's see if I can get in
unnoticed,'' said the Mayor, as his car rolled up in front of the Top of the
Gate theater on the opening night of ''Mayor,'' the musical based on the Mayor's
book about himself. This is not to be confused with ''How'm I Doin'?'' or ''How
Are You Doin'?'' -two other current shows about the Mayor.

Mr. Koch was mobbed in the street by a horde of local and network reporters and
camera crews, whom he told that no matter what the reviews would be, he already
liked the show somehow. Probably about the time Miss Bellamy was making her way
out to a candidates night in Queens, Mr. Koch was signing his way through waves
of autograph seekers and finally making his way inside the theater. ''You're
going to love yourself!'' someone in the orchestra yelled at the Mayor.

Everywhere that Ed Koch went, the press was sure to go. Harsh television camera
lights greeted him at every stop and the golden tan that he picked up on his
vacation to Israel seems unlikely to fade until after the fall election.

Technically, it was another day on the noncampaign trail, since Mr. Koch has not
announced his candidacy. He is doing quite nicely with his noncampaign on
autopilot, cruising high above the fray.

The normally combative Mayor is now refusing to respond to attacks by his
challengers. ''It's difficult for me to let anything lie,'' he admitted, but
added of this strategy: ''I may have learned something. It makes them even more
angry when I don't respond to their charges.'' And he broke into a wide grin.

After arriving Sunday from Israel, where his vacation was well covered by the
press, he arose at 5:40 A.M. in Gracie Mansion and was off to do his
much-despised exercise before arriving at City Hall at 7:30 for meetings on tax
reassessments, reports on the allegations of police brutality in the 106th
Precinct and Federal loan guarantees. To some coffee-gulping aides, his overall
chipperness bordered on the annoying.

Then he was off from one noncampaign stop to the next with an entourage that
included William Rauch, who is his press secretary, and Daniel Wolf, who is his
special adviser.

''Everyone at City Hall,'' the Mayor said, ''says I add a life and an energy to
the place that isn't there when I am gone. I take that as a compliment. And I
believe them.'' Mr. Wolf, who has a habit of needling the Mayor, remarked, ''I'm
not surprised.''

Mr. Koch maked a quick tour of the New York Press Club Awards presentation in
midtown, stopping to note that a photograph of him was one of the winners and
being told that, no, he could not have the ribbon. He hugged the woman
dispensing coffee, a dozen photographers' flashes went off and the Mayor said:
''This will win next year.''

Out on the street, passers-by shouted hellos, showered him with compliments,
whipped out their pocket cameras and asked for autographs. A city tow-truck
driver shouted a greeting and the Mayor yelled back: ''Go get 'em! We need the
hundred bucks!''

The next stop was a news conference at the top of the Equitable Building where a
large art complex in the all-new Equitable Center was announced. John Carey,
Equitable's president, apologized that the distinctive top of the new building
could not be placed on the model because of the low ceiling, and said: ''The
Mayor was too good to us on air rights.''

''Now you'll see the Ed and Al Show,'' the Mayor said on the down elevator,
referring to the next joint press conference with Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato at
a Chinatown day-care center.

Mr. Koch introduced Senator D'Amato to the children: ''Boys and girls this is
Sen-a-tor Al D-a-ma-to. Say it.'' When the Senator did the same for Mayor Koch,
one little girl no more than 2 feet tall said: ''We know, we know. He's on TV.''

He makes so many appearances on screen and television that AFTRA, the radio and
television union, said he should become a member. He did. He can be seen
currently on MTV in a music video entitled ''Country Boy.'' He recently appeared
on Dr. Ruth Westheimer's popular television talk show, ''Good Sex,'' where he
discussed prostitution in New York, homosexual-rights legislation and city
efforts to help AIDS victims.

He has been on ''Phil Donahue,'' of course, and on ''Saturday Night Live'' three
times, and ''The Tonight Show,'' ''All My Children,'' the movie ''The Muppets
Take Manhattan'' and a TV-movie ''Terrible Jo Moran.'' His book was a nationwide
best seller and audio cassettes of the Mayor reading it are available.

He said that he has a way with an audience, and that it stems from his ability
to take complex issues and explain them simply and clearly. He attributes this
in part to an inquisitive mind. ''I am intelligent,'' he explained, ''although
not a genius, and I don't think I'm deprecating myself.''

He strode into a Thai restaurant in Chinatown and leaned over to ask a couple,
''Is it good?'' The couple laughed until they coughed, and the man called out,
''The chicken with basil, Your Honor.''

Mr. Koch was called away from the table to take a call from his political
consultant, David Garth, and someone at the table remarked facetiously,
''Strange of him to call in this non political season.'' When the check arrived,
he made everyone at the table kick in.

The entourage then took off in a police helicopter to York College in Queens - a
''hot LZ,'' or landing zone, as they said in Vietnam. In a steamy lecture hall,
Mayor Koch was questioned heatedly and heckled by students about Israel's trade
policies with South Africa, among other things.

The helicopter landed next in Brooklyn, where the Mayor announced improvements
in public-school reading scores, to a host of reporters and television cameras.

After stopping for a few quick meetings at City Hall, he set out in the same
blue suit - somewhat wrinkled now after 12 hours - for the opening of ''Mayor.''
He sat with his sister and her family, and afterwards said he enjoyed every
minute of the show, even the parts where he was called ''a triumph of style over
substance,'' and accused of not paying enough attention to the poor.

After the show he hugged the actress who played Carol Bellamy and told the press
that he was moved by the poignancy of the show. He went on to entertain
reporters for about half an hour with lines that most agreed were as good as
those conjured for the musical.

He stopped at a cast party and then went home to his mayoral mansion. Tomorrow
would be another day on the noncampaign trail. He was scheduled to hold three
press conferences, one with Mikhail Baryshnikov, live and in person at City
Hall.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 16, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON TAKING RENEWED PRIDE IN ITS PERSONNEL

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2083 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 15


The recruiting and retention of able men and women in the armed forces have been
hailed as the single most notable achievement in the Reagan Administration's
four-year military buildup, although warning signs have recently come over the
horizon.

While procurement of weapons has been marred by rising costs, doubtful quality
and possible fraud, and the readiness of the forces for sustained battle has
been questioned, the people in the services have been among the best in the
post-World War II era, in the view of military leaders. Senior Administration
officials have cited that as their greatest victory so far.

Five years ago the Joint Chiefs of Staff were unanimous in telling Congress that
personnel was their most critical shortcoming. One lamented that the Army was
''hollow,'' another found a ''hemorrhage of talent'' from the Navy, and a third
said the Air Force was in ''critical'' condition.

In contrast, their successors marched up Capitol Hill this winter with banners
flying as they proclaimed an outstanding record in recruiting new soldiers,
sailors, airmen and marines and in retaining experienced noncommissioned
officers.

The Army Chief of Staff, Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., for instance, said: ''Today's
soldiers are at the top of the scale. With high quality men and women joining
the service, the state of discipline is superb; the indicators of morale and
discipline are at all-time highs.''

Strikingly, this improvement has cost the taxpayer the smallest increase for any
category in the military budget. In President Carter's last full budget, in
1980, personnel costs came to $69.4 billion when measured in 1986 dollars. For
1985, Congress voted $80.3 billion.  That was a 15.7 percent increase, including
pay for retired military people. That contrasts with the increase of 91.9
percent in spending for arms in the same period, to a total of $99.6 billion.

The improvement in the quality of personnel has been a result of unemployed
youths' wanting jobs, the educational benefits offered by the services, the
increases in military pay and the chance to get away from home and travel,
according to noncommissioned officers throughout the services.

As for the warning signs in recent months, they include an annual survey
conducted for the Pentagon that reported young men and women less interested in
military service than they had been for five years. And new contracts in which
recruits sign up for delayed entry into the services have dropped several
percentage points.

Problems for Recruiters

In the longer run, recruiting may be difficult because the pool of young men of
military age is shrinking while civilian employment is expanding. The pool was
largest in 1979, and estimates are that it will continue to contract until the
mid-1990's.

Thus, after four years of steady improvements in the quality of military
personnel, 1984 may have been a peak year. Recruiting quotas were filled every
year, and last year they were oversubscribed; by July, the Army had stopped
accepting recruits until the new fiscal year. Retention has been so good that
the Pentagon expects half the force to be career people by 1987.

A high school diploma brightens a recruiting sergeant's eye because time has
shown that such graduates are more easily trained than nongraduates and tend to
complete their enlistments. In 1980 only 68 percent of the recruits were high
school graduates; last year the figure was a record 93 percent. The same
percentages held for the recruits who attained average or above-average scores
on the Armed Forces Qualification Test.

Retirees' Pay Cited

At the same time, the size of the military force has grown modestly, by 98,500,
to a total of 2,138,000, with President Reagan asking Congress to authorize a
strength of 2,178,000 by the end of the fiscal year 1986.

Even with that relatively small increase, the cost of military personnel has
come under some attack in Congress, with Senator Warren Rudman, Republican of
New Hampshire, wanting to cut 150,000 from the total strength while others are
seeking to hold down pay increases.

The military retirement system has also come under attack, most notably from
David A. Stockman, director of the Office of Management and Budget, who has
called it a ''scandal'' for what he considers lucrative provisions.

In addition, a measure to cut retirement pay to $14 billion a year, from $18
billion, has been proposed by Representative Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat
who is chairman of the Armed Services Committee. His committee has adopted the
plan, but it needs approval by the House and Senate and the President before
becoming law.

Calls for Conscription

The shrinkage of the recruitment pool has generated new calls for a return to
conscription. Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina, has
introduced legislation to revive the draft, and Senator Gary Hart, Democrat of
Colorado, would make a draft part of a national service program.

But Mr. Reagan, Administration officials said, remains opposed to peacetime
conscription. Other officials assert that no draft would be fair unless all
those eligible served. And the cost of a drafted force would be the same as the
cost for the volunteer force, or greater, according to senior military and
civilian officials.

In addition, some economists say, the unemployment rate among young people will
make going back to a draft unnecessary. They argue that unemployment among young
people is built into the economy and will remain around 20 percent overall, and
above 40 percent for minorities.

In sum, says Lawrence J. Korb, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower,
''The volunteer force is here to stay.''

Restraint on President

The foremost policy implication of the volunteer force is the restraint it
imposes on the President's use of military power.

A President can order an operation like the invasion of Grenada with the current
force and set in motion a cadre of trained people around which a larger force
could be assembled for a large war. But military analysts agree that the United
States could not sustain a war the size of Korea or Vietnam without resorting to
a draft.

So if a President sought to engage the nation in war, he would be required to
ask Congress for authority to begin a draft. That would probably be the focal
point of a national debate over whether such a war was in the national interest
and whether it would receive public support.

While Mr. Korb, the Pentagon's senior personnel official, was pleased with the
1984 recruiting and retention results, he cautioned that it was such a good year
that to use it as a standard would be to ''distort'' the outlook. The next few
years may not reach that level, he said, though they should still be very good.

Attaining high levels, senior officers in the Pentagon said, will depend on
continued support of Congress for pay that is comparable to civilian wages, for
medical and other benefits and especially for retirement pay.

Reasons for Enlisting

Conversations with dozens of senior noncommissioned officers and junior enlisted
men and women over the last two years have produced several reasons for joining
and staying in the services, including these:

The economy and unemployment. Thirty young solders gathered in a recreation room
at Hunter Army Airfield near Savannah, Ga., were asked why they had joined the
Army. From one after another came the same answer: ''I needed a job.''

Education. Many said they had joined the service to learn a skill that would be
useful in the civilian job market or to put away money for college. The services
are in the process of replacing the current educational benefit with a more
lucrative G.I. Bill, the first adopted in peacetime, which will go into effect
July 1.

Increased pay. Two quick raises, one of 11.1 percent, the other of 14.3 percent,
in the first two years of the Reagan Administration brought enlisted earnings up
to a level that compared favorably with civilian wages, especially when medical
care, retirement and other benefits were added. A private just out of basic
training gets $8,700 a year, plus living quarters, meals and other benefits.

Travel. Many young people said they wanted to get away from home and see
something of the world. With one-third of the armed forces stationed abroad or
on duty at sea and with others being temporarily deployed overseas for training,
that could almost be guaranteed.

Jail No Longer a Factor

Senior officers asserted recently that a new patriotism had contributed to
recruiting efforts. But 18- to 22-year-olds rarely gave that as a reason for
enlisting.

A reason no longer heard for enlistment is escaping the arm of the law. Sgt.
Maj. Malachi Mitchell, the top soldier in an artillery battalion at Fort Hood,
Tex., said he had asked each of 2,000 men who joined the unit over two years why
he had enlisted. ''One thing you don't hear anymore,'' Sergeant Major Mitchell
said, ''is that old standard: 'I came in the Army to keep from going to jail.'
''

The personnel expense most under attack today is the pension plan, which allows
military people to retire at half of base pay after 20 years of service. The
system, which has its roots in the Civil War, has evolved from an old-age
benefit to a form of deferred compensation.

Pay for retired military personnel will cost the taxpayers $18 billion this year
and is headed up after 35 years of a standing force that has never dropped below
two million people. That has produced a steadily rising number of retired
officers and noncommissioned officers.

Adding to the cost has been the loss of experienced people shortly after the
20th year of service. The retirement plan was originally intended to provide
old-age security after 30 or more years of service, when the retired person
would draw 75 percent of base pay.

An Underlying Question

Over time, however, more and more officers and noncommissioned officers have
retired at about 40 years of age, depriving the services of their experience
while collecting retirement pay for life. A lieutenant colonel who retired after
20 years, when retirement pay is 50 percent of base pay, would have an annual
pension of $20,500, plus cost-of-living increases.

The underlying question about the cost of personnel, however, is rarely asked:
Why is it necessary to maintain a standing force of 2.1 million men and women in
uniform and a million civilians in support and administrative positions?

Until 1950, the United States had a small standing force of professional
soldiers that was filled out, as in World War II, with citizen-soldiers. When
the war was over that force was demobilized. The armed forces after World War
II, for instance, dropped from 12 million in 1945 to 1.5 million in 1947.

Beginning with President Truman, the United States has built and maintained a
standing force to carry out the basic policy of containing the Soviet Union and
deterring it and other potential adversaries. Most Presidents since have added
to that commitment.

Containment has led, in turn, to a strategy in which the United States has
spread military forces around the world in a manner not seen since the Roman
Empire. One-third of the Army, half the Navy and a quarter of the Air Force and
Marine Corps are outside the United States on any given day.

Army Has Leveled Off

In addition, the United States has committed itself to the defense of 60 other
nations, some by treaty, others by varying degrees of political understanding.

According to senior Pentagon officials, this deployment strategy and the
commitments require a force that should be at least as large as the one in
existence, with some arguing that it should be half again as large.

The services, except the Army, have planned to expand gradually over the next
few years. The Army has leveled off at 781,000 for the time being because the
pool of military-age youths has begun to shrink, senior Army officers said. They
said recruiting a higher number would thus become increasingly difficult unless
less qualified young men and women were accepted.

But the Navy, which had 565,000 sailors last year, will be up to 571,000 this
year and has asked to go to 586,000 next year. The Marine Corps plans to go from
196,000 in 1984 to 198,000 this year and to 200,000 next year. The Air Force
will be up from 597,000 last year to 602,000 this year and wants 612,000 for
1986. ---- Next: The conflicting forces in Congress.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Billions for Defense: The Spending Debate; Third of five articles

GRAPHIC: photos of troops training at Fort Benning, Ga. (NYT/Alan Weiner) (page
B9)

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 16, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TOP OFFICIAL TELLS CHURCH COUNCIL THAT IT'S TIME TO MEND ITS WAYS

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 541 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, May 15


Like a minister preaching to a congregation that has strayed, the new chief
executive of the National Council of Churches told its governing board today
that the council had to confess its organizational sins and mend its ways.

Only then could the council get on with the task of reorganizing itself, said
the Rev. Arie R. Brouwer, who has been general secretary of the council since
January.

In his address today and in a news conference that followed, the 49-year-old
executive reaffirmed the council's programs of social action but said the
council needed to reorganize in terms of Christian worship, ecumenism and
financial accountability.

The council, the nation's largest ecumenical church body, represents 40 million
American Christians. Dr. Brouwer, a minister in the Reformed Church in America,
said that since joining the headquarters staff in New York he had found an
organization in ''decline and disorientation and dismay.''

His purpose, he said, was not to assign blame. ''I wish only to confess our
brokenness,'' he said, ''to confess it and put it behind us, to open us to the
grace of God, grace that will free us all to assume our common vocation of
living toward unity.''

Organization Under Attack

The council has come under severe attack in recent years for what some critics
have called a pattern of anti-American activities, including links to churches
in the Soviet Union and humanitarian aid in Latin American nations and Vietnam.

Some of these charges, made by the Institute on Religion and Democracy, a
conservative research group based in Washington, agained prominence two years
ago in an article in the Reader's Digest and on ''60 Minutes,'' the CBS News
televison program.

Today, Dr. Brouwer reaffirmed the council's commitment to its humanitarian
programs. He suggested that the council was vulnerable to unfair attacks because
of internal organizational problems.

His speech, ''For the Healing of the Council,'' was delivered with a quiet
religious fervor. He put forward many of the proposals for structural and
financial change recommended in a report to the council's president, Bishop
Philip Cousin of the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, issued last
November by a special internal committee.

Proposals for Change

The recommendations for reorganization will be voted on Thursday by the 263
members of the governing board gathered here at the McCormick Center Hotel. The
members represent 31 Protestant, Eastern Orthodox and Anglican churches in the
United States. One proposal calls for the establishment within the council of a
Commission on Worship and Evangelism, which Dr. Brouwer said, ''promises to give
body to our spirit of renewed commitment to the spiritual dimension of our
struggles.''

He also said that he would seek to establish improved links with the Roman
Catholic Church and with conservative evangelical churches, which do not belong
to the council.

Dr. Brouwer also called for the establishment of an office of financial
development to oversee the organization's $35 million annual budget. Seventy
percent of the budget goes to Church World Service, a relief arm of the council
that played a central role in bringing supplies to drought-stricken Ethiopia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 16, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

State Department;
Who's Who Now the Old-Boy Network Is Dead

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 15


Before the Vietnam era, the important relationships inside the State Department
and Foreign Service flowed principally from family background and Ivy League
school connections. Then, in the mid-1960's and early 1970's, working on and in
Vietnam became the central link for the inside power-brokers.

Now there is no single network that pervades Foggy Bottom, no single set of
friends and allies bonded by one common experience who help one another into top
positions and call one another on the old-boy basis to iron out their bosses'
differences behind the scenes.

Now there are at least four often overlapping networks: of Asia hands, of former
Vietnam servers, of special assistants and of old Henry A. Kissinger hands who
dominate European issues.

Bonding Occurred Early

Like most networks, the bonding among these people occurred early in their
foreign service careers. Unlike most political networks, the bonding is not
based on ideological goals. Most of these officials are demonstrably apolitical,
although most tend toward the conservative side of policy for professional
diplomats.

Many of them can be found either in those jobs on the seventh floor that deal
with Secretary of State George P. Shultz daily and directly or in the No. 2 or
''principal deputy'' slots directly under assistant secretaries of state. If it
can be said that the State Department can be controlled at all, these are the
pivotal positions.

And according to a number of State Department officials, the two men at the core
of the networks or those with the most links are M. Charles Hill, whose job as
executive assistant to the Secretary gives him an office with adjoining private
doors to Mr. Shultz's, and Frank G. Wisner, principal deputy assistant secretary
of state for Africa. Mr. Wisner has links to all four networks, Mr. Hill to all
except the Asia hands.

Without any of these links except Asia but right up there with direct dealings
with Mr. Shultz and around the building is Nicholas Platt, the department's
executive secretary. From his glass-enclosed command post in the middle of the
seventh floor near Mr. Shultz's office, Mr. Platt decides who will handle what
issues and controls all formal communications into and out of the department.

Said one official who is close to all three men: ''We're not talking about a
conspiracy here. These are guys, along with a lot of other guys, who have worked
together over the years and trust each other and try to help each other.''

The old Asia hands whose careers have been principally based in that area
include Mr. Wisner and Mr. Platt, along with Morton I. Abramowitz, the director
of the bureau of Intelligence and Research; Kenneth Quinn, a deputy to Mr.
Platt; and Michael H. Armacost, the Under Secretary for Policy. Mr. Armacost,
who had been serving as Ambassador the the Philippines, leapfrogged over his
colleagues a year ago when Mr. Shultz picked him for the department's No. 3 job.

The special assistants' club includes Mr. Hill, Mr. Quinn, Mr. Wisner and John
H. Kelly, now principal deputy assistant secretary of state for Europe. Both Mr.
Wisner and Mr. Kelly were deputies to the executive secretary in the recent
past. Also in this club is Arnold Raphel, the No. 2 man in the Bureau of Near
Eastern and South Asian Affairs, who used to be an aide to Joseph Sisco when he
was Under Secretary for Policy in the Kissinger era and later an aide to
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance.

The Vietnam group has dwindled over the years. But some of those whose ties go
back to the years of American involvement there are Mr. Hill, Mr. Wisner and Mr.
Quinn, as well as L. Craig Johnstone, who is now Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs handling Central America, and John D.
Negroponte, now Ambassador to Honduras but slated to be Assistant Secretary for
Oceans and International and Scientific Affairs.

The most insular of the networks is the European one. The group congealed when
Mr. Kissinger was Secretary of State from 1975 to 1977. Unlike the other
networks, the Kissinger hands stuck almost exclusively to the European area and
particularly to Soviet-American relations. Almost all of them were proteges of
two key Kissinger aides, Helmut Sonnenfeldt, now at the Brookings Institution,
and Lawrence S. Eagleburger, now president of Kissinger Associates, a consulting
concern based in New York.

Three in this group are now deputy assistant secretaries in the European Affairs
bureau: John Kelly, a Western European expert; Robie M. Palmer, a Soviet expert;
and James F. Dobbins, and arms control expert.

Speechwriters for Kissinger

In the Kissinger years, Mr. Palmer and Charles Hill were the prime speechwriters
for the Secretary, while Mr. Wisner handled the negotiations on what was then
called Rhodesia and is now Zimbabwe.

All these men also were connected to L. Paul Bremer 3d, now Ambassador to
Sweden. He used to be a special assistant to Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Eagleburger
and was the department's executive secretary under Alexander M. Haig Jr. And it
was he who brought Mr. Kelly and Mr. Hill up to that seventh-floor office.

There are, of course, other networks throughout the building, but none whose
influence is so pronounced with Mr. Shultz and so widespread in affecting
personnel and policy decisions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of M. Charles Hill; photo of Frank G. Wisner; photo of Arnold
Raphel

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 16, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEW;
'TICKET TO SEOUL,' JOURNALISTS' FREE TRIP

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 611 words


WHEN Kenneth Ellis, a producer at KQED, a public television station in San
Francisco, was invited to a two-week, all-expenses-paid trip to Asia by the
World Media Association, an arm of the Rev. Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church,
he asked himself, ''Why would the Moonies take journalists to Asia?'' So, Mr.
Ellis relates in a rather self-satisified way at the outset of ''Ticket to
Seoul,'' he decided to go on the trip but pay his own way. The documentary, on
Channel 13 tonight at 10 o'clock on the ''Intercom'' series, is the result.

The tour took Mr. Ellis and a cameraman to a refugee camp on the Thai-Cambodian
border for Cambodians on the run from their Vietnam-controlled regime; to the
Phillipines, where we hear from opponents of the Government of President
Ferdinand E. Marcos as well as its supporters; to Taiwan, where we witness signs
of industrial activity and military readiness; to Tokyo, where Mr. Ellis
surmises that he wasn't invited to see Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone because
''we had declared our ideological independence by paying our own way,'' and
finally to South Korea and the demilitarized zone, where the camera plays on a
North Korean soldier whose hand keeps fidgeting in the vicinity of his holster.

''Ticket to Seoul'' offers as many surprises as a home movie by a neighbor back
from Europe with shots of the Tower of London, the Tower of Pisa and the Eiffel
Tower and observations to match. Mr. Ellis, who has a taste for such phrases as,
''We hit the streets to get a handle on the people,'' apparently believes he is
delivering news when he reports that there is ''precious little liberty'' in
Taiwan and that Thailand is ''a land of haves and have-nots.'' The freshest
footage is of a frenetic air-raid drill in Seoul, where, as Mr. Ellis notes with
typical discernment, ''the threat of Communism is more than a conservative
cliche.'' Our guide manages to be at once ingenuous and supercilious. ''So much
for objectivity,'' he comments after hearing Bo Hi Pak, head of the World Media
Association, expound upon his ''God-centered world view,'' which, he preaches,
can save the world from Communism.

Mr. Ellis interviews some of the journalists on the trip about whether it is
influencing them. Since they all take it as given that the Unification Church
was not investing $500,000 on them without hope of some sort of return, and the
reporting that came out of the tour was mixed, there isn't much for Mr. Ellis to
expose. He is reduced to running excerpts from pieces based on the trip that
appeared in ''Human Events,'' a conservative publication. It is unlikely that
the free ride could have made its correspondent any more anti-Communist than he
was when he started out.

Should journalists accept generosity from such a source? Mr. Ellis doesn't think
so. But his companions, mostly from small publications, ask how else are they to
obtain firsthand looks at these faraway lands for the benefit of their readers?
On the other hand, a freelance critic of the Unification Church makes the
reasonable point that by going along on such a trip, journalists serve to
legitimize the activities of the sponsors. The issue remains unresolved, and not
all that compelling.

Unlike the Unification Church, Mr. Ellis does no proselytizing and is not bent
on making a political or ideological argument. His deficiency as a guide is that
he does not seem to know when he is dealing in common knowledge and unoriginal
opinions. The summing up by a Belgian journalist at the conclusion of the tour
applies to his documentary: ''I don't think we learned anything that informed
people all over the world don't already know.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BEHIND MILITARY BUDGET RISES: POLITICAL AIMS OF LAWMAKERS

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1919 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 16


Representative Joseph P. Addabbo recalls visiting the headquarters of the
Rockwell International Corporation, the prime contractor for the B-1 bomber.
There he saw a map of the nation, with strings radiating from the plant to every
subcontractor building a part of the bomber. The strings covered the entire map.

Mr. Addabbo, a Queens Democrat, remembered the map when he was leading an
unsuccessful fight in Congress to kill the B-1 program.

''One by one I was losing members,'' said Mr. Addabbo, who heads the
Appropriations Subcommittee on Defense. ''They said to me: 'Joe, they've built a
plant in my district. I need the jobs.' ''

As that anecdote shows, Congress is buffeted by conflicting forces as it tries
to grapple with the military budget, which now accounts for about one-third of
all Government spending. The lawmakers are supposed to oversee Pentagon
operations and make informed judgments about military policy.

A Sort of Public Works Bill

But, by their own accounts, they are often too pressed for time, too overwhelmed
by the size and complexity of the Pentagon's requests and too intimidated by the
military officers who defend the requests to render informed judgments.
Moreover, the lawmakers' parochial and political concerns motivate them, at
times, to treat the Defense Department's budget as sort of a public works bill
that dispenses money and jobs back home.

''The department is so big and cumbersome that nobody wants to dig in and try to
understand it,'' said Senator Charles E. Grassley, an Iowa Republican who has
emerged as a leading critic of the Pentagon. ''The military budget has
deteriorated into a pork barrel allocation of resources.''

Some lawmakers assert that procuring contracts and jobs for their voters is not
something to apologize for. ''It's an inherent part of representative
government,'' said Senator Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat who is a member of
the Armed Services Committee. ''If you like what happens, you call it democracy.
If you don't, you call it pork barrel politics.''

Sizable Reductions Considered

But there is broad agreement on Capitol Hill that the pork barrel aspect of the
military budget makes it extremely difficult for lawmakers to reduce the budget
in an efficient way. Major weapon systems, such as the B-1 bomber, are virtually
impossible to eliminate. And large bases are almost as invulnerable.

However, the threat of a soaring deficit and rising public concern about
wasteful Pentagon practices have moved Congress to focus on the way it handles
the military budget, and lawmakers are considering sizable reductions in the
President's original military request.

But Caspar W. Weinberger, the Secretary of Defense, has steadfastly refused to
set priorities within that request or provide guidance for Congressional
budget-cutters. As a result, Congress is now making, on its own, decisions that
could have a significant impact on the military for years to come.

Focus Seen as Shortsighted

''We're trying to fill the void the Pentagon left, and I'm not sure we're able
to do that,'' said Representative Trent Lott of Mississippi, the House minority
whip.

Many lawmakers agree with Mr. Lott that they are ill equipped to manage the
Pentagon budget, and the tendency to play politics is only one reason. To a
remarkable degree, the legislators who have prime responsibility for Pentagon
spending agree that they focus far too much on detail and not nearly enough on
the broad sweep of military policy and priorities.

As Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, the ranking Democrat on the Armed Services
Committee, said recently, ''We are spending most of our time looking at the
grains of sand on the beach, and we are not looking at the ocean or looking over
the horizon.''

New Expertise on the Rise

That is starting to change a bit as a new generation of Congressional experts,
including Senator Nunn and Representative Les Aspin, the new chairman of the
House Armed Services Committee, take larger roles on Capitol Hill. For example,
Mr. Aspin, a Wisconsin Democrat, established a new panel within his committee
this year that would examine long-range military goals, not just short-term
budget requests.

In Mr. Aspin's view, Congress should act as a board of directors for the
Pentagon. ''We should oversee policy,'' said the chairman, who worked at the
Pentagon in the late 1960's before his election to Congress. ''And we should
assert ourselves when we think things have gotten screwed up.''

Mr. Aspin concedes, however, that it will be next year at the earliest before
Congress begins to change its procedures. The lawmakers are now evaluating more
than $300 billion in military spending proposals, and probably the main question
they will be asking is the one mentioned by Mr. Addabbo: Who gets what?

Take the example of Mr. Lott, whose district on the Gulf Coast of Mississippi
includes the Ingalls Shipyard, Keesler Air Force Base and a variety of smaller
military installations. All told, 24,000 jobs in the area depend on military
spending, and he admits that his desire to reduce the Federal deficit will be
weighed against his impulse to protect his constituents.

''It is tough to balance that,'' said Mr. Lott, whose father once worked at the
Ingalls Shipyard in his hometown of Pascagoula, Miss. ''You're talking about a
lot of jobs. A freeze in the defense budget would really have negative
ramifications across the country.''

Spreading Contracts Around

According to Mr. Addabbo, military contractors like Rockwell have grown
increasingly shrewd about spreading their subcontracts as broadly as possible.
The result is a larger constituency on Capitol Hill for their activities.

''Somewhere in this town,'' said Senator Grassley, ''there is a computer that
can tell you where every nut and bolt is made for the B-1 bomber.''

Moreover, military contractors have bolstered their bargaining position with
Congress by establishing political action committees and vastly increasing
campaign contributions. The 20 largest contractors have doubled their donations
since President Reagan took office in January 1981.

Fred Wertheimer, president of Common Cause, the public-affairs lobbying
organization, called these contributions ''a critical part of the lobbying
process'' that he said increased both the Pentagon's budget and the accounts of
the contractors.

Source of Money and Jobs

But lawmakers have historically viewed the military budget as a prime source of
money and jobs for their districts. Mr. Addabbo himself, while a strong critic
of military spending, has looked out for the interests of the Grumman
Corporation, an aerospace manufacturer on Long Island that has workers in his
Queens district. Another member of the House Appropriations Subcommittee on
Defense, Representative Charles Wilson of Texas, plays a similar role in
promoting the fortunes of home-state contractors.

Throughout much of his public career, Henry M. Jackson was known as the
''Senator from Boeing'' because of his outspoken support for Boeing, an airplane
manufacturer based in Washington, the state he represented until his death on
Sept. 1, 1983. Representative Norman D. Dicks, another member of the
Appropriations Subcommittee on Defense, has continued to defend Boeing's
interests on Capitol Hill.

Representative Mervyn M. Dymally, a California Democrat, is the only member of
the Congressional Black Caucus who sometimes votes in favor of the MX missile;
several contractors in and around his Long Beach district make parts of the
weapon, a highly accurate intercontinental missile with multiple warheads.

In the last Congress, one of the key votes for the missile was cast by
Representative Jerry M. Patterson, a liberal Democrat from California who
conceded that he was voting in favor of jobs for his district. But it did not
help; he was not re-elected last November.

The Military's 'Iron Triangle'

Lawmakers who defend weapon systems and bases that promote jobs in their
districts have a clear common cause with the Pentagon and the military
contractors. Together, they form what has been called an ''iron triangle'' of
powerful interests, all united behind the goal of preserving a particular chunk
of the military budget.

''The services come up here and say we need so many fighters and so many
helicopters,'' said Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado.
''They sit there with all that braid, and it's very difficult to raise your hand
and say, 'General, I think you're wrong.' ''

According to Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana, a Republican member of the Armed
Services Committee, all this ''adds up to an intensity factor'' that
budget-cutters simply cannot match. ''From a political point of view, Congress
cannot and does not cut procurement programs,'' he said.

This tendency to preserve whole programs is enhanced because Congress seldom
examines Pentagon proposals when they are still in development, before they are
asked to commit funds to purchase large numbers of specific weapons. This is
what Senator Quayle calls the ''camel's-nose-under-the-tent syndrome,'' and it
is adroitly practiced by military planners.

Trimming on the Margins

''Once it gets into the procurement stage, a system develops a life of its
own,'' said Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, a Democrat who is becoming
increasingly influential on military matters. ''There's no way you can make much
of a difference except on the margins.''

As a result, when Congress sets out to trim the Pentagon budget, most of the
savings are realized by stretching out and deferring major purchases. For
example, instead of canceling the C-17 cargo plane outright, the lawmakers would
simply decide to buy fewer planes in a given fiscal year.

''We do it because it's easy,'' said Mr. McCurdy. ''You don't have to make
choices, and you don't have to alienate your friends.''

Most members of Congress however, agree with Senator Nunn's observation that
such a practice ''causes monumental inefficiency'' by raising the cost of each
item purchased. Moreover, the weapon system remains alive, ready to soak up more
funds in the next budget year.

Focus on the Wider Picture

But few lawmakers hold out much hope of eliminating the pork barrel aspect of
military spending. What they do think they can change, however, is the enormous
amount of time they spend on ''micromanaging'' the Pentagon budget.

Some suggest that the budget should extend for two years, instead of one.
Others, like Representative Jim Courter, a New Jersey Republican who has been a
critic of the Pentagon, contend that the current procedure, under which military
spending must be authorized and appropriated by separate bills, can be
telescoped.

''Congress,'' said Mr. Courter, ''would then be able to look at the broader
questions that they don't have time for right now.''

Congressional procedures change slowly, however, and to many lawmakers, the best
chance of making a more reasoned and rational judgment about military spending
in the near future rests with the new leaders, particularly Mr. Nunn and Mr.
Aspin.

Both of these experts in military policy are 46 years old; thus, they reached
political maturity at the time of the Vietnam War, not World War II, and they
take a much more skeptical view of the Pentagon than their predecessors. As Mr.
McCurdy put it, ''They've definitely taken the rubber out of the rubber stamp in
Congress.'' ---- Next: Changing the incentive system.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Billions for Defense: The Spending Debate; Fourth of five articles

GRAPHIC: photo of aircraft carrier Lexington (NYT/Dan Miller) (page D22)

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Wallace Spurns Request For Extradition to Texas

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: ENTERPRISE, Ala., May 16


A disabled man wanted by the Texas authorities for leaving that state in
violation of his probation got a chance at a new life Wednesday when Gov. George
C. Wallace of Alabama blocked his extradition to Dallas.

The disabled man, Billy Moody, who has lived here since 1981, is wanted in
Dallas for violating the terms of his probation in 1976 heroin and burglary
cases.

But in a letter to Gov. Mark White of Texas, Mr. Wallace said he would not allow
Mr. Moody to be extradited because of the ''great deal'' of community support
and character references for the man, said Bryan Morgan, a legal adviser to Mr.
Wallace.

Mr. Moody had his left leg amputated at the hip in 1970 as a result of wounds
suffered in Vietnam, according to his lawyer, Paul Young.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thai Troops Force Vietnamese Soldiers Out

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 137 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 16


Thai soldiers drove intruding Vietnamese soldiers back into Cambodia today in
intense fighting along Thailand's southeastern border, military officials said.

After more than a week of fighting, Thai rangers and marines seized part of a
Vietnamese-occupied hill just inside the Thai border Tuesday. On Wednesday both
sides clashed for about eight hours with mortars, antitank cannons and machine
guns, the military said.

Between 800 and 1,200 Vietnamese soldiers crossed into southeastern Thailand's
Trat Province last month in pursuit of Cambodian guerrillas who have been
fighting Vietnamese occupation forces from bases along the Thai-Cambodian
border.

Instead of withdrawing the Vietnamese set up a permanent base on a hill in
Thailand, about a half mile from the border, where they laid mines and built
bunkers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 60 words


The preface to The Times Magazine's special issue about Vietnam, on March 31,
misidentified the building shown in a famous photograph of the rooftop
evacuation of Americans by helicopter in 1975. The site was also misidentified
in a picture caption on April 30 with a Vietnam chronology. It was a Saigon
apartment building, not the United States Embassy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Foreign Fund Warning

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 13, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 214 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 16


House Democrats today warned the Reagan Administration that if it did not get
Republicans strongly behind a money bill for international development agencies
such as the World Bank, the bill would not be passed and the United States would
not meet its international commitments.

The warning was given to the Treasury Secretary, James A. Baker 3d, by members
of a House appropriations subcommittee. In reply, he pledged that ''I'm going to
do everything I can'' to get wavering Republicans behind the funding measure,
which is in trouble in the House after a defeat two weeks ago in the
subcommittee on foreign operations.

Mr. Baker testified that the development institutions - the World Bank, the
Inter-American Development Bank and the Asian Development Bank - were ''very
important to our overall economic policy.''

But the subcommittee chairman, David R. Obey of Wisconsin, told Mr. Baker that
he and his fellow Democrats were ''not prepared to be punching bags for the
little leaguers on your side of the aisle.'' He noted that in the past Democrats
who supported Administration funding requests for the agencies had been
criticized by conservative Republicans on the ground that some of the loans
helped countries opposed to the United States, such as Vietnam or Nicaragua.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INCREASED ATTACKS ON 'BOAT PEOPLE' REPORTED

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 23, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, May 18


Refugee officials here say they have been receiving reports of a new surge in
pirate attacks on Vietnamese ''boat people,'' often marked by the ramming and
sinking of the vessels and the kidnapping and raping of young women.

''What it appears we are dealing with is an attempt on the part of some
particularly cynical pirates to destroy evidence of their deeds,'' said Michel
Barton, a press spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Although the percentage of boats attacked by pirates declined from 64 percent in
1982 to 36 percent last year, Mr. Barton said that the number remained
unacceptably high and that individual cases indicated a new viciousness by the
assailants.

In 1984, when 24,783 refugees from Vietnam arrived in Southeast Asian ports
after fleeing by sea, pirates killed 61 refugees, raped 110 women and abducted
hundreds more, Mr. Barton said. In addition, he said, 130 people were confirmed
as missing because of pirate attacks.

So far this year, Mr. Barton said, the United Nations High Commissioner has 38
confirmed dead or unaccounted for as a result of attacks by pirates, who operate
from Thailand and Malaysia.

Increase in Incidents Seen

United Nations officials have grown alarmed at what they say they see as a clear
increase in the incidence of the ramming of boats after pirate attacks and
growing evidence that a key motive of the pirates, apart from robbery, is the
abduction and rape of young women, who are often passed from one pirate boat to
another.

''This can last for months,'' Mr. Barton said.

In one incident involving a group that fled Vietnam on March 17, Mr. Barton
said, five men were thrown overboard, followed by a woman and her 2-year-old
daughter, who drowned.

The woman's 8-year-old son and 10-year-old daughter jumped in after their mother
but survived by clinging to flotsam from the boat, which was rammed and sunk.
Eight other women and children are missing, he said.

Mr. Barton told of four other cases that he said United States officials had
confirmed as accurate after interviews with survivors.

'Happening Right Now'

''We believe these incidents are indicative of what is happening right now on
the South China Sea,'' Mr. Barton said, adding that there had been many other
reports, ''some of them particularly gruesome.''

He said the United Nations would report only those cases that it is convinced
actually occurred.

The new wave of pirate violence might stem from growing pressure being put on
the Thai and Malaysian pirates under an anti-piracy program begun in 1981. The
program involves surveillance by aircraft and patrol boats of a large area of
the South China Sea by specially trained Thai Navy, marine and port personnel.
The program has been expanded every year.

Arrests Resulted in Convictions

United Nations officials say the many arrests since 1981 have resulted in 32
convictions and have acted as somewhat of a deterrent, lowering the overall
number of attacks.

At the same time, the officials have reported an increase in the number of
Vietnamese leaving under the Orderly Departure Program established by Vietnam
and the United Nations in 1979.

Last year, the 29,154 Vietnamese leaving under the program surpassed the number
of boat people for the first time. This year, ''for every 1,000 leaving by boat,
2,000 are leaving'' under the program, Mr. Barton said.

The 2,453 boat people who arrived in Southeast Asian ports in January and
February of this year represent a continuing reduction in their numbers,
according to United Nations records.

A total of 555,073 Vietnamese have fled by boat since 1975.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA GETS HIGH MARKS ON SETTLING REFUGEES

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: PEKING


Of the millions of Vietnamese who have fled their country by boat or on foot
since the Communist victory in 1975, few have attracted less attention around
the world than the 280,000 who came north to China.

Among Vietnamese populations abroad, those in China are second in numbers only
to those who have found new homes in the United States. Although the
overwhelming majority of those who came here are of Chinese ethnic descent,
settling down has not always been easy, and years after arriving thousands are
still actively seeking acceptance elsewhere.

A glimpse into the lives of people in China's only refugee community of any size
was provided recently by Poul Hartling, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, who discussed the matter at a news conference in a visit that included
talks with senior Chinese officials, visits to refugee camps and the signing of
a new aid agreement.

Mr. Hartling, a former Danish Prime Minister, announced that the United Nations
would give an additional $12 million from 1986 to 1988 to help China resettle
the Vietnamese. It would bring total United Nations assistance to the Peking
authorities to more than $51 million since 1978, when the refugees first started
arriving here with tales of official discrimination by the Hanoi Government
against those of its citizens who were of Chinese origin.

Refugees Sent to Farms

According to figures given by Chinese officials, the United Nations assistance
is barely a quarter of what the Peking Government has spent on the problem. The
Chinese put their commitments to date at more than 600 million yuan, or $211
million at current rates of exchange. Much of this has been invested in the 196
state-run farms to which China has directed most of the Vietnamese citizens, as
well as about 4,000 refugees from Laos.

Mr. Hartling said the United Nations agency considered a resettlement program a
success when 80 percent of those involved were satisfied with their new lives, a
criterion that he said had been met among the Vietnamese here.

But he acknowledged that soundings taken by the international agency indicated
that about 20 percent of the refugees remained unhappy, with a large number
still requesting transfer to other countries, mainly the United States,
Australia, Britain, Canada or France.

The refugees are concentrated in four Chinese provinces, Yunnan, Guangdong,
Fujian and Jiangxi, and in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region. At most of the
collective farms they form a distinct minority of 10 to 30 percent of the work
force, differentiated by dialects as well as by customs. Many were formerly city
dwellers and find adjustment to the rural life difficult, according to officials
in the United Nations office here.

Efforts Are Praised

Mr. Hartling spoke highly of the efforts made by China to help the refugees
integrate. He said the greatest success so far had been at the port of Beihai on
the Gulf of Tonkin, in the Guangxi Zhuang region, where 11,000 refugee fishermen
have been established as trawlermen.

''They have the same work, they have the same pay, they have the same social and
other facilities,'' Mr. Hartling said. ''They are certainly not discriminated
against.''

But Mr. Hartling and other United Nations officials said a major point of
friction had been China's strict birth control policies and the failure of many
refugee families to observe them.

According to the United Nations officials, China places no impediment in the way
of refugees seeking to settle elsewhere, but there are few offers from the
countries where the refugees would like to settle. So far, only 1,300 have left
China, and several hundred others are marooned in a transit camp at Fangcheng in
the Guangxi Zhuang region. Mr. Hartling said ''a handful'' had returned to
Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 85 words


An article on May 5 about Yale University's acquisition of some weapons used in
the killing of four Kent State University students in 1970 incorrectly described
some of the victims. Only two, not all, of those slain by Ohio National
Guardsmen were reported to be at an antiwar rally before the shooting started.
They were Jeffrey G. Miller and Allison Krause. A third student, Sandra Lee
Scheuer, was on her way to class, and the fourth, William K. Schroeder, was
walking toward the scene when he was shot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AT YALE, A SCHOLAR PRODUCES SMALL MAGAZINE PROVIDING VIETNAMESE REFUGEES WITH A
VOICE

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 46, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN


Huynh Sanh Thong, who edits a small journal here, receives so many poems,
stories, personal histories and essays that he cannot possibly publish
everything that hopeful writers send him.

The office he uses at Yale University is piled with manuscripts and papers. His
table at home in nearby Hamden sags with more. Their authors, in most cases, are
refugees from Vietnam.

''I'm overwhelmed by stuff like this,'' said Mr. Thong, seizing the thick draft
of a book by a writer named Ha Thuc Sinh.

The book is a memoir whose Vietnamese title means ''Blood University.'' In more
than 800 pages, it describes the Communist re-education camps in which its
author spent 1,685 days before fleeing Vietnam for California several years ago.

Mr. Thong had been translating poetry for a living when, in 1981, he began
directing Yale's new Southeast Asian Refugee Project. The project was set up to
collect the literature, letters, oral histories and other memories and cultural
artifacts of hundreds of thousands of refugees who had poured into the United
States from Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. It has been supported by Yale and by
grants totaling $125,000 from the Henry Luce Foundation.

A Scholarly Journal

Mr. Thong concentrated on the writings of refugees from his native Vietnam,
which he left in 1948. And in 1983 he published the first issue of The Vietnam
Forum, a small magazine that seeks to publish the best new Vietnamese literature
and scholarship.

Explaining his motives for spending long hours editing, translating, typing and
contributing his own literary-historical essays to the magazine, the 58-year-old
Mr. Thong said: ''Will my children know their history? What is this Vietnamese
culture? Will it disappear?'' Americans, he said, have written countless volumes
on Vietnam, and Vietnam's Communists have written others. But what of the
Vietnamese who lost the war, or favored the Communists and later turned against
them, or endured the warfare of others? What of the refugees?

The tales these people have to tell are often still locked in their hearts, Mr.
Thong said. In Vietnam the Government simply outlaws such stories. In the United
States few Americans have any idea what this ''other version'' of Vietnamese
experience might be. And when unknown Vietnamese refugees do produce serious
stories from the materials of their recent history, said Mr. Thong, their voices
sometimes go unheard among the pronouncements of former South Vietnamese
soldiers and politicians.

Circulation Below 1,000

Scores of other Vietnamese-language periodicals are published in the United
States, but practically none of them pretend to literature or scholarship. The
Vietnam Forum is therefore unusual and, though the journal's circulation is
still less than 1,000, and for only two issues per year, it has found readers in
Vietnamese communities across the country.

One recent issue offered a pleasant memoir of a refugee writer's girlhood in Hue
(the old central-Vietnamese city that became the scene of fierce fighting during
the war), an essay on the traditional legal status of Vietnamese women by a
jurist who left Saigon a decade ago, and a collection of six poems by Vietnamese
still living in Vietnam.

All six poems deal with southern Vietnam after the fall of Saigon. Most of the
authors use pseudonyms. All but one of their poems are laments or reveal some
bitterness toward the Communists.

Attacks on the New Order

Mr. Thong has also published works by authors who still live in Vietnam and have
at least polite relations with the Government - including essays by the
historian Ta Chi Dai Truong and poems by such aging poets as Xuan Dieu and Huy
Thong. But the most arresting stories and poems are usually by refugees. And
some of these are passionate, detailed indictments of the new order.

One story, ''The Two Ducks,'' to be published in the next issue, describes the
attempts of a prisoner at a rural Communist re-education camp to protect two pet
ducks from the greed, rules, hunger and general absurdity of the camp's guards.
The author, Nguyen Ngoc Ngan, fled Vietnam by boat in 1979 and now lives in
Canada.

Mr. Thong first came to America after spending a year in jail for subversion in
French-colonial Vietnam.

He later got involved in South Vietnamese politics - but from a distance, mainly
in Washington and New Haven. A return to Saigon in early 1964, when he ran South
Vietnam's national press office, ended badly; the Government at the time was
''clownish'' as well as corrupt, he said. He returned to New Haven, lived
obscurely and resumed teaching Vietnamese.

''In the early 1970's I couldn't join the hawks or the doves,'' he recalled.
''Money to teach Vietnamese disappeared. I was losing my country and my job. I
felt so lonely. So in true Asian fashion I turned to poetry.''

He turned to the masterpiece of Vietnamese literature, ''The Tale of Kieu,'' an
early 19th century narrative poem, and he translated it into English. In 1979,
Yale University Press published Mr. Thong's anthology, ''The Heritage of
Vietnamese Poetry.''

In 1981, though he was never a professor, he was awarded the Harry J. Benda
prize in Asian scholarship; and in 1983 Yale published a new, bilingual edition
of ''The Tale of Kieu.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Huynh Sanh Thong (NYT/Steve Miller)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BLOCK THAT VIETNAM MYTH

BYLINE: By George W. Ball;George W. Ball was Under Secretary of State in the
Kennedy and Johnson Administrations.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON, N.J.


Soon after the end of the First World War, Gen. Erich von Ludendorff and some
reactionary nationalist leaders invented a myth to explain Germany's defeat. The
German Army, thoroughly beaten in the field after the failure of the March 1918
offensive, had, they asserted, really won the war. But then, like Siegfried in
the heroic German sagas, it had been ''stabbed in the back'' by the politicians.

Today, a similar myth is being fabricated to explain our fiasco in Vietnam. For
example, Richard M. Nixon has written in his most recent book: ''When we signed
the Paris peace agreements in 1973, we had won the war . . . Defeat came only
when the Congress . . . refused to provide military aid to Saigon.'' In other
words, Mr. Nixon implies, Congress had stabbed his Administration - and the
American people - in the back. That myth has been endorsed, though somewhat less
categorically, by both Henry A. Kissinger and The Wall Street Journal and is
being repeated as an article of faith by the American right wing.

The facts, however, tell a different story.

By the end of 1968, most of the top echelon of the Johnson Administration had
concluded that the Vietnam War was unwinnable. When Lyndon B. Johnson declined
to run for a new term, he left the problem of extrication to his successor.

Unlike Mr. Johnson, Mr. Nixon had no responsibility for our Vietnamese
imbroglio, and he could have made a tactical settlement without confessing
error. America then had in Vietnam a vast army of more than a half-million men
and, to exploit that moment of ultimate bargaining power, Mr. Nixon could have
offered the North Vietnamese a Hobson's choice.

If they were prepared to make an overall settlement, we would agree to withdraw
our forces unilaterally; if they rejected that offer, we would pursue the war
with even greater intensity. To be sure, there was no way we could have hoped to
achieve our full objective, but we could almost certainly have made a better
bargain than we made four years later - and saved thousands of human lives.

But, overvaluing the efficacy of air power against a primitive economy, Mr.
Nixon and Mr. Kissinger remained bemused by the thought that by dealing ''brutal
blows,'' our bombers could force Hanoi to the breaking point. Thus, it was not
until 20 months after Mr. Nixon became President that Mr. Kissinger even
tentatively played the one bargaining card that had any meaning to Hanoi - the
hint of an offer to withdraw American troops unilaterally. But that was too
late; by then Mr. Nixon had destroyed our bargaining leverage by announcing
major troop withdrawals and indicating that he planned a phased withdrawal of
all American forces. All Hanoi had to do was to stall negotiations until the
American Army had gone home, then sign an agreement that would assure their
victory over the South Vietnamese. So they signed nothing while continuing to
fight, until America had withdrawn all but a meager remnant of 23,000 men who
were themselves shortly scheduled to leave.

At that point, the North Vietnamese had effectively won - and they knew it.
After some months of replenishing their supplies and regrouping their forces,
they rolled up the South Vietnamese Army and captured Saigon while the world
watched television pictures of desperate South Vietnamese hanging to the
undercarriages of the helicopters that were evacuating our countrymen. Such is
the lamentable story of America's defeat. Rather than using our bargaining power
to end the war when we still had a vast army in the field, we deployed heavy
bombers to spread indiscriminate carnage while we brought home our troops. And
once our forces had left Vietnam, defeat was effectively assured. So there was
no stab in the back. The public was sick of the war, and Congress wisely
registered that repulsion by recognizing reality and halting the killing and
further profligate waste of resources.

No one but our soldiers, sailors and airmen who did the actual fighting emerged
free from blame. The Eisenhower Administration promised limited aid to the
Saigon Government; the Kennedy Administration provided military equipment and
greatly increased the number of military advisors; the Johnson Administration
turned our limited commitment into an all-out engagement; and the Nixon
Administration kept America in the war a further four years at a cost in lives
of 20,000 young Americans and several hundred thousand Vietnamese.

No doubt future historians will reject current efforts to invent a Vietnam
betrayal legend, just as they have totally discredited General Ludendorff's
myth. But even though self-serving revisions of history have only a short life
span, they can still do harm. The Ludendorff myth not only helped poison public
life in the Weimar Republic but also gave Hitler a strong assist in his rise to
power.

Vietnam has already provided enough turbulence and outrage; we can do without a
divisive mythology that can only create further resentment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE CLASS OF 1985

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Most of the young men and women graduating from college this year were born in
or around l963, the year President John F. Kennedy was murdered.

They were 5 years old when President Nixon was elected, 11 when he resigned
after Watergate, 12 at the end of the Vietnam War, and 17 or 18 when they
entered college and Ronald Reagan entered the White House.

Dates are important. For this year's college graduates, the recent 40th
anniversary of the Second World War, with its flickering black and white
television pictures of broken cities and broken lives, must have seemed almost
as remote as the struggles of the pioneers on the prairies or the bread lines
and the flight of the Okies during the Great Depression.

So it's no surprise that there's a gap, as usual, between the memories of the
Class of l985 and the perceptions of their parents and grandparents. But
somehow, or so it seems in this corner, the gap is wider and deeper this year
than usual.

It's not only that the graduates and their old folks have changed, but that the
nation has changed faster than we can change ourselves. The population of the
United States has increased by over 50 million since this year's graduates were
born. The wheeled industries have moved into the computerized world, from coal
and steel into laser beams on earth and even in the stars.

This is not the sort of thing, in the confusion of leaving college, most young
graduates are thinking about. They probably think they're going into a world as
dangerous and troublesome as any faced by any other generation. But I happen to
think they're the lucky ones and are going into the most hopeful years of the
20th century.

In the next 15 years, despite all the present commercial conflicts, local wars,
tribal brutalities and philosophical confrontations, backed by nuclear weapons,
the chances are that the Class of l985 will not have to face a third world war
in this century; and if they do in this nuclear age, they won't have to endure
it for long.

Their problems are likely to be quite different and maybe more difficult: not
how to deal with war that threatens the nation and brings people together; not
even how to deal with adversity (the poor and uneducated, as usual, have to deal
with that), but how to deal with prosperity and the new Four Freedoms of the
modern age: the freedom of sex, the freedom of booze and other drugs, the
freedom of divorce, and the freedom to run away from the consequences of their
disbelief in anybody or anything.

This is a hard call for the Class of l985. Most of the 960,000 college graduates
this year will get jobs, including the 60,000 blacks among them - most in useful
work far from the sooty industrial tunnels of the past.

They'll work in the new, clean, antiseptic computerized service industries in
the sun: jobs for both educated husbands and wives, bringing in enough money to
hire other people to look after their children.

There are ways to escape from this opulent trap of material success, but the
Class of l985 has not had much help in trying to do so.

Since high-school days they have been encouraged to believe that college is not
a means to an understanding of the history and poetry of life, but an employment
agency, promising two careers in every family, and two cars in every garage.

The Wall Street Journal reported the other day that economics was now the
favored subject among undergraduates, even at Harvard. In the early l970's,
economics at Harvard ranked sixth after studies in history, English literature,
government, philosophy and something called the psychology of social
responsibility. But no more. Even The Journal, no enemy of economics, didn't
seem to think that this switch in priorities was a good idea.

The Class of l985 has heard a great deal in these last four years about the
''gross national product,'' the menace of the Russians and the dangers of
Federal budget and trade deficits - all important - but very little about the
suffering of the human family at home or abroad.

In a period of spiritual bewilderment, this year's college graduates have been
asked, often in the name of religion, to confuse selfishness with self-reliance,
to regard their own government as an enemy, and to concentrate on their own
material well-being. My kingdom come . . .

My will be done . . . Hallowed be My name . . . It will take awhile for the
Class of '85 to sort out the tinsel and hollow political cardboard characters
and false values of the present day.

Here's hoping they'll have somebody to hold their hand to keep it from
trembling.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RESISTING 'CENTRAL AMERICANIZATION'

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO


When the United States ordered an economic boycott of Cuba in the early 1960's,
it quickly persuaded every Latin American country except Mexico to join its
campaign to isolate the Castro Government. But when the Reagan Administration
imposed a similar embargo on Nicaragua last month, Latin America was outspokenly
critical.

Governments throughout Central and South America have deplored the move as
interventionist and called for negotiations between Washington and Managua. Last
week in Caracas, 24 countries of the Latin American Economic System called on
the United States to lift the embargo and promised to help Nicaragua. Only El
Salvador and Honduras, which are highly dependent on United States military and
economic aid, have publicly backed Washington.

Latin America's response, however, did not reflect any special good will toward
the Sandinistas or belief that Nicaragua in the 1980's was dramatically
different from Cuba in the 1960's. Rather, it illustrated how Latin America's
relations with the United States have been transformed. Most Latin Americans no
longer view the world through Washington's eyes. They have developed their own
political and commercial relations with Western Europe, the Soviet bloc and
Asia, while their foreign policies are now more closely attuned to national
interests.

The Central American conflict, of crucial importance to countries ringing the
Caribbean, including Mexico, Colombia and Venezuela, is considered a secondary
issue farther south. Officials in Brazil, Argentina and Peru, arguing that
economic strains are their countries' greatest peril, frequently express dismay
at what they describe as the ''Central Americanization'' of policy by the United
States.

In contrast, at the time of the 1959 Cuban Revolution, Washington's leadership
was still unquestioned. When the United States and Venezuela produced evidence
that Fidel Castro was ''exporting'' guerrilla movements, even countries that did
not feel directly threatened broke off diplomatic ties with Havana and supported
the boycott. President John F. Kennedy's Alliance for Progress was viewed as a
reward for this loyalty. It was designed to combat leftist influence by
promoting economic and social reform and strengthening security forces. But the
vast resources poured into the region also gave the United States additional
leverage: The economic and counterinsurgency programs of several countries were
even drawn up in Washington.

Ending Paternalism

It was the United States, not Latin America, that changed this relationship. By
the mid-1960's, as attention turned to Vietnam, the Alliance for Progress
faltered for lack of money. In 1969, President Nixon defined his policy toward
Latin America as ''trade not aid,'' formally ending the age of economic
paternalism and prodding the region toward greater political independence.

Militarism ruled in much of Latin America in the 1970's, but many of these
regimes were also strongly nationalistic. They used harsh methods to combat
guerrillas and resented criticism by Carter Administration human rights
officials. Further, the generals in Brazil, Peru, Panama and Ecuador launched
programs to transform the economic or social structures of their societies. In
the 1970's, paradoxically, many Latin governments restored diplomatic relations
with Cuba. Fidel Castro had seemingly abandoned his dream of ''one, two, many
Vietnams'' in Latin America and Cuba no longer seemed capable of threatening the
larger countries of the region.

Coincidentally, in the United Nations and other international bodies, Latin
Americans identified with the third world, diverging from Washington on
nonregional issues and, notably, taking the lead in the campaign for a so-called
new international economic order. They set up the Latin American Economic
System, with Cuba as a member and the United States excluded.

In 1982, the Reagan Administration's decision to support Britain in the Falkland
Islands war with Argentina strengthened the perception that Latin America was of
secondary importance to Washington. But more than anything, it was Central
America that made clear the growing distance between the United States and its
neighbors. The Contadora Group of countries - Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela and
Panama - make no secret of their belief that the Reagan Administration has
undermined their peace efforts. They have struggled, without much success, to
remove the Salvadoran and Nicaraguan conflicts from the East-West context by
promoting a ''regional solution to a regional problem.''

In South America, where the return of democracy everywhere except in Chile and
Paraguay means that governments must pay more attention to public opinion, the
general policy has been to support the Contadora effort and criticize
Washington. Conversely, Nicaragua is not viewed as a threat. Nicaragua's
President Daniel Ortega Saavedra received sympathetic hearings from several
Latin American leaders when he visited them in March.

But perhaps most illustrative was Washington's own diplomatic approach.
Apparently anticipating a negative reaction, it made little effort to involve
the Latin Americans in the embargo. In contrast to the 1960's, the United States
did not ask the Organization of American States to endorse its unilateral move.
The United States no longer calls the tune in the O.A.S.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CHANGING FACES OF POLITICS IN ARIZONA

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX


Beneath a sweltering sun, bulldozers are knocking down cactus and sagebrush to
make way for still more homes on the desert floor near the booming cities of
Arizona.

The state's political landscape is changing just as profoundly. Senator Barry
Goldwater, the 76-year-old Republican and native son whose presence has
dominated Arizona politics for a quarter of a century, has said he will not seek
re-election next year when his fifth term ends. The politician many regard as a
likely heir to his seat is Representative John McCain, a Republican and Vietnam
War hero who moved to the state less than five years ago.

His chances appear all the better because Gov. Bruce Babbitt, a Democrat whose
conservatism on fiscal matters and liberalism on social issues made him popular
with Arizonans during the past seven years, is preparing to leave the state
Capitol next year to help lead an effort to reshape the national Democratic
Party and possibly to run for the Presidency in 1988.

It had been widely assumed that Mr. McCain and Mr. Babbitt would square off next
year in a hard race for Senator Goldwater's job. But in March, the 46-year-old
Governor decided not to enter the race, apparently for two reasons.

Since President Reagan's rout of Walter F. Mondale last November, he has emerged
as a spokesman for change in his party. He contends that Democrats must reduce
the influence of organized labor and special interests and become more
conservative on economic issues. He has supported President Reagan's initial
plan for tax changes, for example, and called for limits on farm subsidies and
changes in Social Security. And he feels he has as good a chance as anyone to
carry the conservative Democrats' banner.

Many in Arizona say Mr. Babbitt has another reason for not running for the
Senate: a fear that Mr. McCain would beat him or damage him so badly that his
national prospects would be ruined. Two days after the Governor said he would
not run either for the Senate or for re-election next year, Mr. McCain announced
he would seek Mr. Goldwater's job. He faced a strong potential rival in Bob
Stump, a five-term Republican Congressman. But last week, after conducting a
public-opinion poll that showed he would have a tough time beating Mr. McCain,
Mr. Stump said he would not enter the race.

Even in fast-growing Arizona, where every other person seems to have arrived
from somewhere else just the other day, Mr. McCain's rise has been striking. A
third-generation graduate of Annapolis, the 48-year-old politician has
impeccable credentials as a war hero. After his A-4 attack-bomber was shot down
over North Vietnam in 1967, he spent six years as a prisoner of war, including
more than three years in solitary confinement. He rejected an offer for early
release because he suspected it was a propaganda gesture aimed at his father,
Adm. John S. McCain Sr., commander of the Pacific Fleet. In 1981, shortly after
leaving the Navy, where his final job was director of Congressional liaison, Mr.
McCain moved to Arizona. His second wife, Cindy, is from Arizona and her father,
a beer distributor, had offered him a job. ''But I have to admit,'' he said in
an interview last week, ''that I knew there would be political opportunity in a
fast-growing state like Arizona.''

The following year, the seat then held by Representative John Rhodes came open,
and Mr. McCain beat three established politicians for the job. Although Mr.
McCain did not dwell on his war experiences in the campaign, he could respond to
opponents who called him a ''carpetbagger'' by saying that as a Navy officer and
the son of one, he had never had a chance to put down roots. ''The longest place
I ever lived was Hanoi,'' he has said. He has another, more oblique way of
dismissing the issue. ''It's interesting,'' he said in the interview, ''that in
1986, 400,000 voters, 35 percent of the total, will only have been in Arizona
since 1981.''

Mr. McCain, as well as anyone, knows that the phenomenal growth has changed the
state's needs and character. The Phoenix metropolitan area, which he represents,
has nearly doubled in population, to more than 1.8 million people, in the last
15 years. Arizona has long had a reputation for rugged individualism and
distrust of distant big government. But as urbanization has crept over its
deserts, it has turned to Washington for help, especially in meeting its growing
need for water. For Mr. McCain and other Arizona politicians, one of the biggest
challenges is maintaining a flow of Federal money to complete the $3.6 billion
Central Arizona Project, a system of aqueducts and dams.

Mr. McCain describes his politics as ''right of center,'' although he has
surprised conservatives on occasion. He has, for example, called for cuts in
defense spending. He points out that Arizonans have elected Democrats in seven
of the last 10 Congressional elections, with Mr. Goldwater winning the three
other races. Mr. Babbitt and Senator Dennis DeConcini, a Democrat, won by
''getting the support of a moderate-centrist group'' of voters, he said, and he
would have to do the same. Meanwhile, he says he is not impressed by the talk of
his commanding lead to succeed Mr. Goldwater. ''I think the worst enemy of any
politician is overconfidence,'' he said. ''Remember President Romney and
President Muskie?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Barry Goldwater (UPI); Photos of Gov. Bruce Babbit and
Representative John McCain (J.B. Pictures/Alan Dorow; AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR PUTS GUERRILLAS ON THE DEFENSIVE

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR


AFTER a five-year war that produced striking military and political gains,
Salvador's leftist guerrillas seem to have stumbled. Popular backing for the
estimated 5,000 armed guerrillas no longer seems to be growing and improved army
tactics have forced them onto the defensive. Guerrilla commanders who once vowed
to seize power in a few years now speak of a decades-long war of attrition.
Rebel units that formerly sought out and defeated army battalions are now
avoiding contact and concentrating on sabotage and political intimidation.

In 1981, France and Mexico issued a joint declaration calling the guerrillas a
''representative political force.'' Today international support is waning and
France is reportedly about to return an ambassador to El Salvador after leaving
the post vacant for several years. ''We are entering into a period of
reflection,'' said a leading theorist of the Salvadoran left who is living in
exile. ''In general, the situation is not very good for us,'' he added in an
interview. The guerrillas will have to conserve their strength, he said, and
hope for new crises to exploit.

Several changes have contributed to the decline in the rebels' fortunes. Their
popular appeal has been dented by the growing strength of Salvadoran President
Jose Napoleon Duarte and his moderate Christian Democrats. Officially backed
death-squad killings appear to have virtually ended, further strengthening the
Government's standing. President Reagan met with Mr. Duarte last week in
Washington and hailed his ''heartwarming progress.'' ''The people of El Salvador
had another free election in March, economic reforms are continung, Communist
guerrillas are losing ground,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''None of this would have been
possible without the economic assistance and military training and equipment
that we provided.''

The political threat posed by an elected government has brought a sharp reaction
from the Peoples Revolutionary Army, the second largest rebel military faction.
In the last two weeks, its units have kidnapped 14 mayors and assassinated at
least one in eastern El Salvador. The rebel radio, Venceremos, described the
campaign as an effort to undermine Government influence. In earlier terrorism,
off-duty army officers and rightist political figures were killed in the
capital. Which faction or splinter group carried out specific killings is
disputed.

Militarily, the guerrillas have been faring poorly. In the last year they have
successfully carried out only four big attacks, a fraction of their activity two
years ago. Forty American-provided combat helicopters, three years of intense
training and a quadrupling of forces has given the Salvadoran Army the ability
to severely hamper the rebels, even if it cannot decisively defeat them.

Two weeks ago, the army ambushed and captured a senior rebel commander, Nidia
Diaz, who was reportedly carrying important documents. Another senior commander,
Napoleon Romero, who says that he surrendered, reported in an interview last
week that the insurgents were having difficulty drumming up support. (There was
a failed rebel effort last fall to recruit new fighters forcibly.) Speaking with
a Government official present, Mr. Romero added that the insurgents had also
suffered shortages of supplies. Cuba and Nicaragua, he contended, provide 70
percent of the guerrillas' bullets and explosives. The rebels' general staff
works inside El Salvador, he said, but each of the five military factions
maintains offices in Managua. Mr. Romero's senior rank in the Popular Liberation
Forces has been confirmed by other rebels, but his observations may have been
colored while in custody, a period of more than a month.

On the 'Vietnamese Road'

The army's successes have forced the insurgents to adopt a new order of battle.
Joaquin Villalobos, commander of the People's Revolutionary Army, said on rebel
radio that the nature of the conflict had changed. Instead of attacking the army
head on, he said, small squads will concentrate on sabotaging the economy in
hopes that the United States will lose its will to provide the millions of
dollars needed for economic revival. ''We are in no hurry,'' Mr. Villalobos
said. This message was reinforced last week when radio Venceremos began a series
on Vietnam, which it said waged a 20-year struggle against ''the same North
American imperialist enemy.'' ''We, too, can defeat imperialism if we follow the
Vietnamese road,'' Venceremos said.

Guerrilla setbacks seem to have exposed differences among the many groups in the
military Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front and its political arm, the
Democratic Revolutionary Front. While the People's Revolutionary Army has
kidnapped mayors, the Popular Liberation Forces has not. A dissident faction
appears to be responsible for most assassinations in the capital. Two rebel
political leaders who asked not to be named said that they had disagreed with
the new hard-line actions but their views were not heeded.

Despite their difficulties, the guerrillas are hardly ready to lay down their
arms. They remain the most potent insurgent army in Latin America. When they
speak of a long war, they appear to mean it. Their leaders vow to rebuild
support among unemployed urban workers and among the poor and landless peasants
who make up a majority of the population. If Mr. Duarte's Government cannot cope
with El Salvador's acute social problems, the rebels may yet prove to be down
but not out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of guerrilla addressing townspeople in San Augustin (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW WE LOOK TO OUR FRIENDS

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis; Flora Lewis writes a column on foreign affairs for The
New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1540 words


THIRD WORLD INSTABILITY: CENTRAL AMERICA AS A EUROPEAN-AMERICAN ISSUE By
Fernando Moran, Irving Kristol, Michael D. Barnes, Alois Mertes and Daniel
Oduber. Edited by Andrew J. Pierre. 156 pp. New York: Council on Foreign
Relations. Paper, $5.95. CENTRAL AMERICA AND THE WESTERN ALLIANCE Edited by
Joseph Cirincione. 238 pp. New York: Holmes & Meier. $26.50.

THE spreading war in Central America is of growing concern to the Europeans,
although they do not feel directly involved. Their major worry is what it
portends for the United States, for their own relations with Washington and
overall Western relations with the developing world.

Almost all the European countries in the Western alliance were colonial powers
at some point. Some of them went through wracking wars of decolonization,
leaving scars that still throb. Then they watched the United States grapple with
the ordeal of Vietnam and acquire its own scars. Many Europeans do not accept
the American self-image as a nation that never stooped to seek an empire. They
consider the American vocabulary of a territorial ''backyard,'' of ''vital
interests,'' of ''rescue from alien domination'' as euphemisms, fine points of
distinction among various forms of colonial hegemony rather than as a clear
contrast between America's historic policies and their own imperial past.

So there is a degree of empathy and a certain knowing disdain as they watch the
United States trying to deal with nationalism, social unrest and revolution in
Central America. There is something familiar about it all, even if it is far
from their own immediate problems. And there is the persistent fear that
Americans will lose sight of their fundamental security partnership with Europe
in their passionate, even reckless, response to ideological challenges
elsewhere.

The French have a phrase for this kind of reflex. It is ''primary
anti-Communism,'' and it is an expression of some contempt for those who can't
see the forest for the nettles in the underbrush, who reject the evidence of a
complicated world in favor of a single view of good and bad. But this by no
means denies that there are many dangers, and that expansionist Communism is one
of them, especially when it is beholden to Soviet power. Of course, there is not
a single European view of Central America and United States behavior there.
There are differences between left and right, between establishments and their
critics, between those who emphasize Realpolitik and those who preach moral
principle. There are differences in the sense of national interest based on
history, in current national politics and in future hopes.

The one surprise in these two collections of essays by Americans and Europeans
is the extent of basic agreement between opposing sides. On three main points,
there is no dispute:

* The basic goals are to achieve stability in a region of turmoil and violence
and to prevent the Soviet Union from establishing new political or military
bases. There is no argument about the need to keep the Russians out.

* Present American policy is not working and cannot be expected to reach either
of these goals.

* A sharp division between American and European attitudes as the conflict
continues would inevitably weaken the Western alliance.

Why things are not going well and what to do about it is the subject of the
debates. They take separate forms. The Council on Foreign Relations book
contains five essays by two Americans and three Europeans. It is part of a
series on European-American relations, the result of lengthy discussions but
presented as individual contributions.

The other book, ''Central America and the Western Alliance,'' is the outcome of
a symposium in the late spring of 1984 under the joint auspices of the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace and the International Institute for Strategic
Studies. There are 24 contributors, representing condensed versions of the
papers presented at the conference and the points brought out in the
discussions. This provides a broader spectrum of opinion, but it is less
developed, a smorgasbord instead of a table d'hote menu.

But the flavors are quite similar. It should be noted that despite their
conflicting stands, the authors are all more or less insiders, the kind of
people who are in position to steady the alliance and are convinced that it is
necessary and desirable. There are no Soviet contributors, no revolutionaries
who want to see the United States humiliated and ''the other side'' triumphant.
This is a family quarrel, but it is an uneasy family. As Robert O'Neill, the
Australian-born director of the London-based International Institute for
Strategic Studies, points out in the symposium book, ''the present ambiguity and
obscurity of United States aims and policies in Central America are complicating
an already difficult situation.'' And Edward Luttwak, a hawkish American defense
consultant who has had official missions to Central America, concludes that ''to
persist at the current level of activity'' in both El Salvador and Nicaragua
''offers no assurance of success, to say the least.'' He suggests alternatives
of ''very greatly'' increased United States intervention, or withdrawing and
relying on Mexico ''to resist the spread of insurgency.'' The current ''midpoint
of political compromise,'' he says, ''does not correspond to either one of these
valid strategic options.'' T HERE is a ''second Western option,'' says Wolf
Grabendorff, a West German analyst, in which the European Community would take
the initiative to provide for Central America an alternative of ''pluralism'' to
dependency on either the United States or the Soviet Union.

This same idea threads through the more extended arguments in the Council on
Foreign Relations book. Irving Kristol, a spokesman for neoconservatives, is the
exception. He sees European reluctance to support the Reagan Administration's
approach to Central America as a symptom of Europe's infection by Socialism and
doubt. He lumps European conservatives, centrists and leftists together as
people dangerously short of the will and capacity to resist Communism, which he
rates well above Russian expansionism as the menace. Nor is Mr. Kristol
satisfied with United States policy. He hints that he favors full-scale United
States military intervention to settle the Central American hash. And he warns
that if Europe gets in the way, too bad for Europe.

He writes that ''the American people today are more insistent than ever that the
United States remain a great power capable of shaping the international order.
They are not opposed to the NATO Alliance - so long as that alliance does not
interfere with this nationalist ambition. If the American people should ever
come to feel that the two commitments are incompatible, it is NATO that will go
by the board, not nationalism.''

Michael Barnes, a Democratic Congressman from Maryland, says flatly that all
this amounts to an American demand for hegemony. The United States cannot solve
the political and economic problems of Central America, he says, and should see
the region not as a vital security interest but as a political quagmire. The
people will have to work their own way out. The United States cannot provide a
compromise settlement, a view Mr. Kristol echoes, but neither can it win a
victory.

Fernando Moran, the Spanish Foreign Minister, also insists that the local crisis
must be seen in its own terms, and cannot be subordinated to the larger
East-West conflict. But for him, the backwardness of Central America is also a
failure for the United States, which helped Western Europe to recover but was
never able to develop the countries at the narrow waist of the Western
Hemisphere. American credibility in the region, he says, depends on not seeking
risks, the opposite of claiming the right and capacity to shape local affairs.

Alois Mertes, Minister of State in the West German Foreign Ministry and former
parliamentary foreign affairs spokesman for the Christian Democrats, is the most
sympathetic of the foreigners toward the Reagan Administration arguments. But it
is clear he does not agree. Rather, he considers it unwise to split with the
United States on an issue it takes to heart, and wants more Euro-American
dialogue on the subject.

Finally, Daniel Oduber, former President of Costa Rica and now a vice president
of the Socialist International, actively urges a European role as an alternative
to Communist support for Central American malcontents. He does not see military
force as a solution, and says that ideology does not equal security or
insecurity.

It emerges clearly that nobody thinks the United States is on the right course,
or is even sure of what it wants to accomplish. Europe's longer perspective and
even tolerance for political confrontation may be due to its lesser
responsibility, as Irving Kristol argues. It may be another of those wan hopes
for a ''third way.'' But the other two ways, as defined by Edward Luttwak, are
unacceptable to Europe and can provoke the very disaster all want to avert. The
books do show that the Europeans would like to try conciliation and think they
have a chance. It is perilous for the United States not to listen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LAS VEGAS, LOVE IT OR LEAVE IT

BYLINE: By David Mamet; David Mamet's play, ''Glengarry Glen Ross,'' won the
1984 Pulitzer Prize for Drama.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 765 words


HEAT By William Goldman. 244 pp. New York: Warner Books. $15.50. FINALLY, the
wonderful thing about William Goldman's novels is this: they create a world in
which we would like to live. That world is the world of Invention. This stuff is
satisfying. Here in his new novel, ''Heat,'' we have a Tale of America. We have
The Glider, a hit man from Tahoe who is a double for Fred Astaire; Baby, ruler
of the Vegas Combination; Rainbeaux Wylie, ambitious woman; Cyrus Kinnick,
computer millionaire from Boston; Ashley and Darryl Paxton, two media
evangelists who've now turned to God.

And we have Shootouts, Punchouts, Rape and Revenge, a Gambling Binge written in
the galloping style of Count Vronsky's steeplechase. We have changes of fortune,
identity and sex. We have the American language written with the glorious
vitality of the self-taught: ''The accent was so heavily British it made you
want to break something.''

And we have a lovely American Hero in Nick Escalante - contributor of the
chapter ''Give In to Win'' to the book ''Our Friend Violence,'' a modern paean
to the martial arts. Escalante is a Mexican-American, a for-mer military
policeman in Saigon. He is currently a private eye who describes himself as a
chaperone. He is an aficionado of airline timetables and travel literature. He
longs to earn enough money to escape Las Vegas and set off on five years of
uninterrupted travel.

What's the book about? Escalante is suffering through his 5,000th morning in Las
Vegas. He wishes, at this auspicious juncture, to be presented with a test. He
wants his inertia and imprisonment shattered (who counts time in days but
prisoners?). He wants to be forced to confront himself. He wants a new life.

The gods - ever happy to oblige - answer his request with several tests, the
correct response to any of which will be sufficient to transport him out of
Vegas. His best friend, Holly, is beaten up and raped by three heavy-hitters:
''Every high school student in America knows there is no such thing as organized
crime in this country. And every grammar school student knows that if organized
crime ever dreamt of staking a toehold in this great land of ours, the last
place it would try would be here in our wondrous fairyland of Las Vegas.''

Holly begs Escalante to obtain revenge, and he enters the lists against the
armed thugs who are trying to kill her: ''In the fifteenth second Escalante
realized that he was, without question, going to win. Certain moves had to be
completed, yes, but he was so skilled at them that the chances of a third shot
hitting him or even being fired were next to impossible. He was about a dozen
feet from DeMarco when he backhanded the gold toward the man who looked like
Sylvester Stallone. He could have gone for the eyes or the nose, but because
DeMarco was a talker, he decided, symbolically perhaps, that the mouth was the
proper target. DeMarco stood still after his second shot, the pistol recoiling
in his hands.''

Escalante's tests continue, and he is tapped by fortune: ''He sat there, sat at
the table, watching her small hands shuffle the cards, and as she worked he
became convinced of one thing: Her down card, the one he couldn't see, was
another picture. Giving her a total of twenty. . . .

''Except he didn't feel bad about it, didn't feel bad about anything just then,
how could you, when you'd been kissed by fortune, because he'd heard of it, he'd
seen it happen to others, had even felt it himself - '' - but never like this,
never as sudden and strong as this, there was a weight on his shoulders now,
luck was riding on his shoulders now, out of all the people in all the casinos
in all the world, luck had chosen to camp out with Nick Escalante.''

In the best tradition of earlier heroic models, Escalante accepts all the tests
offered him - of friendship, of arms, of augury by blackjack. And as the book
closes, he is still accepting them. What does this mean? Well, he don't want to
leave Vegas. And neither do we at the end of the book. As with many of Mr.
Goldman's novels, we wish it to continue forever.

Mr. Goldman is a master storyteller and has done a master's trick. He has made
us wish for ourselves the same thing the protagonist wishes for himself. In
''Heat'' it is this: to live forever in the safe and magic world he has created
- the world of Friendly Hookers; of Roxy, the waitress of table 75; of honorable
gangsters; wealthy benefactors; sneering toughs whose faces soon will be ground
in the dirt, and interesting friends who will be true to us till death.

What a wonderful world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AUSTRALIAN WRITING TODAY: RIDING OFF IN ALL DIRECTIONS

BYLINE: By Craig McGregor; Craig McGregor is an Australian writer and critic.
His most recent book is a volume of essays, ''Soundtrack for the 'Eighties.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2206 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia


THE National Book Council created a furor late last year when it issued its list
of the Best Ten Books of the last decade and included none by women - this at a
time when the emergence of a formidable number of women writers is one of the
few significant movements in contemporary Australian literature. Then the judges
of the nation's premier literary prize, the Miles Franklin Award, declined to
award it, although Elizabeth Jolley, David Malouf, David Foster, Nigel Krauth
and John Hooker, to name a few, have published novels recently and thus were
eligible. David Williamson and half a dozen other dramatists have been drawn
into writing scripts for the growing film and television mini-series industries.
The editor of a short story anthology noted in his preface that contemporary
Australian short fiction is fragmentary, materialist, unpolitical. And a recent
survey by the Australia Council found that the average earnings of authors from
their writing was $6,700 (Australian) a year. Finally, in the national elections
last year, Patrick White, the Nobel Prize-winning novelist, gave his vociferous
support to the newly founded Nuclear Disarmament Party, whose main candidate was
Peter Garrett, the shaven-headed lead singer of the rock group Midnight Oil.

Thus the state of the art. If it sounds parochial yet sophisticated, it is. One
of the smartest tricks Australian literature performs, the poet Ronald McCuaig
said once, is to come of age. He could have said the same about Australian
culture generally, which has been performing a series of comings of age since
the 1890's, when a burst of nationalism created both the Commonwealth of
Australia, out of six separate States, and the first indigenous school of bush
balladists, short story writers and novelists. The latest coming of age occurred
in the 1970's, when a somewhat more artificial nationalism, encouraged by the
government between 1972 and 1975, coincided with a genuine renaissance in the
arts.

In those years a radical theater emerged in Melbourne and produced such
playwrights as Mr. Williamson, Jack Hibberd, John Romeril and Barry Oakley. A
new film industry started, with Mr. Williamson writing the scripts for the
adaptation of his play ''Don's Party'' and for movies like ''Gallipoli'' and
''Phar Lap.'' The postwar art boom peaked in the abstractionist movement
associated with Sydney and the imagist one in Melbourne. Confident new
directions in music composition, dance and photography appeared, and poetry was
revivified by an iconoclastic post-Vietnam generation heavily influenced by
Americans like James Dickey, Gary Snyder and Charles Olsen.

As the list of happenings at the start of this survey indicates, the last few
years have been a time of cultural disintegration and diffusion. That could be a
sign of the sheer bigness of the arts in Australia right now, or even of their
maturity. But there is no clear sense of purpose, while there is a pervasive
skepticism bordering on cynicism. To a certain extent this reflects the social
and political temper of the country. The Labor government is pragmatic and
hard-nosed, and although Bob Hawke, the Prime Minister, has great personal
popularity, his support for nuclear strategy and his backing of President
Rea-gan's foreign policies led to the formation of the Nuclear Disarmament Party
and the defection of Mr. White and many disillusioned idealists from the ranks
of the Labor Party, which traditionally has been the reformist party here. Even
though the N.D.P. has now split asunder, its capture of 500,000 votes from an
electorate of nine million made it a symbol of the uneasiness felt by many
Australian writers and intellectuals about the materialism of society. The
middle classing of Australia has proceeded apace in the last decade, but it has
been accompanied by political and economic crises, the highest unemployment
since the Depression and a widespread fear of technological unemployment. The
old heroic ethos of social unity has ended. A second element in this cultural
confusion is what might be called the death of the modern. This is not, of
course, unique to the arts in Australia, but the breakdown of modernist
orthodoxy internationally has had a profound impact on local architecture,
painting, photography and literature. One possible response of an art form to
the sudden fragmentation of an orthodoxy is to ''return to the roots,'' as jazz
did during the ''funky era'' of the 60's, and the Australian arts now are
characterized more by varieties of revivalism than by experiment or innovation.
In architecture there has been a clear move away from Bauhaus principles, and
architects are designing bush vernacular houses of galvanized iron and timber,
as well as preserving old city districts and facades and indulging in an
eclectic historicism that extends to the nation's new Parliament House in
Canberra - designed by an American postmodernist, Romaldo Giurgola. In painting
there has been an enormous swing back to representation, so much so that at the
recent Sydney Biennale there were only two abstract canvases - leaving the
impression they were there by mistake.

In film the revivalist impulse is clearest of all, with such movies as ''The Man
From Snowy River,'' ''Breaker Morant'' and the forthcoming ''Burke & Wills'' all
concerned to re-explore classic Australian myths and legends. Such films may
have an impact on foreign audiences, including American, but at home they have
been criticized by some for being excessively backward-looking and for
romanticizing cultural stereotypes.

It is harder to argue the theme of the death of the modern in literature because
modernism never established its hegemony as firmly in writing as in other arts.
The outstanding figure in Australian fiction, after all, has been Patrick White,
who is in the tradition of the great 19th-century epic novelists. He is now an
old man and says he doesn't have the physical stamina to write any more novels.
Thomas Keneally, having won Britain's Booker Prize with ''Schindler's Ark,''
continues to write historical novels recast to a modern lapsed-Catholic
sensibility. He said recently: ''After spending the early half of this last year
trying to write a Gunter-Grass-style novel about certain as yet unexplored
aspects of our first boatload of wogs, namely the young convicts of the East End
and the West Country, I set it aside temporarily when it reached the size of
''And Quiet Flows the Don.''

For a while a somewhat mannered formalism, best represented by the work of the
Sydney author Murray Bail (and perhaps by the ex-Queenslander David Malouf),
seemed close to establishing a literary orthodoxy and certainly garnered a large
proportion of fiction prizes and academic approval. It suited the prevailing
text-centered, antipolitical yet highly conservative tone of Australian
literature studies in most universities. But that academic approach and its
judgments have been challenged recently by critics who argue that fiction ought
to reflect the contexts it was written in and be in tune with the times.

If one were to discern three important currents in contemporary Australian
writing they would be the emergence of a strong group of women writers, the
re-emergence of the short story as a major literary form and the persistence of
irony and alienation as the characteristic tone of much fiction.

Australia has always had a strong tradition of women writers, stretching from
Barbara Baynton and Henry Handel Richardson (Mrs. Henrietta Richardson
Robertson) at the turn of the century to Thea Astley now. The current writers do
not form a cohesive movement although a feminist sensibility is evident in the
work of the novelists Elizabeth Jolley (''Woman in a Lampshade'') and Kate
Grenville (''Bearded Ladies''), the playwright and novelist Dorothy Hewett and
Andrea Stretton, a short story writer. Barbara Hanrahan, Beverley Farmer and
Olga Masters have emerged as significant writers. Helen Garner, who created a
sensation with her first novel ''Monkey Grip,'' which is about sex, drugs and
rock and roll in bohemian Melbourne, has followed it up with two novellas and a
novel, ''The Children's Bach.'' In a literary tradition dominated by males, and
to a certain extent by such masculine themes as mateship, exploration, war and
stoicism, the women writers have brought a new sensibility. So have the
extraordinary number of leading poets who have turned to the novel in recent
years - including Mr. Malouf, Thomas Shapcott, Roger McDonald and Rodney Hall.

Helen Garner is working on a collection of short stories. Beverley Farmer won
the New South Wales Premier's prize last year with her collection, ''Milk,'' a
painful and despairing account of personal relationships among
Greek-Australians. A decade ago the Australian short story seemed to have all
but disappeared. It is tempting to generalize that the best writing in the
country at the moment is going on in that form. The resurgence is due largely to
a group of Sydney writers, loosely clustered around the inner-city neighborhood
of Balmain, which the Paris newspaper Le Monde was pleased to call ''le ghetto
de Balmain.'' Some years ago they began holding their own readings; they
published in girlie magazines like Playboy because the literary journals
rejected them and they created their own bohemian coterie of fiction writers,
poets, film makers and publicists. T HE group included Frank Moorhouse, whose
''Tales of Mystery and Romance'' and ''The Everlasting Secret Family'' are in
the ironic tradition of Australia's greatest short story writer, Henry Lawson;
Murray Bail, who began as a short story writer and then made a great impact with
his first novel, ''Homesickness''; Michael Wilding, an avowed experimentalist,
and Peter Carey, a writer of bizarre and black-humored fantasies whose first
novel, ''Bliss,'' was filmed recently. The Balmain push has dispersed somewhat,
but their irreverence and sexuality and formal concerns have revivified the
short story. In their hands, and in the work of Morris Lurie, James McQueen and
Robert Drewe, it has become a popular form once again. Mr. Drewe's recent
collection, ''The Bodysurfers,'' centered on Australia's hedonistic beach
culture, sold 20,000 copies. There's talk of a film. Such a figure is tiny
compared to the sales of established Australian bestsellers such as Morris West
and Colleen McCullough, but in a country with a population of only 15 million
they are significant.

The biggest publishing successes have all been determinedly backward-looking -
boxed sets of the complete works of Henry Lawson and Banjo Paterson, both 1890's
writers, and the many editions of A. B. Facey's ''A Fortunate Life,'' a sort of
diary of ''an ordinary bloke'' who suffered bush pioneering, World War I, wage
slavery, the Depression and World War II - and survived. Our prophets these days
tend to be historians: Geoffrey Blainey, who stirred the racist pot shortly
before the national election by criticizing the high level of Asian immigration
and predicting ''the Asianization of Australia,'' and the indomitable Manning
Clark, who looks and reads like a radical Old Testament fundamentalist and who
has just finished the draft of the sixth volume of his mammoth ''History of
Australia.''

The poets, who used to be our prophets, are no longer popular - with the
exception of Bruce Dawe, a sardonic Queenslander who makes use of vernacular
idioms and rhythms and has become the best-selling poet since the bush
balladists and larrickin versifiers of World War I. Mr. Dawe's poetry is not
typical, and the impulse generated by the modernist post-Vietnam generation of
poets has died away somewhat. The most widely admired poets today are probably
two older, more traditional figures -Les Murray, a nationalist who explores both
spiritual and regional themes, and Peter Porter, who writes sophisticated,
highly structured verse and spends most of his time in London.

The different directions taken by the poets underlines just how heterogeneous
Australian writing is today. The film makers may still be fascinated by the
bush, but the writers have moved on to other themes - Southeast Asia, inner-city
turmoil, migrants, cultural crises. Skepticism prevails over passion. Politics
is still a question mark. The radical Melbourne theater of the 70's has
virtually disappeared. It was annexed, in part, by Sydney with its happy throng
of commercial/camp/transvestite/ burlesque/satirical shows. The rock and
songwriting scenes have produced such groups as Men at Work and Air Supply, both
of which have reached the top of the charts in the United States and Britain,
but at home top bands such as Midnight Oil, Redgum and Goanna are consciously
political and antinuclear. The dominant tone of contemporary fiction may still
be ironic, personal and alienated from the liberating possibilities of
commitment, but the nonfiction essayists, commentators and journalists are
predominantly liberal and critical of the Government's and the nation's endemic
conservatism. Those are the crosscurrents. In its lack of direction Australian
writing is a metaphor for the diversity of the nation's culture at the end of
the 20th century.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Australian writers 1. Thomas Deneally, 2. Patrick White, 3.
Colleen McCulltough, 4. David Malouf, 5. Elizabeth Jolly, 6.Dorothy Hewett, 7.
Thomas Shapcott. (Jerry Bauer/John Stockdale/Camera Press London/Australian
Information Service/Roger Garwood/Australian Information Service/Australian
Information Service)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER OPINION;
THE WAR TO END ALL WARS STARTED ON A BATTLEFIELD IN CORTLANDT

BYLINE: By JOSHUA J. HAMMERMAN; Rev. Joshua J. Hammerman of the First Hebrew
Congregation of Peekskill lives in Cortlandt

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 24, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words


''ACCURST be he that first invented war,'' was the sentiment penned by
Christopher Marlowe in 1590, and Western civilization has been paying lip
service to it ever since. In the 1960's war was declared unhealthy for children
and other living things, and that slogan was seen adorning posters nationwide.
Yet, when one goes beyond the slogans and dreams of the pacifistic few, are we
not truly a nation that prefers to march to the beat of a different and more
warlike drummer? Who among us would sacrifice an opportunity to see ''Star
Wars'' for a special showing of ''Brother Sun Sister Moon''? Our heroes are
Clint Eastwood, John Wayne and Bernard Goetz, our national motto is ''Make My
Day,'' and weaponry is our grossest national product.

Are we doomed or is war merely popular for the moment because Americans haven't
been involved in one for a decade? Ten years is about the amount of time it
takes for collective guilt to melt away into nostalgia. If war's current
popularity is temporary, can it be arrested before we go too far and ignite a
new skirmish, simply because the Duke would have wanted it that way? Somewhere
we must draw the line.

The war to end all wars has begun, and it is being fought at this moment in the
State Courts and in Albany. It all started in the little town of Cortlandt,
situated in the northwest corner of Westchester County.

There, the shot heard round the world was fired not by a soldier, but by a
county judge, and his salvo, in the form or a preliminary injunction, silenced
the guns of a Queens entrepreneur, who wanted to turn part of Cortlandt into a
battlefield for mock war games.

Capture the Flag Inc. purchased a 200-acre wooded tract near a drive-in-theater
and planned to begin operations on March 30. In the games, teams of 25 to 30
people (at $30 a person for women and $35 for men) try to steal the other teams'
flags under simulated combat conditions.

I used to play ''Capture the Flag'' at camp, and I usually enjoyed it. It is an
exciting game of action and strategy, and if Steve Marco, the company's
president, intended to sponsor healthy, recreational games of Capture the Flag,
I would have no objections. But I wouldn't pay money for it either.

No one would, and Marco knows it. It would be like paying for the opportunity to
play Hide and Seek. So Mr. Marco added a few features to his game to make it
seem more ''realistic.'' For one thing, he added guns. For another, he put
bullets in those guns -not lethal bullets, but dye-filled pellets which, when
they strike a player, brand him ''dead'' for the duration of the game.
Furthermore, the guns make noise, and the residents of the neighborhood were
understandably concerned about the potential noise pollution, in the truest
sense of the term: the corruption of the environment. It is not easy to live
amid the sounds of war, even if it's only a game.

I commend the town of Cortlandt for taking action against Mr. Marco, and I
commend George Pataki, the Republican State Assemblyman, for introducing
legislation in Albany that would give local municipalities power to ban war
games without having to go to court.

But what scares me is that such legalities are necessary because, without them,
not only would war games be initiated, they would thrive. Mr. Marco has hit upon
a gold mine.

What type of society are we that we must constantly prove manhood on the
battlefield? ''Violence breeds violence,'' wrote the medieval Jewish poet Ibn
Gabirol, echoing a tradition that has, for millenia, attempted to minimize the
glory of war.

The Jewish sages of ancient times did not even allow weapons to be worn on the
Sabbath, although technically it could have been allowed. Why? ''Because they
are shameful,'' they said. Golda Meir once said, ''A leader who doesn't stutter
before sending his nation into battle is not fit to be a leader.'' Don't we wish
that our Presidents of the Vietnam era had done just a bit more stuttering
before sending over the troops. War is not glory. It is a nation's shame,
mankind's menace.

At Passover seders, Jews spill ten drops of wine when reciting the litany of the
Ten Plagues. Why? So as to temper their joy over the victory achieved against
the Egyptians. One sage, Rabbi Judah, even contracted the list of plagues into
an acrostic, desiring not to hear about them in detail. Let us not dwell on the
misery of others. War means misery.

Mr. Marco feels this is all much ado about nothing. He says, ''I think they're
afraid that when they see what we're doing it will bring out the little boy in
them and make them want to participate.''

Actually, he is right. There is a little boy in all of us, and that boy loves
adventure. But what of the mature adult that little boy is supposed to grow up
to become? We seem too preoccupied with catering to the whims of that little
boy. Do we no longer acknowledge adulthood as a desirable goal of the maturation
process?

And what of these people: John Bowen Jr., Frank B. Sanders, Bobby G. Fields, and
the 58,019 other Americans who gave their lives in vain in Vietnam? What about
the millions who left behind grieving families in other, more justifiable wars?
What about them, Mr. Marco? Does Capture the Flag Inc. not kick dirt onto their
graves by trivializing the calamity and unspeakable horror that is war?

And why, Mr. Marco, do you stop at guns and pellets? Why not update your venture
by adding car bombs, suicide drivers and maybe even a nuclear warhead or two to
your arsenals? Wouldn't these make Capture the Flag more exciting and therefore
more lucrative? This is not the little boy speaking, Mr. Marco. This is the
enraged adult.

We must all be enraged adults, pursuing to the end the only battle worth
fighting for, the war to end all wars, the battle to eliminate every vestige of
war and violence from our culture and from the face of the earth.

So go ahead, Mr. Marco. Make my day. Get out of town before sundown and take
John Wayne's posse with you.

If public outcry succeeds at keeping Cortlandt a Demilitarized Zone, maybe there
is hope for the rest of the world.

Rabbi Joshua J. Hammerman of the First Hebrew Congregation of Peekskill lives in
Cortlandt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MANY VIETNAMESE IN LIMBO BECAUSE OF PAST

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 629 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


A decade ago she was a multilingual lawyer qualified to practice on three
continents. Now she sells embroidered blouses to Soviet-bloc tourists in a
souvenir shop.

He was a skilled interpreter. Today he works as a part-time waiter and private
teacher of French and English. He worries both about the hunger and the
''militarization'' of his children.

She was the daughter of a doctor. Forbidden to continue with higher education
because of her middle-class background, she now fills her time as a bookkeeper
for a relative's small business.

They were laborers, the two quiet men living side by side in small wooden houses
on a muddy dead-end street. They now spend empty days sitting on straight-back
chairs, staring out of windows, waiting for permission to leave the country. One
wears stained and faded prison pajamas. He was recently freed after 9 1/2 years
in a ''re-education'' camp.

These and some other residents of Ho Chi Minh City took the risk of speaking to
Western reporters during the 10th anniversary celebrations of the fall of this
city, the former Saigon, in the Vietnam War on April 30. They said they did so
with a sense of urgency and sometimes forboding.

Vietnamese leaders have said they intend to ''consolidate socialism'' in the
south by the end of the century. Fearful southerners think that means the next
decade under Hanoi's rule will be marked by severe new measures to remove the
anomalies of private property and free enterprise, and new waves of arrests to
eliminate those who are ideologically suspect.

Southern Vietnamese also fear -more from instinct than from evidence - that the
door to both legal and illegal emigration could be closed, and that the limited
access to the West could be further curtailed.

The blouse seller ended her tale of present problems and future fears with the
commonly heard comment, ''I don't know what to do.''

Hanoi has been taking a tougher public stance against Vietnamese emigres who
become outspoken critics abroad. There is also some evidence the Government is
concerned about independent criticism at home, especially from apparently
disullusioned members of what was called the third force. They were critics of
the Government of South Vietnam, and some had been imprisoned or harassed by the
Saigon regime.

Earl Martin, an American who directed aid programs for the Mennonite Church in
South Vietnam before 1975 and had written somewhat sympathetically about the
Marxist revolutionaries, was asked to leave Ho Chi Minh City this week half way
through a two-week visa. At the airport he was searched and interrogated for
indications that he had met any former third force acquaintances.

Even now, in the midst of political and economic adversity, it is almost
impossible to find anyone in the south with a kind word for former President
Nguyen Van Thieu, leader of South Vietnam from 1967 to 1975.

But there are supporters, including former officials, of the last South
Vietnamese Government who have successfully made the transition to a new
political system. Among them is Gen. Nguyen Huu Hanh, the operations officer who
ordered Saigon's troops to lay down their arms in 1975.

Now 61 years old, he lives in comfortable retirement in a relatively large
house. His wife runs a cafe in the front garden. Reporters are regularly taken
to meet General Hanh, who stresses to visitors how important it is that Vietnam
is finally the master of its own fate, free of civil war.

General Hanh acknowledges that he has misgivings about the ''re-education''
camps and other forms of detention without trial. But he says he has been
assured by Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach that war-crimes tribunals would be
worse, since many of those found guilty in such trials would no doubt be
executed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN INSURGENT LEADER IN EGYPT:

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 48 words


Prime Minister Kamal Hassan Ali, left, greeting Son Sann yesterday in Cairo. Mr.
Son Sann, on a four-day visit to Egypt, is head of a coalition of rebel groups,
including supporters of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, fighting the Vietnamese-backed
regime in Phnom Penh.

Associated Press

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOR REMEMBERED G.I.'S, THUMBS UP SIGN IN CHINA

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1185 words

DATELINE: KUNMING, China


Four decades ago this old city in southwest China was one of the hubs of World
War II, familiar to thousands of Americans who helped Chiang Kai-shek's ''Free
China'' survive invasion by Japan.

In the teahouses and free markets that enliven the city center, and in other
spots where old-timers gather, fond memories linger of the Americans who helped
push the ''Burma Road'' through the jungles from Kunming to Mandalay. Equally
remembered are the men who flew lumbering transports over ''the hump'' of the
Himalayas into the airfield to the west of town.

One old man with gapped teeth paused to offer his assessment while trying on a
new pair of spectacles at a stall along Qingnian Street. ''Americans? Terrific,
terrific!'' he said, shooting out an upraised thumb.

Elsewhere, the pattern was the same. A 58-year-old American of Chinese origin,
C. W. Kung, who grew up here during the war before leaving to make a career as a
chemical engineer in the United States, told visitors to the apartment he shares
with his new wife that local people still recall how American fighter squadrons
drove off Japanese bombers in 1943 and 1944, ending raids that terrified the
city.

Popularity Is Recalled

''Nobody has forgotten them,'' Mr. Kung said. ''They were very popular because
they actually fought the Japanese, while Chiang's air force did nothing.''

For the Americans, the good will is the only memorial. Local officials have no
plans to mark the 40th anniversary of the Japanese defeat in August. There is
not so much as a plaque on the wall of the four-story gray-stone building on
Peking Road that was headquarters for Gen. Claire Chennault's 14th Air Force,
now doing service as a hotel.

Out at Wujiaba, the wartime airfield that still serves civil and military
planes, passengers looking toward the Shuimenren Mountains that hold the city
like a bowl can see a cluster of dun-colored hangars and crew rooms, some of
wartime vintage. Where General Chennault's ''Flying Tigers'' taxied in after
their 700-mile journey across 15,000-foot mountains from Assam there is now a
fighter base of the People's Liberation Army.

The rows of aging MIG-19's and F-5's are a reminder of the new conflict 200
miles to the south between border troops of China and Vietnam. Mostly, it is a
war of artillery barrages and small-scale infantry skirmishes, but it is severe
enough to have driven hundreds of villagers with relatives in the city to trek
north for sanctuary.

'City of Eternal Spring'

Set at nearly 6,000 feet above sea level, Kunming is known as ''The City of
Eternal Spring.'' Travelers reaching here from lower-lying spots elsewhere in
southern China, such as Canton, celebrate the cooler air and the blossoms that
linger through much of the year. But in other ways Americans who return to savor
their wartime associations find the city transformed.

A thousand-year-old university town has grown into a bustling city of nearly two
million people. The sinuous, cobblestoned lanes of the old days have mostly
disappeared. As in other Chinese cities, broad avenues and rows of 12-story
apartment blocks have destroyed a good deal of the old character, though much
that is ancient remains.

A change that few regret is the passing of the prostitutes and opium sellers who
were an insistent feature of wartime Kunming. Prostitutes were rounded up after
1949 and sent to re-education camps, but the opium dealers proved more
persistent. Terraced fields outside town where poppies once grew have been given
over to tea and other crops, but small-scale dealing continues.

A Deputy Governor of Yunnan Province, Zhu Kui, told Western reporters that drug
abuse was a thing of the past. But other local residents asserted that opium was
still available among the mountain tribes that live along Yunnan's 1,300-mile
border with Burma, 250 miles to the west, where movement is uninhibited by
fencing or effective border patrols. The locals said that at least six people
had been shot in Kunming for opium trafficking in the past year.

Notice Confirms Execution

One of the executions was confirmed by a notice outside the Kunming Intermediate
People's Court on Qingyun Street, a relic of the old city with its two-story
gabled homes, its street-side merchants and its cluster of old men nursing
bamboo pipes as they relaxed in the springtime sun. The poster announced three
executions on March 30, one of them of a 54-year-old opium dealer, Qian
Guanxing.

Mr. Qian had a surprisingly long career. Above the red check mark signifying
that his sentence had been carried out, the poster said he had been imprisoned
four times for opium offenses since 1955, most recently for ''entertaining'' 28
people at an ''opium den'' in Kunming in 1983. The poster said he was on parole
from the fourth term on the ground of ill health when he resumed trafficking
last year.

Outside the Kunming Hotel, the center for the city's thriving tourist trade, a
retired American college professor who served as a major with a Chinese
artillery unit, recalled how opium was a commonplace in the wartime days. ''If
you went out with a boatman on the lake,'' he said, referring to Lake Dian, a
local beauty spot, ''he would row for a while, ship his oars, pull out his opium
pipe and start puffing away.''

Like others who knew the old Kunming, the professor had little nostalgia for the
uprooting of some of the old ways. Wartime accounts tell of hungry Chinese
soldiers dying by the dozens in the streets, and of beggars at every corner.
These days the free-enterprise markets are bursting with fresh meat, vegetables
and fruit, and ''night markets'' thrive past midnight with stalls serving spicy
dishes to order.

Feel of a Country Fair

So many are the merchants that a visitor passing down Qingnian Street could
imagine himself in Hong Kong. In this the city is reverting to its old self,
before the collectivist austerity of Mao Zedong extinguished enterprise. For a
mile or more on either side of the broad avenue entrepreneurs ply selections of
clothing, toys, comic books and herbal medicines, haggling over price as though
Mao had never been.

Other merchants give the street the feel of a country fair. Men with homemade
pool tables charge the equivalent of 35 cents for a quarter of an hour, with
side bets for those who want them. An old man draws crowds with a homemade
''test your strength'' machine. The spirit of the place seemed to be captured
when a West German reporter introduced himself to one old trader by his first
name, Jurgen-Karl. With a grin, the man shot back: ''Karl? Like Karl Marx? We've
no time for him around here.''

So far, there is nothing to rival Billy's, the nightclub that was a big draw
among wartime G.I.'s. But a start has been made at the city's Peking Opera
Troupe, where musicians have formed a Western-style band, rented the troupe's
rehearsal hall and organized a discotheque that draws crowds of 200 to 300 at a
time. With a repertoire that includes a reedy version of ''Home on the Range,''
the band is taking in more in a month than the opera earns in a year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of passers-by looking at jackets on street (NYT/John F. Burns)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON WATCH;
Paying Up at the I.M.F.

BYLINE: By Nathaniel C. Nash

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 173 words


Even as the United States was severing trade links with Nicaragua, or maybe
because of it, the Sandinista regime was quietly paying up arrears, totaling
about $20 million, to the 148-nation International Monetary Fund.

Washington monetary officials believe that Managua acted out of fear of being
stigmatized as ''ineligible'' for I.M.F. loans. That is the next worst thing to
being drummed out of the agency. No one expects Nicaragua to ask the I.M.F. for
a new loan at this stage, but it could at some time in the future.

Managua has sought to maintain its links with other international organizations.
It argued recently in the council of the 90-nation General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade that the American economic sanctions were illegal.

Meanwhile, reports from Georgetown, Guyana, confirmed here, said that that
country had been declared ''ineligible'' to receive I.M.F. loans because of
failure to pay some $19 million owed since May 1983. Thus, Guyana joins Vietnam
as the only countries that have been so stigmatized.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 21, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The War Is Over

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 136 words


To the Editor:

I hitchhiked to the parade from Tyler, Tex. Carried a sign: ''Vietnam Vet, New
York.'' When I got to town, I found a city beside itself with friend-liness.

There's a good buddy who works there. Still tough. Fought a hard war. He gruffed
about it, you know, and said he didn't need a damned parade. But when we stepped
on to Broadway - into that fantastic scene - I heard him shout my name, and then
there he was, marching beside me.

I guess I've been as down as most of my brothers, at one time or another. But
wounds do heal. And I think the war in my heart is finally over. I would not
dare to speak for my brothers on such a solemn subject. But for me, I'm sure.

And I want to thank New York City for providing the catalyst that brought it to
an end.ALLEN GLICK Tyler, Tex., May 14, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 21, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CAPTURED SALVADORAN REBEL PAPERS LIST TRAINING CLASSES OVERSEAS

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1379 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, May 20


Documents captured from a Salvadoran rebel leader recently indicate that the
leftist guerrilla officials are attending courses in the Soviet Union, Vietnam
and Bulgaria.

The papers also indicate that the Salvadoran rebels consider Nicaragua their
closest ally, one to be defended if it is invaded by the United States.

The documents give an unusually close look at the inner workings of the
Salvadoran rebel high command and of relations with Nicaragua's Sandinista
Government. They also indicate that, contrary to assertions by the Reagan
Administration, the Sandinistas appeared ready to cut off aid to the Salvadoran
rebels at the end of 1983 and may have done so, at least temporarily.

Senior Salvadoran military officers and officials at the American Embassy here
have said they believe the documents, which were shown to news organizations by
a Salvadoran military official, are authentic. The papers were captured last
month from a senior rebel commander, Nidia Diaz, they said.

Papers Appear Authentic

Several small details appear to support the authenticity of the documents. Miss
Diaz told reporters in a brief news conference last month that she had been
captured with ''secret guerrilla material.'' The documents are grimy, folded and
worn as would be expected of papers carried in the field. Names, dates and
events seemed to fit actual events and people.

''Several officials of the United States Embassy have seen these documents,'' an
embassy spokesman said. ''We have every reason to believe in their
authenticity.''

But a senior rebel political official raised questions about the documents.

''They can put anything they want into supposedly captured documents,'' Jorge
Villacorta, a member of the rebel Democratic Revolutionary Front, said in a
telephone interview. He refused to comment on specific documents. No officials
of Miss Diaz's rebel group could be reached.

Rebel Was Badly Wounded

Miss Diaz was badly wounded before being captured by Salvadoran troops at the
end of April. She is now recovering in police custody.

Miss Diaz is the most senior rebel commander to be captured by the Salvadoran
Army. She is a top official in the Central American Revolutionary Workers Party,
a Marxist group that is one of the five factions in the rebel military Farabundo
Marti Revolutionary Front. The papers appear to represent virtually the entire
archive of the Revolutionary Workers Party.

The documents contain analyses of international support for the rebels. They
speak of seeking to influence the Democratic Party in the United States and the
need to encourage Americans to back the rebels.

Guerrilla plans are outlined for peace talks with the Salvadoran Government. One
diary entry calls President Jose Napoleon Duarte the rebels' ''principal and
most dangerous enemy.'' Another entry says the rebels risk being seen as
''intransigents.''

Criticism of Duarte

''Duarte wants to put us in an imperialist bourgeois project,'' the diary says.

A letter appears to show Guillermo Manuel Ungo, the rebels' chief political
spokesman, complaining to rebel military commanders that they are failing to
consult fully with him.

In a telephone interview, Mr. Ungo refused to comment on the letter. He said he
could not accurately judge a document that he had not read.

A diary confiscated with the papers contains detailed notes of discussions at
the La Palma peace talks between the Salvadoran Government and the insurgents,
which Miss Diaz attended. One political pamphlet appears to be perforated by a
fresh bullet hole. Another diary contains self-criticism for ''political
infantilism'' and ''paternalism''; a love poem, and a letter from a relative.

Key Entries in a Diary

What seems to be Miss Diaz's personal diary for 1985 lists rebel officials to be
trained abroad. The diary lists names under two headings: ''Courses 1984'' and
''Courses 1985.'' Thirteen rebel officials are listed as due to attend courses
in 1985 in ''VN,'' ''BULG'' and ''URRS.'' The letters stand for Vietnam,
Bulgaria and the U.S.S.R., according to Salvadoran and American officials. Miss
Diaz is on the list to attend a course in Vietnam.

The listing for 1984 has 20 names of people to be trained in the same countries
and in East Germany. Some of the listings are backed up by notes later in the
diary. One entry says: ''To Bulgaria: Ernesto Maldonado. To the USSR: Irma,
Marlena.'' Other entries refer to ''technical'' courses, and the study of
explosives.

Another set of documents chronicle tense relations between the rebel high
command and Nicaragua's Sandinista leaders after the United States invaded
Grenada in October 1983. They show a much higher level of dependence on
Nicaragua than the rebels have publicly admitted. But the documents also
indicate that the Sandinistas may well have cut off aid to the rebels in 1983.

Rebel officials did briefly leave Nicaragua in November 1983. The documents
indicate that their departure came after a heated debate with the Sandinistas.

Notes About Sandinistas

A short, handwritten note on Nov. 9, 1983, is addressed to ''R. Roca'' from
''Simon.'' Roberto Roca is the head of the Central American Revolutionary
Workers Party. A Salvadoran military intelligence officer said ''Simon'' is the
code-name for Shafik Handal, the head of the Salvadoran Communist Party.

The note says the Sandinistas are about to expel the rebels from Managua and
will ''definitely cut off supplies.''

''I believe we must send a message to Fidel and seek a definition to know who to
rely on,'' it adds. Salvadoran officials said they believe the note referred to
Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader.

What seems to be a handwritten note by a rebel official on Nov. 7, 1983, refers
to a meeting between ''Lopez'' of the Sandinista Front's Directorate of
International Relations and rebel representatives. Julio Lopez is the head of
the Sandinista Directorate of International Relations. The document says the
Sandinistas are about to cut off aid because they fear an attack from the United
States.

In what seems to be a last-ditch appeal to the Sandinistas, the document states
that the rebels ''consider that the Salvadoran peoples war has in its actual
level of development a strategic importance for the Nicaraguan revolution and
for the region. Nicaragua in the vanguard constitutes the advanced and true
revolution.''

Plans to Fight Invasion

The document says the Nicaraguans have asked for a list of rebels to be based
near the border for military training. If the United States invades, the
Salvadoran rebels are to fight in the Sandinista Army, the document says.

''All logistical support will be divided here to confront the aggression,'' the
document adds. The Nicaraguans can no longer ''be protecting supplies'' to the
rebels, it says, adding that most rebel officials living in Managua will have to
leave and those that stay will be under the control of a Sandinista official.

A Sandinista military intelligence officer will be detached to ''facilitate
communications,'' apparently between rebels inside and outside Nicaragua, the
papers say.

The guerrillas should stress the rebels' desire for unity with the Sandinistas,
the document adds, calling for ''the most intimate coordination in a concrete
manner on all political, military, propaganda and diplomatic fronts.''

Request for Aid

A document from the five top rebel commanders to the Sandinista National
Directorate on Nov. 10, 1983, calls on them to provide the rebels ''new and
audacious forms of aid,'' to allow the rebels to help repel an invasion.

''We thank you for all the aid you offered and we hope it continues because it
is indispensable to defeat whatever form of invasion on Central American soil,''
the document says. Another document dated Nov. 2, 1983, calls for meetings with
the Sandinistas and the Cubans.

A separate set of documents analyze international support for the rebels in
Europe, Latin America and the United States. One document dated October 1984
calls for increased rebel attacks before the American Presidential elections.
''If the Democrats win, it would fortify the tendency to negotiate,'' but would
not necessarily change American strategy in Central America, the document says.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 21, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A DARK-HORSE FILM WINS TOP PRIZE AT CANNES

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: CANNES, France, May 20


Americans took three of the major awards at this year's Cannes Film Festival.
However, the top prize, the Golden Palm, given to the best film in the festival,
went to a Yugoslav movie, ''Papa Is on a Business Trip'' (''Otac Na Sluzbenom
Putu''), directed by Emir Kusturica. ''Papa Is on a Business Trip,'' a
comedy-drama about an affable philanderer who is imprisoned during Tito's
postwar crackdown on Stalinism, was chosen unanimously by the jury, a rare
occurrence at this festival.

The special jury grand prize, traditionally given to the runner-up film, went to
an American movie, ''Birdy,'' the story of a friendship between a young man who
wants to fly and his boyhood companion, who has been mutilated in the Vietnam
War. ''Birdy,'' directed by Alan Parker, was a box-office failure in the United
States last Christmas and was overlooked for Academy Award nominations despite
favorable reviews.

In a brief ceremony tonight at the Cannes Film Palace, William Hurt was named
best actor for his performance in the Brazilian film ''Kiss of the Spider
Woman'' as an imprisoned homosexual who survives by fantasizing about the movies
he has seen. For her performance as the mother of a disfigured teen-ager in the
American film ''Mask,'' Cher shared the best actress award with Norma Aleandro.
Miss Aleandro was honored for her role in the Argentine movie ''The Official
Version'' (''La Historia Oficial''). Miss Aleandro plays a middle-class woman
who fears that the child she has adopted is the daughter of one of the
Desaparecidos, the men and women who were arrested and vanished during the
Government's war against terrorism in the 1970's.

An Award for Cher

Today is Cher's 40th birthday. When she accepted her award, the actress thanked
her mother for having ''the good taste to have me on the 20th of May so I could
receive this as the best birthday present of my life.''

Today is also James Stewart's birthday. The actor, who turned 77, received a
standing ovation when he was given a special tribute for his lifetime of movie
acting. Mr. Stewart -who has also picked up the American Film Institute's Life
Achievement Award, Kennedy Center honors and an honorary Academy Award during
the last few years - told a news conference yesterday that he had no fear about
the future of the motion picture. ''It's indestructable,'' he said. ''It will be
with us always.''

The acting awards were heavily applauded, but the award for best director was
fiercely booed. Historically, the jury manages to give at least one award each
year to a French film. Best director went to Andre Techine for the French movie
''Rendez-vous,'' about a young woman who, according to Mr. Techine's program
notes, ''carries out apprenticeships of the theater and love.'' A panel of
critics from 12 countries has been rating the festival movies for one of the
trade journals here. Only two of the critics gave ''Rendez-vous'' a rating
better than fair.

Special Jury Awards

The jury - which was presided over this year by Milos Forman, the Academy
Award-winning director of ''Amadeus'' - is allowed to give two special prizes of
its own. The jury awarded a special prize for artistic contribution to John
Bailey, Eiko Ishioka and Philip Glass for ''Mishima,'' Paul Schrader's film
about the life and bizarre death of a Japanese novelist. Mr. Bailey was the
cinematographer of ''Mishima.'' Miss Ishioka created the stylized sets, and Mr.
Glass wrote the music.

Although many people here had expected ''Mishima,'' which has been critically
well-received in France, to receive the special jury grand prize, a smiling Tom
Luddy, the movie's American producer, said that he had never expected it. Mr.
Luddy said he felt that ''Mishima'' was coming to Cannes with many strikes
against it, including the touchiness of its subject matter and the fact that its
executive producer, Francis Coppola, had already won the Golden Palm twice.

''Colonel Redl,'' the Hungarian director Istvan Szabo's movie about the decay of
the Austro-Hungarian Empire, was given a special ''Prix Du Jury'' - essentially
an honorable mention.

The prize for best short film went to ''Jenitba,'' an animated Bulgarian film
about a lad who fantasizes his wedding.

No Prize for Eastwood

Among the films that did not get a prize was Clint Eastwood's western, ''Pale
Rider.''

Unlike the Academy Awards, where a movie can sweep many Oscars, it is rare for
the Cannes Film Festival jury to give more than one award to a film. So, for
example, a good performance in a movie that has won the Golden Palm will be
ignored. Historically, the jury tends to choose the films it wants to honor and
then manages to pick prizes that more or less fit the film.

There was general agreement this year that almost half of the 20 films in
competition were mediocre at best. Although the awards were supposed to be kept
secret until the 7 P.M. ceremony, word had spread throughout Cannes by 5 P.M.
today about the awards to William Hurt, Cher and the Yugoslav film.

Until yesterday, ''Papa Is on a Business Trip'' was a dark horse. One British
journalist, acting as a bookmaker, had it listed in the field at 10 to 1.
However, although ''Kiss of the Spider Woman,'' ''Mishima'' and ''Birdy'' had
more fierce defenders, ''Papa Is on a Business Trip'' is a movie that no one
disliked.

Tony Curtis Accepts

Two other awards are given by special juries. Nicolas Roeg's ''Insignificance''
- a fantasy about 24 hours in the lives of Albert Einstein, Marilyn Monroe, Joe
DiMaggio and Senator Joseph McCarthy - won a special prize for technique. In
accepting the award for Mr. Roeg, Tony Curtis, who plays Senator McCarthy in the
British movie, said that he was happy to be connected with a film that won an
award before he reached the age of 60.

The Camera D'Or, given to the best first film, went to Fina Torres for
''Oriana,'' a Venezuelan movie with a Gothic motif, about a woman who delves
into the life of the woman who previously owned the house she has inherited.
Unlike the other awards, which are limited to films in the official competition,
the winner of the Camera d'Or can come from from any of the festival's
categories. The prize is a real movie camera, which Miss Torres carried happily
from the stage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cher and Norma Aleandro (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 22, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. MAY SOON STOP TAKING REFUGEES FROM THAI CAMPS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 21


State Department officials said today that the United States would soon stop
processing Cambodian refugees in Thailand for resettlement in this country.

Unless there is a change in plans, this would mean the end of a program that has
brought 120,000 Cambodians to the United States since Indochina became Communist
in 1975.

The officials explained the cutoff by saying that no more Cambodians in Thailand
were deemed eligible for admission. Of the 25,000 in the main refugee camp, at
Khao-i-Dang, all but 2,000 have been processed and deemed ineligible, the
officials said.

Links to Communists Found

Those found ineligible are said to have falsified their background, failed to
meet the criteria for admission, or had a connection to the Khmer Rouge, the
Communists who have been accused of genocide while they ruled Cambodia from 1975
until they were ousted by the present Vietnamese-backed Government in 1979.

The remaining interviews are expected to be completed by June 7, officials said,
unless there is a decision to reopen the program and to re-interview those who
were previously rejected.

There is another category of 4,300 Cambodians at Khao-i-Dang who were not
officially accepted by Thailand as refugees but have been allowed to remain.
With Thai permission, the United States and other Western countries would also
review their eligibility, the State Department officials said.

Some May Be Re-examined

Selected cases among those rejected may be re-examined if new information is
produced, officials said.

The impending cutoff has aroused concern among some State Department officials
with experience in Indochinese affairs. A department official said the problem
had been brought to the attention of Secretary of State George P. Shultz, who is
reviewing it.

''It is not acceptable to say we will stop processing on June 7,'' said a State
Department official who has been seeking a change. ''What will happen is that
the Thais will bulldoze the camp and force all of the 25,000 to the border.''

The United States is not the only country taking refugees, but officials said
the 25,000 remaining in the camp have been rejected by virtually all other
countries.

In addition to the 25,000 officially classified as refugees, there are 230,000
so-called border Cambodians who were driven into Thailand by recent Vietnamese
military activities and are living in camps on the border. Thailand intends to
induce them to return to the Cambodian side of the border as soon as the
situation permits, State Department officials said.

Two key House members asked President Reagan and Mr. Shultz in a letter today to
review the cases of Cambodians who have been denied admission to the United
States.

The legislators, Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a New York Democrat who is
chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Asian and Pacific affairs,
and Representative Jim Leach of Iowa, who is the ranking Republican member,
wrote:

''We believe that the current screening program, which has labeled nearly 15,000
people as security risks or not refugees, is inconsistent with the spirit of
National Security Directive 93.''

The two men said the directive established a policy giving the benefit of the
doubt to refugees.

Since 1975, the United States has admitted 740,000 refugees from Indochina,
State Department officials said, including 480,000 Vietnamese, 145,000 Laotians
and 120,000 Cambodians.

Although President Reagan and Mr. Shultz favor continued aid, problems have
arisen because the Thais discourage the entry of more refugees and because some
within the Administration and in Congress feel that most people entitled to be
allowed entry into the United States have been admitted.

Among the exceptions are those held by Vietnam in so-called re-education camps
and Amerasian children. The children have been coming to the United States on a
regular basis, but Vietnam has apparently reneged on an earlier offer to let the
prisoners leave.

The United States is committed to receive 50,000 Indochinese refugees a year
through the 1985 fiscal year.

They are mainly Vietnamese boat people who are allowed to leave Vietnam through
a United Nations-managed program and have made it safely to Thailand, Malaysia,
Indonesia and other Asian countries, and as well as Cambodians and Laotians who
are in Thailand and have been processed for admission to the United States.

Hmong Seek to Cross Mekong

The Thais have been refusing to admit more Laotians, mainly Hmong hill people,
who have been trying to cross the Mekong River, State Department officials said.

Some Hmong may have American ties, such as those who fought in an army organized
by the Central Intelligence Agency. The Thais say almost all those now seeking
refuge are ''economic migrants'' with no claim to refugee status. This view is
shared by some staff aides on Capitol Hill who in the past favored the admission
of Indochinese refugees.

Another problem involves Vietnamese who do not leave by boat, but travel
overland through Cambodia. About 4,000 are in Thailand, and the Thais have ruled
them ineligible as refugees. American officials would also like to interview
these Vietnamese to make sure that those with American connections may be
admitted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 22, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ABORTION CHOICE DEFENDED IN CAPITAL

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 21


A little more than a year ago Rabbi Shira Stern lay on a New York hospital bed,
waiting miserably for the beginning of the induced contractions that would abort
her defective, five-month-old fetus. Her husband turned on the television set
for distraction, and there was President Reagan addressing a convention of
religious broadcasters, attacking abortion and lamenting the ''15 million
children who will never laugh, never sing, never know the joy of human love.''

''Even in the pain we felt, we were tremendously angry,'' Rabbi Stern said. So
today she and her husband, part of a force of women and men drawn from every
state in the Union, stood in a downtown plaza near the Capitol. Under a banner
that read ''We Are Your Mothers, Your Daughters, Your Sisters, Your Friends,''
they told of the rape, the poverty, the youth, the inadequacy or the biological
defect that had led them to choose abortion.

They were taking part in a new drive mounted by the National Abortion Rights
Action League to defend the legal practice of abortion against its attackers and
to show that, as Nanette Falkenberg, executive director of the league, said,
''People who have abortions in this country are not selfish, irresponsible
people who don't care about family.'' #35,000 Personal Testimonials From 7
o'clock this morning on into the night, single women, divorced women, married
women, mothers and grandmothers told of abortions and read letters from the
flood of 35,000 to 40,000 personal testimonials the league says have poured in
in the last two months.

At a hotel conference room across the street, the National Right to Life
organization began its own counterattack on this new offensive. The founder of
the group Women Exploited by Abortion characterized women who believe they made
the right decision in having an abortion as ''emotionally ill.'' And a Senate
subcommittee heard medical experts testify on the subject of ''fetal pain'' in
the aborton process.

In each case, the events were recorded by cameras and reporters as part of an
increasingly emotional battle for public support in the debate about abortion,
which was legalized by the Supreme Court 12 years ago.

To a large extent, like so many political conflicts now, the fight over abortion
is one of focus and image. ''I wanted to find a way to treat the issue so that
when people think of abortion, what they see in their mind is not a fetal
picture but the face of someone they know, someone who is not a murderer,'' Miss
Falkenberg said.

Veracity of Tape Is Debated

The league decided on the strategy of asking women who had had abortions to come
forward and tell their stories earlier this year, after the President's speech
about fetal pain and the release of a video track, ''The Silent Scream,'' began
stirring strong emotions. The tape purports to show a 12-week fetus recoiling in
open-mouthed pain as an abortion begins.

Dr. Bernard Nathanson, the New York physician and former abortion practitioner
who narrates the video track, testified at the subcommittee hearing this
morning. Various prominent physicians have said that the tape is deceptive
because the nervous system of a 12-week fetus is insufficiently developed to
allow it to feel pain. At the subcommittee hearing, some of the medical experts
testifying agreed with Dr. Nathanson and some did not.

At the National Right to Life conference afterward, Dr. Nathanson spoke about
the videotapes's propaganda value. It was televised footage of the victims of
the Vietnam War that turned the public against that war, he said, and ''now we
have a videotape that shows abortion from the victim's point of view.''

As the former director of the largest abortion clinic in the Western Hemisphere,
Dr. Nathanson said, he supervised 75,000 abortions before deciding that the
practice was wrong. He insisted that ''there is a reasonable probability that
the child, even at 12 weeks, is experiencing a primitive pain.''

'Our Name Is Legion'

At the ''speak-out'' across the street, Ann Taylor Allen, one of the women who
had an abortion at Dr. Nathanson's New York clinic and an associate history
professor at the University of Louisville, read the letter she had written to
Mr. Reagan, explaining why she and thousands of other women are now choosing to
make the case for abortion.

''We are nameless but our name is legion,'' she read. ''We are the millions of
women who every year, in every town, state and nation, seek abortion.'' In 1970,
as a married graduate student and mother of a seven-month-old baby, she found
herself pregnant again despite having been fitted by the clinic with an
intrauterine device.

''Why may Bernard Nathanson speak freely and publicly about his experience of
abortion while I, his ex-patient, am ashamed, embarrased, and afraid to speak?''
she continued. ''Why should a 12-week fetus be given a voice, even a 'scream,'
while the woman in whose body it resides has no voice at all? I am writing in
order to give th at woman a voice and a name - my voice, my name.''

''If women who support reproductive choice do not tell their stories,'' she
wrote the President, ''then the debate will be dominated by those who, in the
name of political, religious or moral principle, ignore us and our needs and
sometimes view us simply as containers for the next generation.''

Letter Speaks of Anguish

Rabbi Stern and her husband, Rabbi Donald A. Weber, who are now expecing a child
in August, took turns reading their letter to Mr. Reagan, a letter that spoke of
the anguish they felt over the abortion of a child they said they had dearly
wanted but who would have died at birth if carried to term. When they left the
platform, they held each other for long moments.

''You don't have to show us pictures of fetuses in jars - we held our own
shortly after the abortion,'' the letter said. ''If you do not approve, we do
not ask that you follow in our footsteps. But don't tell us that we do not
understand the issue or the tragedy: We pray that no one in your family will
ever need to understand as fully and personally as we do now.''

The women will take their letters to lobby members of Congress on Wednesday. At
some point, said Marcia Niemann, the league's project director, copies of all of
the letters will be sent to the White House.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rabbi Shira Stern and husband Rabbi Donald A. Weber
(NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 22, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 975 words


GREASY LAKE & OTHER STORIES. By T. Coraghessan Boyle. 229 pages. Viking. $16.95.

''SOME of you will be shocked by what I report here, others moved,'' says one of
T. Coraghessan Boyle's narrators, by way of prefacing his story about a torrid
love affair between Dwight D. Eisenhower and Khrushchev's wife, Nina. ''Still
others - the inevitable naysayers and skeptics - may find it difficult to
believe. But before you turn a deaf ear, let me remind you how unthinkable it
once seemed to credit reports of Errol Flynn's flirtation with Nazis and
homosexuals, F.D.R.'s 30-year obsession with Lucy Mercer, or Ted Kennedy's
over-mastering desire for an ingenuous campaign worker 11 years his junior. The
truth is often hard to swallow.''

Some time in the 60's, as Norman Mailer once observed, reality began surpassing
fiction in terms of incongruity, inventiveness and just plain strangeness: what
novelist could have thought up the Vietnam War, say - or imagined Watergate and
its ensuing dramas? To cope with history's crazed acceleration, some writers
retreated into their own psyches; others started to apply heavy doses of black
humor and surrealism to their fiction, coming up with truly bizarre reinventions
of the reality around them.

Mr. Boyle, clearly, belongs to that latter group; and in this, his second
collection of stories, he uses his seemingly limitless capacity for invention
and a gift for nimble, hyperventilated prose to delineate his heightened vision
of the world. In these stories, as in his two previous novels (''Water Music''
and ''Budding Prospects''), fairly ordinary events have a way of snowballing,
melodramatically, out of control: a baseball game goes into inning after inning,
apparently never to end; a group of punked-out teen-agers go out cruising for
excitement and discover real death and destruction; a huge flock of starlings
settle in a farmer's orchard - and refuse, like their relatives in Hitchcock's
movie ''The Birds,'' to ever leave.

Though the tales share the author's distinctly manic voice, a voice, pitched
just this side of hysteria, they remain remarkably eclectic in form, disparate
in subject matter - a testament to both Mr. Boyle's range as a storyteller and
to the reach of his ambition. There are reworkings of classic genre pieces -
''The Overcoat II'' takes the 19th century Russian short story, translating its
characters and their dilemmas into the present-day Soviet Union; meditations on
such real-life figures as President Eisenhower and the blues singer Robert
Johnson that effectively transform biography into myth; and there are satiric
fables of contemporary life, so funny and acutely observed that they might have
been written by Evelyn Waugh as sketches for the old ''Saturday Night Live.''

In ''On for the Long Haul,'' Bayard, a fairly ordinary fellow given to
apocalyptic visions, moves his family to a cabin in Montana, purchases a
complete line of survivalist gear (yogurt powder, radiation suits, a pair of
Russian-made AK 47's, and a four-wheel drive vehicle that will run on anything
from paint thinner to rubbing alcohol), and gets himself and his wife
appendectomies so they'll be prepared for the day when doctors and hospitals are
a long-vanished luxury. For the first time in his life, Bayard feels secure,
''glad to have escaped the Gomorrah of the city,'' but his sense of peace is
short-lived: his neighbor, it turns out, is not only a fellow survivalist, but
also a maniac with an aversion to children and small animals - in particular,
Bayard's.

Many of Mr. Boyle's stories share a brooding, Pinteresque atmosphere of menace:
violence and blood percolate throughout this collection, often surfacing in
especially gruesome images - a poisoned dog, tearing out its own guts; a bloated
body floating upside down in a murky lake, a kidnapped child with its tongue
ripped out. What saves the darkest tales from becoming morbidly grotesque is Mr.
Boyle's infectious, farcical humor. He possesses a delicious sense of the
absurd; and he is also a master of overstatement and hyperbole. One of his
characters describes the loss of his car keys as ''a tactical error, as damaging
and irreversible in its way as Westmoreland's decision to dig in at Khe Sanh;''
and a politician refers to his aides as ''a bunch of young Turks and electoral
strong-arm men who wielded briefcases like swords and had political ambitions
akin to Genghis Khan's.''

''I was overdramatizing,'' says the narrator of ''Two Ships,'' speaking on Mr.
Boyle's behalf. ''For effect. Overdramatizing because humor resides in
exaggeration, and humor is a quick cover for alarm and bewilderment.''

The story of two childhood friends who grow up and grow apart, ''Two Ships''
remains one of the weakest entries in this collection. Its narrative - which
details how one friend became a Marxist radical, while the other became a
well-heeled suburbanite - is pat and contrived, refusing to penetrate beneath
the surface details of its heros' lives. Indeed Mr. Boyle tends, even in the
most naturalistic of these stories, to substitute cleverness for felt emotion,
one-liners for sustained comedic effects - he seems more comfortable making
jokes or dazzling the reader with verbal pyrotechnics, than working through the
consequences of his characters' actions and beliefs.

Most of the time, though, the reader doesn't notice - so vigorous and alluring
is Mr. Boyle's use of language. Capable of shifting scales from the lyrical to
the vernacular, the literary to the mundane without the slightest strain, he can
conjure up, with equal facility, the adrenalized atmosphere of a baseball
dugout, the snide posturings of teen-age rebels, the cocktail-party chatter of
East Side liberals. Indeed, the best of his stories not only make the reader
see; they also make the reader hear and smell and feel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of T. Coraghessan Boyle

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 22, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: SYLVESTER STALLONE RETURNS AS RAMBO

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 757 words


ABOUT two seconds after he has been dropped into the middle of Vietnam to look
for American prisoners of war, Rambo (Sylvester Stallone) is accosted by a large
snake, dangling from a tree. Rambo simply turns and, with what appears to be no
more than a flick of the wrist, strangles it. A few seconds further on, he meets
his beautiful young Vietnamese underground contact, and maybe four minutes later
he has found the P.O.W.'s.

Vietnam, as seen in ''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' seems to be somewhat smaller
than Central Park, though rather more thickly planted. It's the sort of place
where, if you stand in one spot for 30 minutes, everybody you have ever known
will eventually walk by. The size is important, since Rambo has only 36 hours in
which to carry out his commando mission.

''Rambo,'' which opens today at the Gemini and other theaters, does nothing less
than rewrite history. Though the movie doesn't say so, it's designed to win the
war that officially ended 10 years ago in humiliating defeat.

If you have any doubts about the outcome of Rambo's mission, you don't know
Rambo. Also you obviously didn't see Mr. Stallone's much more accomplished 1982
film, ''First Blood,'' which introduced Rambo. He's the moody Vietnam veteran
who, single-handedly, fought off several thousand National Guardsmen, armed
helicopters and tanks as he attempted to find a little peace and quiet in the
mountains of the Pacific Northwest.

At the beginning of the new film, Rambo, serving time in a prison quarry for
that earlier unpleasantness, is recruited as the ''pure fighting machine'' he is
to look for missing Americans in today's Vietnam. It takes Rambo at least three
minutes to realize that society is still against him. Even before he starts, the
mission has been sabotaged by a lily-livered, pinko, bleeding-heart-liberal
Congressman, representing the same people who lost the original war.

According to ''Rambo,'' the Congressman is attempting to placate his
constituents by backing the P.O.W. mission. However, he's dead set against
finding any prisoners, since that might start the war all over again. The
movie's politics are implausible if not truly bubble-headed, but they are a
conveniently topical frame for the spectacle of Mr. Stallone, bare to the waist
and sometimes further, as he gives his one-man army demonstration.

Equipped with a bow and a quiver full of exploding arrows, and sometimes using
guns and helicopters stolen from the Vietnamese, Rambo succeeds in laying waste
much of Vietnam. It's not easy or painless, though the movie makes it look that
way.

Captured by the Vietnamese, he is subjected to unspeakable tortures on an
electrified rack by a haughty, elegantly mannered, Russian ''military adviser.''
Even worse, a promising liaison with his pretty Vietnamese associate is quite
cruelly nipped in the bud, but - looking on the bright side - this saves Rambo
from all that mushy stuff that interferes with the more important action.

Rambo, as personified by Mr. Stallone, isn't a man who needs the love of others.
He loves himself quite enough. There's also the comforting presence of the
camera, which behaves like someone obsessed. It caresses Mr. Stallone's face and
body with an abandon not seen on the screen since Josef von Sternberg made
movies with Marlene Dietrich.

To anyone who doesn't share the camera's adoration, this sort of behavior
becomes so comic that ''Rambo'' turns into something of a camp classic. George
P. Cosmatos is credited as the director, but there's no hiding the identity of
the film's real auteur - Mr. Stallone, who not only stars in the film but wrote
its screenplay with James Cameron. Everyone else is superfluous. Vietnam
Revisited RAMBO: FIRST BLOOD PART II, directed by George P. Cosmatos; screenplay
by Sylvester Stallone and James Cameron; story by Kevin Jarre, based on
characters created by David Morrell; director of photography, Jack Cardiff;
edited by Mark Goldblatt and Mark Helfrich; music by Jerry Goldsmith; produced
by Buzz Feitshans; released by Tri-Star Pictures.

At Warner Twin, Broadway and 47th

Street; Gemini Twin, 64th Street and Second Avenue; Bay Cinema, Second Avenue at
32d Street; 23d Street West Triplex, between Eighth and Ninth Avenues, and other
theaters. Running time: 93 minutes.

This film is rated R. RamboSylvester Stallone TrautmanRichard Crenna
MurdockCharles Napier PodovskySteven Berkoff CoJulia Nickson EricsonMartin Kove
TayGeorge Kee Cheung BanksAndy Wood VinhWilliam Ghent YushinVojo Goric KinhDana
Lee

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sylvester Stallone (Dave Friedman)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 23, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDES EXAMINE REFUGEE PROGRAM

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 22


Reagan Administration officials said today that they were looking at the
possibility that some of the 15,000 Cambodian refugees in Thailand who have been
ruled ineligible for admission to the United States might deserve a second
evaluation.

With the United States planning to wind down its program for admitting Cambodian
refugees, Secretary of State George P. Shultz has been studying the situation,
the officials said.

He is planning to discuss the refugee issue on Friday in a meeting with the Thai
Foreign Minister, Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila, retired.

In the meantime, Mr. Shultz's aides are dealing with a letter sent Tuesday to
President Reagan by two key members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee,
questioning whether the refugee program was being ended prematurely.

Reagan's Directive Is Cited

The letter, signed by Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a New York Democrat who
is chairman of the subcommittee on Asia, and Representative Jim Leach,
Republican of Iowa, said that the screening program under which 15,000 people
were barred as security risks was inconsistent with President Reagan's own
guidelines in a National Security Decision Directive 93 of May 13, 1983.

They said they believed that ''a compassionate review of the rejected cases
would find many deserving people to be admissible and would allow them to become
productive citizens of this country as our refugee program intended.''

A State Department official said the main problem involved Cambodians who might
have been affiliated with the Khmer Rouge, the Communists led by Pol Pot who
have been accused of genocide during the time they ruled, from 1975 to 1979,
when they were ousted by the present Vietnamese-backed Communist Government.

''It is very hard sometimes to tell with certainty who was a Khmer Rouge and who
wasn't and whether someone who lived in a Khmer Rouge area necessarily should be
barred,'' the official said.

Khmer Rouge Link a Problem

He said screening officers in Thailand had tended to bar Cambodians if there was
a suspected link to the Khmer Rouge. The problem, he said, is that the true
Khmer Rouge probably went to lengths to cover up their identity while other
Cambodians might have been accused of Khmer Rouge affiliation without proof.

The 15,000 people who have been rejected for admission are in the main Thai
refugee camp, at Khao-i-Dang.

Of the total camp population of 25,000, beside the 15,000 who have been turned
down by the United States, 2,000 have yet to be interviewed, 4,300 are permitted
to stay even though the Thais did not give them official refugee status, and
4,000 are believed to have been accepted by other countries.

In the Presidential directive, Mr. Reagan listed the following categories as
eligible for admission:

''Those who fled Cambodia because of occurrences during the Pol Pot regime,
former members of the military, those with close relatives in the United States,
and persons who refuse to work with the new regime in Cambodia.

''Also unaccompanied minors and those deserting from or evading military service
with the forces of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.''

No Independent Evidence Needed

The directive said that applicants for refugee status in these categories ''will
not have to present independent evidence regarding persecution.''

Mr. Solarz and Mr. Leach said that they recognized that American refugee law put
the burden of proof on the refugee, but they said that ''our American tradition
of common law and common decency would also argue for common sense in
recognizing as refugees those who fled Pol Pot, who lost relatives, who fled the
Vietnamese, who experienced starvation, who lived in prison or in camps for up
to six years, or who have been otherwise persecuted.''

They also raised the possibility of admitting some of the 230,000 Cambodians who
live in camps along the border, have recently crossed into Thailand because of
military activities on the Cambodian side. Although these people are not
officially regarded as refugees, some could have family members in the United
States and thus qualify for admission. So far, the Thai authorities have not
permitted screening of this group.

Bernard Kalb, the State Department spokesman, said Mr. Shultz's personal concern
about our refugee programs ''is well known.''

He said that American policies on refugees are ''carried out with his knowledge
and approval.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 23, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

LLOYD REBELLIOUS 'NAMES'

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 22


For nearly 300 years, Lloyd's of London has sold insurance backed, ultimately,
by individuals. Organized into underwriting syndicates, groups of investors
reaped profits when premiums outpaced claims - and promised to be personally
liable, without limit, if too many disasters occurred.

Now, 500 members of two of the syndicates are facing losses that could exceed
$165 million, and many are refusing to pay up. The investors, including at least
10 unidentified Americans, feature such prominent figures as Adnan Kashoggi, the
Saudi Arabian businessman; Jeffrey Archer, the best-selling novelist, and the
Duchess of Kent.

Contending that they are the victims of fraud and misjudgment by two former
syndicate managers, the investors are calling on Lloyd's itself to make good on
some of their liabilities. A protracted legal battle is threatened, and Lloyd's
procedures and safeguards may soon become the focus of a House of Commons
debate.

A $5 Billion Market

Lloyd's, founded in 1688, operates a $5 billion insurance market, in which its
23,438 underwriting members accept risks placed by brokers. Most of the members
are nonprofessional investors, known as ''names''; the rest are full-time
insurance underwriters.

The brokers write details of the risk on a ''slip'' that is taken to the
''Room'' - Lloyd's headquarters in the City of London - where underwriting
agents of the members initial the amount of each policy they are prepared to
accept.

In the current dispute, the syndicate members believe that because of the
reported shortcomings of their former managing agents - the people who actually
made a commitment on their behalf to accept an insurance risk - Lloyd's should
compensate the members, at least for some of their losses, and assume a more
vigilant role in monitoring the market.

The chairman of Lloyd's, Peter Miller, rejects any such suggestion.

''If the amount 'names' have on deposit at Lloyd's is insufficient to match the
legitimate claim, then we shall call upon the person concerned to find the rest
of the money, up to the limit of his liability,'' he said.

Answering suggestions that at least 100 of the 500 members involved would, as a
result, be forced into bankruptcy, Mr. Miller said: ''I believe it is correct to
say that the Council of Lloyd's has never forced a member into bankruptcy, and
we hope not to have to do this, but we do expect each member to meet his
liabilities, up to the limit of his assets.'' Mr. Miller said this might mean
that a member would have to sell his home and business, if necessary.

The members of the two syndicates, 918 and 940, however, argue that they are a
special case, and believe that if Lloyd's does not act, the steady supply of
rich and famous people prepared to take the financial risk of becoming a Lloyd's
underwriter will dry up.

Facing a $135,000 Loss

''Nobody should become a member until this is sorted out,'' said one of the
syndicate investors, Keith Whitten, a London management consultant who is facing
a loss of $135,000.

The two syndicates involved are managed by Richard Beckett Underwriting
Agencies, a subsidiary of Minet Holdings P.L.C., a London-based insurance
brokerage.

In 1982, Minet discovered that $51 million of the syndicates' funds reportedly
had been misappropriated by Beckett's two top executives, Peter Cameron-Webb and
Peter Dixon.

The two men are said to have spent the money on yachts, executive jets and the
production of at least one movie, ''Let's Do It.'' Neither Mr. Dixon nor Mr.
Cameron-Webb has been charged with any criminal offense. However, the City of
London police and the Government's Department of Trade are investigating them.
Mr. Cameron-Webb is believed to be working in the insurance business in Florida.
Mr. Dixon is thought to be somewhere in southern Europe.

Among a number of irregularities discovered by Minet was the fact that Beckett
had reinsured many of the risks with a Gibraltar company in which both Mr.
Cameron-Webb and Mr. Dixon had interests, rather than in the traditional way, by
reinsuring with major international insurers or other Lloyd's underwriters.
Insurers limit their potential liability by spreading their risks among other
carriers through reinsurance. $32 Million Recovered Minet eventually recovered
$32 million of the $51 million, largely through a return of reinsurance
premiums. In settling with the members of the two syndicates, Minet agreed to
make up the bulk of the remaining $19 million. The settlement was conditioned,
however, on the members promising not to sue Minet or the Richard Beckett
agencies for any additional losses that might occur. But recovery of the
reinsurance premiums meant that, for the most part, there was no reinsurance,
and so when claims came in on the policies the members had to bear the full
brunt.

The claims proved to be substantial, mainly from United States product liability
cases against industrial companies by families of former employees who had
contracted asbestosis, and from cases involving Agent Orange, the defoliant used
in the Vietnam war. The Beckett agencies assess the potential loss at $165
million, over a 20-year period.

The Lloyd's Council has extended the deadline for payment from this month until
July, when the syndicate members are supposed to come up with about half that
amount to meet the contingent liability. But a group of ''names'' has formed an
action committee, headed by Lord Goodman, a leading lawyer here; commmissioned a
study by accountants Price Waterhouse; set aside over $1.2 million for legal
costs, and engaged a firm of solicitors to study possible remedies, including
whether the syndicate members could sue Minet despite their earlier promise not
to.

Minet takes this threat seriously: it has set aside more than $10 million to
fight any legal battle. It has also decided to close down the Richard Beckett
Underwriting Agencies at the end of the year, leaving the members to fend for
themselves.

Lloyd's May Help

It is only in this area that the syndicate members are likely to get any help
from Lloyd's itself. Mr. Miller has pledged that the syndicates would be
provided ''with a competent agent to look after their affairs,'' and sources at
Lloyd's indicate that Minet will be expected to provide that. But this will not
be sufficient to placate the disgruntled members of the loss-making syndicates.

Ed Sparrow of the London law firm Ashurst Morris, representing the syndicate
members, said: ''We are looking into certain areas. The accountants are looking
through the books, and at some stage in the very near future will hold a number
of meetings to decide what to do.''

The syndicate members have also hired a public relations firm, Good Relations,
to mount a campaign. The firm said today that this was expected to lead to
further pressure on Lloyd's ''to preserve its good name.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 24, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A picture on the first page of Business Day yesterday, with an article about
Lloyd's of London, was published erroneously. It showed Princess Michael of
Kent, not the Duchess of Kent.

GRAPHIC: photo of Jeffrey Archer,; photo of Duchess of Kent; photo of Adnan
Kashoggi; photo of Lutine Bell

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 23, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GRADUATE CADETS INCLUDE REFUGEES

BYLINE: By FRANKLIN WHITEHOUSE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 26, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 448 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y., May 22


Two cadets who were born in South Vietnam and fled the Communist takeover threw
their white caps into the air today and graduated with 1,008 classmates from the
United States Military Academy.

''I had to work hard,'' said Second Lieut. Jean Nguyen, 21 years old, of Milton,
Pa. Lieutenant Nguyen came to public attention last Feb. 6, when President
Reagan singled her out during his State of the Union Message as embodying the
values and opportunities of the United States.

''This is very special,'' said Lieutenant Nguyen, holding her diploma, ''and so
was the other time. I was very honored to be with the President.''

The other refugee is Second Lieut. Hung Vu, also 21, of Elmhurst, Queens. Both
newly commissioned Army officers escaped with their families from South Vietnam
in 1975 - Lieutenant Nguyen by boat and Lieutenant Vu through Laos to Paris,
where he had relatives.

Graduating at the top of the class was Lawrence M. Young of Massapequa, L.I. At
the other end was the ''goat,'' Martin R. Clark of Sudbury, Mass. Cadet Clark
received the traditional cheer from the corps of cadets as he stepped forward
for his diploma, turned and waved his arms in the air.

Talk by Army Secretary

The 187th graduating class at West Point, its largest, included 107 women, the
largest number since they were first admitted in 1976. A woman, Leslie A. Lewis
of Sewickley, Pa., finished second in the class, and another, Karen Short of
Peekskill, became the corps' first regimental commander.

Seated on the artifical turf of Michie Stadium, the graduates heard the
Secretary of the Army, John O. Marsh Jr., speak about the modern fighting force.

''There are warriors in the Army, and there are warriors in the corps,'' Mr.
Marsh told the audience of 25,000. ''However, I do not believe it is necessary
to have a war to prove they are there.

Yet, if you examine national-defense issues, what are the questions being raised
by Congress, by the media and by the public? It is the development of weapons
systems, cost overruns, delays in production, prices of spare parts, failures of
performance and quality control. These are management issues.

''Today's officers must have the warrior's ability to lead on the battlefield
and the manager's talents to cope with the logistics necessary to supply,
sustain and modernize the force.''

Lieutenant Vu, who was born in Saigon, said his next assignment would be
paratrooper school at Fort Campbell, Ky. He chose that, he said with a grin,
''because I think it's fun to jump from a flying plane.''

Lieutenant Nguyen, whose birthplace was Vung Tau, said she was on her way to
ordnance school at the Aberdeen (Md.) Proving Ground.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of graduates cheering (NYT/Joyce Dopkeen)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Great White Father Is Still Relocating Indians

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 279 words


To the Editor:

During this time of compassion for the victims of war marked by the
anniversaries of the end of World War II and the Vietnam War, we Americans
continue to turn our backs on, and treat as less than human, the victims of our
Government's very own attempt at genocide - the native Americans.

As we chastise the Government of South Africa for its policy of relocating black
families against their will, Congress tells the Navajos of Arizona (page A1, May
9) they must give up and move off land that has been in their families for
generations. Why? Because Congress has decided to award this land to the Hopis.

Neither the Navajos nor the Hopis deserve this kind of treatment. The Hopis are
here just as much victims of the white man's wheeling and dealing. They may have
won a victory today, but who is to say this new borderline is the ''real'' one
and won't change again according to deals the Government makes based on economic
worth of the land. This has happened to the Navajos before.

We can never make up to the native Americans for the injustices done to them
throughout our history as a nation. We can, however, come up with better, more
humane solutions to problems regarding their continued survival. Instigating
violence and war (which is what this forced-re-location act does) is not the
answer. When will white Government officials stop stereotyping these people as
ignorant savages out of a bad western, and treat them with the respect and
dignity we reserve for others.

Mr. Reagan is the first to accuse other governments of oppression; yet we are
blatantly guilty of this crime.

MARIA MANHATTAN SCATUCCIO

New York, May 11, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOR A MEMORABLE MEMORIAL WEEKEND

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 6; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 5395 words


MEMORIAL DAY weekend is traditionally a time for getting out of New York for the
year's first prolonged session of sun-worshiping or communing with nature. With
the throngs gone, so is talk about the Hamptons or that little shack in the
woods. A quieter, more spacious-seeming New York waits to be enjoyed by those
who elect to stay in the city. And this holiday weekend offers many
opportunities to take in something new or different, or reinvestigate some city
ritual.

Two New York institutions - the Greenwich Village Outdoor Art Exhibit and the
Big Apple Circus - will be in full swing. The weekend provides a chance to
sample an unusually wide variety of theater pieces created and directed by women
and women's theater groups. There will be music from Woodlawn Cemetery to the
Hudson River. For the energetic of all ages, there are workshops in aikido, mime
and African dance, as well as a number of walking tours and a footrace through
Queens.

The festivities start today at 11 A.M. with the weekend's first performance by
the Big Apple Circus, which plays through May 30 at Cunningham Park, at the
corner of Francis Lewis Boulevard and Union Turnpike in Queens. Among the
performers will be Anna Mae, the elephant, Taxi and Adolph, the sea lions, and
three clowns - Mr. Stubbs, Grandma and Gordoon. Katja Schumann and her five
dancing horses will be there, too, as well as the Carillo Brothers, tightrope
walkers from Colombia, Dolly Jacobson, the aerialist, and Paul Binder, the
ringmaster. Additional performances are tonight at 7:30, tomorrow at 2 and 7:30,
and Sunday and Monday at 1 and 4. Admission is $8 for adults and $6 for children
in the grandstand; $10 and $8 for ringside seats. For information and to charge
tickets: 860-7320.

The Brooklyn Arts and Culture Association's free Adopt-A-Landmark Celebration
starts at noon at the Brooklyn campus of Long Island University at Flatbush and
DeKalb Avenues. The event consists of exhibitions of period furniture, drawings,
photographs and written work as well as performances of music and dance - all
created by students from five Brooklyn high schools - that celebrate such
Brooklyn landmarks as the Victorian houses of South Prospect Park, and the
restoration of Weeksville, a mid-19th century black colony. The performance
starts at 1 P.M. Information: (718) 783-3077.

Three free demonstrations will serve as an introduction to aikido, a martial
arts form that emphasizes graceful rolls and throws as a means to a strong body
and calm mind. Taught by Mitsugi Saotome, the workshops are tonight at 6:30 and
tomorrow at 12:30 and 3 at the New York Aikido Club, Bond Street Dojo, 49 Bond
Street. Information: 477-0899.

Edwina Lee Tyler, a mesmerizing performer of African-American music and dance,
will offer dancers and nondancers alike a chance to learn African dance in two
90-minute sessions tomorrow - at 12:30 and 4 - at Taller LatinoAmericano, 19
West 21st Street, on the second floor. Admission to each is $5. Information:
(718) 462-9763.

The Staten Island Children's Museum, 15 Beach Street, Staten Island, will
present Spring Pantomime, a workshop in mime tomorrow at 1:30, taught by Ellen
Mansfield, who will cover the mime techniques of walking and climbing stairs and
discuss the history of pantomime. The workshop is especially suited for
hearing-impaired participants. Two animated films by Eli Noyes will be presented
on Sunday at 1:30. Admission to the museum is $1. Information: (718) 273-2060.
The weekend's unofficial celebration of women's theater starts tonight at 7:30
with a performance of Meredith Monk's ''Quarry'' at La Mama E.T.C., 74A East
Fourth Street. To some extent, all the works of Miss Monk, a major American
experimentalist, explore quarries - excavating mind and memory. Here the
subjects are the horrors of war and human cruelty, as seen through the eyes of a
little girl. ''Quarry'' will be performed again tomorrow and Sunday at 7:30.
Tickets are $15. Reservations: 475-7710.

The San Francisco-based Plutonium Players are probably best known for
originating ''Ladies Against Women,'' which is the title of both a national
network of feminist street theater companies and of a satirical stage revue,
subtitled ''An Evening of Consciousness-Lowering,'' that will be seen at three
theaters around Manhattan this weekend. The group will be seen at Taller
LatinoAmericano tonight at 8. Tickets are $5. Reservations: 255-7155. The
performance tomorrow is at the Duplex, 55 Grove Street, at 8. Tickets are $7.
Reservations: 255-5438. The group will perform on Sunday at 2 and 8 and on
Monday at 8 at the Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street. Tickets are
$5; Theater Development Fund vouchers accepted. Reservations: 807-5541.

There will also be performances by three of the city's leading women's theater
groups. More Fire! Productions, a collective of performance artists, will
present ''Junk Love,'' a comic revue created by Robin Epstein and Dorothy
Cantwell about addiction to love, that will be performed tonight, tomorrow and
Sunday at 8 at University of the Streets, 130 East Seventh Street. Tickets are
$5. Reservations: 533-7667. The Split Britches Company performs ''Upwardly
Mobile Home,'' a surrealistic look at the plight of the artist in society,
tonight and tomorrow at 8 at the Shandol Theater, 137 West 22d Street. Tickets
are $8. Reservations: 460-8067. And ''Feast or Famine,'' a performance art piece
by Sondra Segal and Roberta Sklar about women and eating, will be performed by
the Women's Experimental Theater at the Women's Inter Art Theatre, 549 West 52d
Street, tonight at 8. Tomorrow at 7 and 10 and, in a performance especially for
women, on Sunday at 3. Tickets are $8 for tomorrow's second show; $12 for all
other performances; students and the elderly, $8; Theater Development Fund
vouchers accepted. Information: 246-1050. Reservations: 279-4200.

The sloops Clearwater and Woody Guthrie will be harbored at the East 107th
Street Pier tomorrow for the East Harlem River Revival Festival, organized by
the Clearwater and the community. Arts, crafts and food will be on sale. A
tankful of fish caught in the morning by the Clearwater crew will be on exhibit
for families to look at, touch and learn about. Among the groups performing will
be Crossing the Water, a storytelling and musical ensemble, the Sloop Singers,
Conjunto Aguilar, the Boys from El Barrio and the Manhattan Community School
Choir. Admission to the festival, which opens at 10 and closes at 6, is free. To
reach the pier, at the East River Drive, use the crossover at 102d Street or
111th Street.

The 5K Liberty Avenue Run is a race with a cause, for all funds raised from the
event will go to the Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island Foundation. The
five-kilometer race (3.1 miles) starts at 10 A.M., beginning and ending at the
Forest Park Buddy Memorial in Richmond Hill, Queens, and winding through that
historic area. The entry fee is $8 and registration, which starts at 7:30
tomorrow morning, must be completed by 9:15. The race is open to runners in
seven age categories, from children 12 and under to adults 60 and over, with
gift prizes awarded to the first three male and female finishers in each group.
Information: (718) 738-9133.

The weekend's walking tours start tomorrow morning at 10 with a Botanical
Safari, which examines the wildflowers, trees and shrubs of the Alley Pond
Environmental Center's park in Douglaston. At 2 P.M., there's an exploration of
the aquatic world of the center's Turtle Pond. The tours start from the park's
nature center, in the upper parking field near the picnic area and wading pool.
It is recommended that walkers wear comfortable, old shoes. The fee for each
tour is $2. Information: (718) 229-4000.

The Urban Park Rangers are sponsoring two free tours of interest to nature
lovers. The bugs of Prospect Park will be studied on Sunday, in a free tour that
starts at 1 at the Grand Army Plaza in Brooklyn. Information: (718) 856-4210.
The salt marshes, forests, meadows and history of Hunter Island in the Bronx
will be explored in a tour that starts at 1 at the Pelham Bay Environmental
Center across from Section 2 of the boardwalk at Orchard Beach. Information:
548-7880. For those who prefer the city's sidewalks - and elegant ones, at that
- there's the Museum of the City of New York's ''East Seventies: the Fashionable
East Side,'' a two-hour walk that starts at St. Jean Baptiste Church at 76th
Street and Lexington Avenue. Admission is $6. Information: 534-1672.

The Greenwich Village Outdoor Art Exhibit will spill its wares over the
sidewalks around Washington Square, starting at noon tomorrow and continuing
through Monday. More than 300 painters, sculptors and craftsmen are
participating in this, the 107th show since the exhibit started in 1931. The
exhibition area runs from West 14th Street to Houston, and from Sixth Avenue to
Broadway. The show is open from noon to sundown and there is no admission
charge. Information: 982-6255.

A free air show by the Navy's ''Blue Angels'' jet aerobatic team promises to be
another of the weekend's extravaganzas, as the flyers soar over the Coney Island
Boardwalk near West 10th Street in Brooklyn tomorrow, Sunday and Monday from
1:30 to 2. For those who relish the more tranquil pastimes of other years, it's
Tea Tasting time tomorrow at 3:30 P.M. at the Berkshire Place hotel, at 21 East
52d Street. In addition to the samplings of English, Chinese, Indian, Irish and
Russian teas from Twinings, the hotel will provide afternoon tea delicacies from
each country. The two-hour session takes place in the hotel's skylit atrium and
costs $15. Reservations: 753-5970. And ballroom dancers who want to know about
the tall, dark strangers and ocean voyages in their future are advised to repair
to the Roseland Ballroom, 239 West 52d Street, tomorrow night from 6 to 8 and
from 11 to 1, when fortune tellers will mingle with the dancers. Admission is
$8. Information: 247-0200.

And what would a holiday weekend be without music? The Woodlawn Cemetery and
Bronx Arts Ensemble are offering a free, musical ''tribute of remembrance'' on
Sunday at 2 in the cemetery's Woolworth Chapel. Among the composers to be
featured are Morton Gould, Leonard Bernstein, George M. Cohan and Scott Joplin.
To reach the concert at Woodlawn, at Webster Avenue and 233d Street in the
Bronx, enter through the cemetery's Jerome Avenue gate at Jerome and Bainbridge
Avenues. Information: 920-0500. Downtown, Beethoven, Scarlatti and Shostakovich
will be performed aboard the Bargemusic, a floating concert hall moored at the
Fulton Ferry Landing under the Brooklyn Bridge on the Brooklyn side. The
performers will be Robert McDonald on the piano, Paul Rosenthal on the violin,
and Gary Hoffman on the cello. The concert starts at 4. Admission is $8; $6 for
students and the elderly. Reservations: (718) 624-4061.

STEVE HART

The biggest attraction in the Hudson Valley this weekend is its color -a dozen
shades of green in trees, set off by the earth tones of brown and tan in newly
plowed fields planted with corn.

For those interested in seeing more of the rural background of the state, a good
place to visit is the Erpf Catskill Cultural Center in Arkville, which is
holding an exhibition on ''New York State Barns: Form and Function.'' It
includes photographs, scale drawings, slide shows and tools used in barn
building from the days of the early settlers to the present.

''A study of barn architecture presents an opportunity to walk into a humble,
weather-beaten structure full of holes and discover a majestic framing structure
of beams and posts open to view to the roof peak,'' according to Margaret
Schneider, one of the curators who planned the exhibition.

Also on display at the center are photographs taken by Stewart Dean titled ''In
Celebration of the New York State Forest Preserve: The Catskill Region.'' The
forest preserve, which is in both the Catskill and Adirondack Mountains, is
celebrating its centennial this year.

Both shows are open tomorrow and Sunday - but not on Monday - from 1 to 4 P.M.,
with no admission charge. The information number is (914) 586-3326. The best
route to Arkville is the Gov. Thomas E. Dewey Thruway north to exit 19 at
Kingston and then 45 miles on Route 28 west.

For those who believe that the country is the proper place to shop for bargains
in antiques, arts and crafts, there are two fairs this weekend, one at Rhinebeck
in Dutchess County, the other at New Paltz in Ulster County.

The Rhinebeck Antiques Fair will be open tomorrow and Sunday from 11 A.M. to 6
P.M. with 140 dealers from nine states displaying their wares. Admission: $3.
Information: (914) 758-6186. The route: Taconic State Parkway north, routes 199
and 308 west and then Route 9 north one mile to the Dutchess County fairgrounds.

In New Paltz, the arts and crafts fair is open tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
and Sunday and Monday from 10 A.M. to 6, with demonstrations of glass blowing,
wood carving, weaving and other crafts. Admission: $4 for adults, $2.50 for the
elderly and $1.50 for children. Information: (914) 679-8087. The route: Dewey
Thruway to Exit 18, Route 299 through the village of New Paltz and then
Libertyville Road on the left to the fairgrounds.

The annual spring sale of books at bargain prices will be held tomorrow from 10
A.M. to 3 P.M. at the Woodstock Library, with proceeds going to the library.
Admission is free. Information: (914) 679-6897. To get to Woodstock, you can
take the Thruway north to Exit 19 at Kingston, Route 28 (Pine Hill) a short
distance west and then Route 375 north to Route 212; continue on Route 212 to
Library Lane.

For those who prefer music to books, the 18th Connecticut Regiment Fife and Drum
Corps, based in Simsbury, Conn., is holding a free concert of 18th-century
military music at the New Windsor Cantonment State Historic Site at Vails Gate
on Sunday, from 2 to 2:45 P.M. and from 3:30 to 4. Information: (914) 561-1765.
To get there, you can take the Thruway to the Newburgh exit and take Union
Avenue South to Route 300 and continue to Vails Gate.

Two art exhibitions are open at Bard College on the Hudson River in the
northwest corner of Dutchess County tomorrow and Sunday from noon to 5 P.M. One
is called ''Reflections on the World,'' with works by Joan Brown, Roy
Lichtenstein and George McNeil, and the other ''Contemporary Monotypes,'' works
made by painting an image on a hard surface like glass or copper plate.

Admission is free. Information: (914) 758-6822. The way to the art gallery is
the Taconic State Parkway north, Route 199 west through the village of Red Hook
and then Route 9G north to the campus.

Harold Faber

Long Island Lifeguards will be taking to their stations this weekend - even if
swimmers may be waiting for warmer water - as Long Island's beaches officially
reopen, with snack bars turning out their first hot dogs and hamburgers of the
season.

Jones Beach and Robert Moses State Park on the South Shore, Sunken Meadow on the
North Shore and Montauk Point State Park at the eastern tip of the island are
among the more than 17,000 acres of facilities operated by the Long Island State
Parks and Recreation Commission that will be reopening.

The lifeguards will begin their tour of duty tomorrow. They'll be at their
stations from 8 A.M. to 4 P.M. on weekends through June, then every day until
Labor Day, weather permitting.

The sun and the sea are free, but the parking isn't. At Jones Beach, for
example, the fee is $3.50 for each of the 21,591 parking spaces. Today, however,
parking is free. Information: (516) 785-1600.

For those who would rather walk among shade trees and blooming rhododendrons and
munch bratwurst and quaff German beer while they listen to Bach, there is the
Back to Back Bach Festival at the Planting Fields Arboretum in Oyster Bay. The
Sea Cliff Chamber Players will be joined by guest artists for a three-day
celebration of Bach's 300th birthday.

Concerts are scheduled at 2 and 8 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday, and at 2 P.M. on
Monday in the arboretum's Hay Barn theater. In the courtyard of the barn at 4
tomorrow, D. Jacques Way, one of the country's foremost harpsichord makers, will
discuss the design and construction of the instrument nowadays. Inside the barn,
the violinist Erick Friedman and the harpsichordist Lionel Party will talk about
and demonstrate ''The Bach Style.''

On Sunday at 4, there will be a courtyard auction, including new and old
instruments, autographed recordings and items related to Bach and the Baroque.

For those who just want to wander the grounds of the 400-acre arboretum, it's
the showiest time of the year for blossoms. The rhododendrons should be at their
peak this weekend.

The arboretum is on Planting Fields Road, in Oyster Bay, several miles north of
Exit 41 of the Long Island Expressway. A three-day festival pass is $35, a
one-day pass is $15. An afternoon pass is $8 and an evening pass is $12. Ticket
information: (516) 671-6263.

Admission to the arboretum - $1.50 - is included in the ticket price. Parking is
free. Arboretum information: (516) 922-9200.

For those looking for country music, Roy Clark and Brenda Lee will be at the
Westbury Music Fair on Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M. Tickets, $16.75, are available at
the box office of the Music Fair on Brush Hollow Road, south of Exit 40 of the
Long Island Expressway, and at all Ticketron locations. Information: (516)
333-0533.

On Sunday evening at 8:15, the Shelter Island Friends of Music will present the
American Brass Quintet at the Shelter Island Presbyterian Church on Route 114 -
by South Ferry from Sag Harbor (516-749-1200), or North Ferry from Greenport
(516-749-0139). A donation to the church is suggested. Information: (516)
749-2241.

In the heart of Long Island, the 19th-century Old Bethpage Village officially
opens its gates for the season with its traditional annual sheep shearing
tomorrow. The outdoor historical museum, south of Exit 48 of the Long Island
Expressway on Round Swamp Road in Old Bethpage, is open from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission is $3 for adults and $1.50 for children. Information: (516) 420-5280.

A traditional small-town fair is being held in Garden City to mark the 100th
anniversary of the Cathedral of the Incarnation on Monday from noon to 4 P.M.
Rides, food and handicrafts by Island artists will be available at the
fairgrounds at the cathedral, 50 Cathedral Avenue, five miles south of Exit 34
of the Long Island Expressway. Parking is free. Information: (516) 746-2955.

In the Hamptons, a new play, ''The New Diana,'' by the poet Kenneth Koch is
having its Southampton premiere at the Parrish Art Museum, at 25 Job's Lane,
near the Southampton Village Hall, tomorrow and Sunday at 8 P.M. The three-act
play, written in verse, is a modern re-creation of the Roman goddess of the moon
and the hunt, Diana. Tickets are $15. To reach the museum, take the Long Island
Expressway to Exit 70 (Sunrise Highway) and continue to Southampton Road;
continue to Main Street, which leads to Job's Lane. Information: (516) 283-2118.


John T. McQuiston

Connecticut A lobster festival, a day at the races, a hot-air balloon meet and
an antique fair are among the entertainment features in Connecticut this
weekend.

It can be a big three days for seafood lovers as Mystic Seaport serves up
lobster, shrimp, clam chowder and oysters on the half shell for outdoor lunches
tomorrow, Sunday and Monday. A musician strolling among the food tents will sing
traditional sea chanteys and folk tunes. Dockside, there will be demonstrations
of seafaring skills aboard the Charles W. Morgan, the last of the 19th-century
wooden whalers.

On Monday, staff members in 19th-century costumes will re-enact an 1870's
Decoration Day complete with a parade, music and oratory of the period. A
forerunner of Memorial Day, Decoration Day was first observed in Connecticut in
1868 and was designed to commemorate the ''fallen heroes'' of the Civil War.

Mystic Seaport, in eastern Connecticut, is accessible by taking Exit 90 of
Interstate 95 and following Mystic Seaport signs. The seaport is open from 9
A.M. to 5 P.M. and admission is $9 for adults and $4.50 for children.
Information: (203) 572-0711.  The Memorial Day tradition of gripping hot dogs
and watching 700-horsepower engines scream around a track at 150 miles an hour
continues this weekend at Lime Rock Park. As part of a five-race competition for
$207,000 in prize money in the Coca-Cola 500, prototype cars by Porsche, Jaguar,
Ford, Chevrolet and Mazda are to roar down straightaways and whine through
S-curves at Lime Rock's one-and-a-half-mile track.

The first race, of American sedans, starts tomorrow afternoon at 3:30. A Lime
Rock brochure describes the race as two hours of ''fenderbanging,
bumper-slamming.'' Admission tomorrow is $15.

Monday morning, the first of four races will start at 10:30. The day will
include races by Corvettes, Camaros, American compacts, vintage cars and a
skydiving show. About 6 P.M., the last checkered flag of the day will signal the
end of the two-hour prototype race. All-day admission for Monday is $25.
Information: (203) 435-2814.

Situated in Salisbury in northwest Connecticut, Lime Rock can be reached by
taking Route 22 north to Millerton, then east on Route 44 to the Connecticut
line, then east on Route 112.

Soon after sunrise tomorrow and Sunday, 35 hot-air balloons will gently rise
from a field in Bristol and float over the central Connecticut countryside. The
annual event, ''Balloons Over Bristol,'' is expected to draw multi-colored
balloons from all over New England. Takeoff times are 6 A.M. and 6 P.M. tomorrow
and 6 A.M. on Sunday. The curious who come half an hour early can watch the
balloonists rig up their baskets and inflate their balloons.

''Balloons Over Bristol'' is free, but it will not be held if there is rain or
if the wind blows at more than six knots. The site, the playing fields of
Bristol Eastern High School, can be reached by taking Interstate 84 to Exit 31,
and then Route 229 north to the school, about five miles. Information: (203)
673-1307.

Closer to New York, about 100 New England antique dealers will display their
wares Monday at the annual outdoor show at the First Church, Congregational in
Fairfield. Items for sale will include 18th- and 19th-century furniture,
paintings, Oriental rugs, brass, porcelain and glassware.

The show is from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. At 11 A.M. Monday, Fairfield's Memorial Day
parade - complete with flags, school bands, Boy Scouts and veterans - will end
with a finale on the village green in front of the church on Beach Road and Old
Post Road. Hot dogs, hamburgers and sodas will be on sale.

You can reach the show by taking Interstate 95 to Exit 22 and following signs to
Beach Road. Admission is $1.50 for adults (free for children); information:
(203) 259-8706. Proceeds will go to restore several Tiffany stained-glass
windows that will be on display in the church during the show.

James Brooke

New Jersey For those who like a ''hands on'' experience, there will be plenty to
do in New Jersey this holiday weekend, from browsing through a crafts fair and
looking for rare auto parts to racing bicycles and holding lion and bear cubs.

Races for youngsters on stock bicycles as well as for top international
competitors will highlight the holiday observances in Somerville on Monday.
Marching bands and drill teams will step down Main Street at 9 A.M. to veterans'
memorials on High Street and Bridge Street.

After that, the bicyclists take over, first families and then teams representing
areas. There will be relay races over a 3.6-mile course, and youngsters from 8
to 17 years old will race over a 600-meter course.

After noon, the events sanctioned by the United States Cycling Federation will
begin, including 15-mile races for youths 15 to 17 and for senior women. There
will an $800 prize for the youths and $2,500 for the top finisher in the women's
race.

The main event is the eighth annual Kugler-Anderson 50-mile Tour of Somerville
open to semiprofessional and category 1 and 2 professionals, those who compete
in international and national circuits. The prize is $4,500. This year, racers
from Belgium, Canada and Mexico will join top United States competitors. The
1.2-mile course that bicyclists circle begins on Main Street and runs through
the heart of the town.

To best way to reach Somerville is by Route 22 west from Newark, or Route 80
west from the George Washington Bridge to Route 287 south to Somerville.
Information: (201) 725-2300.

Auto buffs will find antiques like Model-A and Model-T Fords and a 1929
Rolls-Royce Silver Cloud, as well as interesting experiments like amphibian
cars, at Liberty State Park in Jersey City tomorrow and Sunday.

Antique, custom and special-interest cars will be on display inside the restored
Central Railroad Terminal and on the grounds outside.

There also will be a swap meet where buffs can bring hard-to-find parts and
repair manuals for their old cars in the hopes of exchanging them for something
they can use.

Tickets for the event are $3.50 with 50 cents going to the fund to refurbish the
Statute of Liberty. Youngsters up to 12 years old will be admitted free if
accompanied by an adult. Hours are 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. both days.

Take the New Jersey Turnpike to exit 14B at the park entrance. Information:
(201) 435-0736.

In Bridgeton on Sunday, visitors will be able to compete in the annual
10-Kilometer Run for the Animals. The event, which is preceded by a one-mile fun
run, helps raise money to feed the animals in the 51-year-old Cohanzick Zoo.

Registration is $5 and competitors should sign in by 9 A.M., a half-hour before
the first race. The race is run around the 1,200-acre City Park that surrounds
the zoo. Robin Riley, the zoo director, said visitors will be able to hold three
African lion cubs, two black bear cubs and a mountain lion cub.

On Monday in Bridgeton, a parade will step off from City Hall at 10 A.M. and
head for the Old Broad Street Church Cemetery for Memorial Day ceremonies at
11:15 A.M.

Take the New Jersey Turnpike to Exit 2 (Swedesboro Exit) and follow the signs on
Route 77 to Bridgeton. Information: (609) 455-3230.

More than 100 artisans will exhibit and sell their handmade wares tomorrow from
9:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. at the Music Pier on the boardwalk at Ocean City. The
items include jewelry, pottery, furniture, folk art, quilts, dolls and wooden
toys.

Tonight the Pier will offer dancing to the music of two live big bands from 8 to
11. Tickets are $5 and the proceeds will go to the Ocean City Arts Center.

Take the Garden State Parkway to the Somers Point-Ocean City Exit (Exit 30) and
head east to the oceanfront. Information: (609) 399-6111.

Traditional Memorial Day observances will begin early in Dover, at 7 A.M.
Monday, with visits to area cemeteries for wreath-laying ceremonies and rifle
salutes.

At 9 A.M. the Ladies Auxiliary of Unit 27, American Legion will drop flowers
into the Rockaway River from the Warren Street Bridge to commemorate those who
died at sea. At 10 A.M., the annual parade will start at Crescent Field and head
for JFK Commons Park. At noon the observance will shift to nearby Picatinny
Arsenal for wreath-laying ceremonies at monuments outside and inside the
installation.

Dover can be reached by taking Route 46 west or Route 80 west to Route 287
north. Information: (201) 366-1292.

Joseph F. Sullivan

Westchester For historians, for naturalists and for just plain parade lovers,
there's a weekend of Memorial Day rewards in Westchester County.

Museums and historic sites will begin summer programs, while some county pools
and beaches will open early - Glen Island Beach in New Rochelle, Saxon Woods
Pool in White Plains and Sprain Ridge Pool in Yonkers.

Flags flying, Boy Scouts and American Legionnaires in several communities are
expected to march in memory of those who died at war. Eleven bands will play in
Yonkers on Sunday, and four will march in a White Plains memorial on Monday,
weather permitting.

Parades are also scheduled for Monday in North Tarrytown, Mount Vernon,
Bronxville and Irvington. The Irvington celebration will be the dedication of a
granite monument to the village's Vietnam veterans, with 40 names on it.

Tomorrow in Katonah, the John Jay Homestead museum will open with a porcelain
exhibition marking the 200th anniversary of the China Trade.

Mr. Jay, the first Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, was Secretary of Foreign
Affairs in the mid-1780's and encouraged such trade. About 50 pieces of Chinese
export porcelain bearing his initials have been laid out in the dining room of
the 1787 house, which overlooks a broad field on a section of Route 22 known as
Jay Street, three miles north of Bedford Village. A national historic landmark
owned by the state, the homestead is open for free tours from 10:30 A.M. to 4:30
P.M., Wednesday through Saturday, and from 1 to 4:30 P.M. on Sunday and Monday.

The best route to the homestead is north on I-684 to Route 35 exit (No. 6), east
on Route 35 to Route 22, then south on Route 22. Information: (914) 232-5651.

The North White Plains farm home of Elijah Miller, used by George Washington as
headquarters during the 1776 Battle of White Plains, will ring with ''Songs for
the Stout of Heart'' on Sunday at 2 P.M. A repertory of songs from all the
nation's wars will be sung by Teren Duffin, a curator for the Westchester County
parks department. Mr. Duffin will also conduct free tours of the headquarters,
which is furnished with authentic antiques.

The route: north on the Bronx River Parkway to Virginia Road exit, then turn
right and it's about one-quarter mile away. Information: (914) 949-1236.

A slide show about county archeological sites, some of them 2,000 years old,
will be offered at Muscoot Farm Park in Somers on Sunday. Stewart Fidel,
professor of archeology at the State University of New York at Purchase, will
discuss a rock shelter in Ossining and excavations at Silver Lake Preserve and
at Croton Point Park. The route: north on I-684, to Route 35 (Exit 6), west on
Route 35 to the junction of Route 100, turn left, and it's one mile to the farm.
Information: (914) 232-7118.

A talk about how the horseshoe crab has proved helpful in detecting diseases
such as spinal meningitis and leukemia will be given at the county's Marshlands
Conservancy in Rye at 4 P.M. Sunday by its curator, Alison Beall. At 7:30 Sunday
morning, Miss Beall will lead a spring-migration bird walk to spot several
species that use the marshland as a food source on their journeys north.

The route: I-95, New England Thruway north to Playland Parkway exit, the parkway
east to Boston Post Road (Route 1), south on Route 1 to the conservancy.
Information: (914) 835-4466.

A bird walk aimed at spotting blue-winged warblers, kestrels and other species
will be conducted at 7:30 A.M. tomorrow in the 4,700-acre Ward Pound Ridge
Reservation in Cross River by Edward Kanze, curator of the Trailside Nature
Museum there. Parking at the museum costs $2.25 per car, or $1.25 with a county
parks pass. The route: north on I-684, Route 35 exit (No. 6), east on Route 35
to junction of Route 121, then into reservation on Reservation Road.
Information: (914) 763-3993.

Recently initiated outdoor tours of Sunnyside, Washington Irving's home on the
Hudson River, will be given tomorrow and Sunday, while inside the Tarrytown
building, demonstrations of 19th-century recipes will be cooked on wood stoves.
A tour of the house costs $4 for an adult and $2.50 for children under 14.

To get there: north on Major Deegan Expressway and New York State Thruway to
exit 9, south on Route 9 one mile to Sunnyside Lane, right on lane down to the
Hudson River. Information: (914) 631-8200.

Runners can compete on Sunday in the fifth annual 10-kilometer foot race along
the streets of White Plains, starting at the Galleria shopping mall at 10 A.M.
There is a $7-per-person entry fee for the race, which can be paid there between
8 and 9:30 A.M. Sunday.  The route: north on Bronx River Parkway to exit 21,
right on Main Street. Galleria is two blocks east. Information: (914) 682-4336
or (914) 682-0637.

Franklin Whitehouse

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 25, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE EARLY DEATH OF A BEDEVILED GENIUS

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2725 words


The legend of Lenny Ross began at Yale Law School in 1963.

He was only 18 years old then, four years younger than the other first-year
students. And with his small build and disheveled style, his frenzied energy and
puckish humor, he seemed years younger than that.

His classmates knew that Leonard Ross had come billed as a prodigy. He had
attracted national attention by passing a Federal examination for a ham radio
operator's license when he was 7 and, three years later, as the ''whiz kid'' who
won $164,000 on two television quiz shows for his precocious answers about the
stock market.

Precocious themselves, the students were not impressed with that. But during his
first month at Yale, the harrowing ''paper chase'' period, Mr. Ross raised his
hand and answered questions on torts and contracts with such lucid brilliance
that, as classmate Simon Lazarus recalled, ''a chill went down the collective
spine of the class.''

After a month, Mr. Ross had completed all his reading for the first term and was
ready, as one friend put it, ''to kibitz, coast, hustle and help everybody
else.''

His friends had great expectations for Mr. Ross.

Served Under Carter

He went on to teach at Harvard University and Columbia Law School and to capture
high-level posts in the administrations of former California Governor Edmund G.
Brown Jr. and President Jimmy Carter.

Then, early this month, he climbed over a padlocked fence late one night to
reach the closed pool area of the Capri Motel in Santa Clara, Calif. He took off
his glasses and his black shoes and left them by the side of the pool. He was
found by the motel manager at 10:30 the next morning, lying face down at the
bottom of the pool, his arms crossed. He was 39.

Before his death, Mr. Ross's life had begun to shatter. Over the years, his
friends had watched with horror as Mr. Ross's quicksilver mind moved faster and
faster and his attention span grew shorter and shorter.

''It's like standing in front of a great painting that melts in front of your
eyes,'' said Michael Levine, the former president of New York Air who now
teaches at the University of Southern California. ''It has defective pigments
and disappears. There's an enormous sense of waste.''

His friends from New York, where he lived for several years, gathered at
Columbia Law School recently to remember him. And friends are also planning a
large memorial at Yale Law this fall. As they plan, they puzzle over the
dizzying rise and fall of Lenny Ross.

He ended his life only after a bitter struggle against his own demons.

Searching for Solutions

When Mr. Ross realized that his mood swings, his enormous impatience with
himself and the world, and his problems with his early fame, were consuming him,
he brought all his energy and brilliance to bear. He searched frantically for a
physical solution to his psychic pain, believing he could make himself well
again.

''It was a 'Whom the gods would destroy they first make mad' kind of thing,''
said Mr. Levine, who attended both Reed College and Yale Law with Mr. Ross.

''One of the really tragic things about it,'' Mr. Levine added, ''was that here
was a guy who was bright enough to recognize what was going on. He was watching
a pretty wonderful life fall apart and he was appalled by it.''

Mr. Ross's remarkably large network of friends on both coasts, an elite of
academia, business and government, struggled with him, trying to help but not
always knowing how.

Several months ago, Tom Quinn, a top aide to Governor Brown who now heads the
City News Service in Los Angeles, gathered a group in his office to try to come
up with a job for Mr. Ross that could focus his flickering attention.

''One of the women there that Lenny used to date said, 'Next time we get
together, Lenny will be dead,' '' said Mr. Quinn. ''It sent a chill through the
group.'' Early Fame For a Child Genius Before coming East, Lenny Ross's home was
in Los Angeles, where his father was an accountant with a show business
clientele.

From the time he was small, it was clear that young Leonard was out of sync with
people his own age. After his death, his mother told Mr. Lazarus, a Washington
lawyer, that when she took Lenny to restaurants as a child, people at other
tables would stare in amazement at the miniature Walter Lippman discoursing on
national affairs.

Pauline Ross enjoyed playing the role of stage mother with her talented son, as
he would later tell friends, and entered him on several of the television quiz
shows that reached their peak in the 1950's. At 10, he won $100,000 on ''The Big
Surprise'' and at 11, he won the grand prize on ''The $64,000 Challenge.''

Mrs. Ross told The San Jose (Calif.) Mercury-News after the death that her son
''had too much publicity during his lifetime. It didn't help him.''

And a psychiatrist who treated Mr. Ross for several years agreed that ''the
early fame and brilliant success of his youth ruined him. Being a child prodigy
is an enormously powerful event that disrupts normal development.'' He thought
that it created a cat's cradle of expectations and intimacy between Mr. Ross and
his mother that ricocheted through his life, triggering other problems.

He graduated from high school at 14 and entered Reed College in Portland. But he
missed his family and transferred to the University of California at Los Angeles
for his final year before moving East to Yale. A Brilliant Student Who Hid His
Troubles Being younger than his classmates did not seem to cause him any serious
problems. He was shy around girls - it was a reticence that would be lifelong
for Mr. Ross, who had girlfriends but never married.

''He was always so far ahead of himself and apparently doing so well, there was
no reason for you to make allowances for him,'' said Mr. Levine. ''It probably
never occurred to Lenny to make allowances for himself. You had the feeling he
had been an adult since birth.''

Mr. Ross began to see a psychoanalyst at Yale, but he hid whatever problems he
was having behind a demeanor of infectiously high spirits.

''He was a cross between Portnoy and Woody Allen,'' said Peter Passell, a
roommate at Yale who is now a member of The New York Times editorial board. ''He
just acted like your garden-variety neurotic. He was immensely ambitious,
immensely energetic, full of ideas, and always hustling.''

Benno Schmidt, the dean of Columbia Law School, who became friends with Mr. Ross
at Yale Law, called him a genius. ''I've never seen anybody grasp problems as
quickly and see the implications on so many different levels. And, unlike a lot
of extremely smart people I've known, he was an extraordinarily generous person
to those of us who were slower or less able to see as much.''

He had a dazzlingly original sense of humor that could make connections between
James Joyce and McDonald's commercials, between ancient history and comic books.

''His playfulness was the thing that made the later turn so bizarre to people
who knew him,'' said Jeff Greenfield, a media critic for ABC-TV who was at Yale
Law then. ''You meet some people and see there's a dark cloud over them. With
Lenny, it just wasn't there.''

Friends had trouble keeping up with his conversation, which was laced with
references to wildly unrelated things. ''He never wanted to say anything in an
ordinary way because he was afraid of being banal and he was always jumping
ahead,'' recalled Leonard Chazen, a partner in a New York real-estate firm.

He was always taking on a new project -memorizing 30 words a day in the Spanish
dictionary or inventing a board game. And he was always juggling ideas, some
brilliant, some wacky, everything from elegant ways of borrowing money to a plan
to buy unfashionable art and then inflate its value by loaning it to museums.

When the draft lottery went into effect during the Vietnam War, Mr. Ross
commissioned several law students to do research, and he co-wrote a quick and
successful book about students' legal rights called ''The Lottery and the Draft:
Where Do I Stand?''

He served as editor-in-chief of the Yale Law Journal, and was nominated for a
prestigious junior fellowship at Harvard but turned it down, telling friends he
did not want to leave his psychoanalyst.

Mr. Passell thought there was another reason. ''He was already losing his
confidence in his ability to do sustained work,'' he said. ''He thought he would
embarrass himself.'' Friends talk about ''his motor racing faster,'' conjuring
up the image of a sports car accelerating, smoothly at first, and then taking
the curves ever more recklessly as the years passed. First Experiences With
Failure As the motor of his mind raced faster, he began to leave a trail of
unfinished projects. Even his sentences stopped midway, as he flitted to another
thought.

After studying at Yale's graduate school of economics for three years, he failed
to write his doctoral dissertation. He went to Harvard for a teaching fellowship
but told friends he could not write the scholarly articles expected of him or
fit in with the university's establishment image.

''He had bad table manners and he dressed sloppily,'' said Mr. Passell. ''At
some level he was proclaiming that he was a child who needed to be taken care
of.'' He did not win a permanent post at Harvard, a failure that greatly
disappointed him.

''Out of the role of student, he started to feel his inadequacies vis-a-vis
well-rounded people,'' said Samuel Popkin, a professor at the University of
California at San Diego who was a close friend of Mr. Ross. ''He never quite
felt on top of things.''

To the outside world, Mr. Ross remained a hot commodity, and he was offered a
teaching job at Columbia Law School. But his friends noticed his behavior was
becoming increasingly manic.

He was talking at a faster clip, and a dishevelment that had seemed charmingly
eccentric in college now was a worrisome reflection of his inability to focus
his attention. He bought expensive furniture and hundreds of dollars worth of
plants for his apartment on Riverside Drive, but he left the furniture askew and
piled with papers and let the plants shrivel and die.

He was a compulsive overeater and a compulsive dieter, Mr. Passell recalled, and
he often ate frozen bagels and frozen peas because he could not bear to spend
the time defrosting or heating them.

He began to write only with collaborators who were willing to finish what he
started. ''He had great ideas, but no follow-through,'' said Mr. Passell, who
worked with him on articles for the New York Review of Books, The New York Times
and on three books about economics, relations between the Federal Government and
the states, and a popular compendium of the best in everything from pizzas to
police precincts called ''The Best.''

At Columbia, Benno Schmidt recalled, Mr. Ross ''was not a particularly
successful teacher.''

''His mind moved so fast,'' Mr. Schmidt said, ''he tended to skip over the
intermediate premises somewhat without articulating them. The students found him
a little bewildering, and that bothered him a lot.''

When Mr. Ross was not teaching, he was working as a researcher in David Garth's
political consulting firm, doing position papers for John V. Lindsay's 1972
Presidential race. He liked the camaraderie - and collaboration - of politics,
and talked about running for office himself someday.

''He didn't want to be Merlin or a court jester or a talking head,'' said Mr.
Popkin. ''He wanted to be a man of action.'' A Frustrating Time In Government
Service In 1973, Mr. Ross resigned from Columbia and went to California to work
on the gubernatorial campaign of Jerry Brown, who had been at Yale with him.

With scissors, stapler and yellow pad, Mr. Ross became the issues and ideas
staff for the future governor. He helped put together Mr. Brown's first budget
and was rewarded with a six-year appointment to the Public Utilities Commission.
He quit after two years.

Mr. Ross took a job with the State Department under Jimmy Carter, working for a
former teacher at Yale, Richard Cooper, who was an under secretary for economic
affairs. There, he believed, he would be able to influence national events.

''He was unhappy when he came to Washington and realized that Dick Cooper, and
even Jimmy Carter, had as many constraints on them as Lenny had had in
California,'' said Mr. Levine, who was in Washington himself during that period
working as the general counsel for the Civil Aeronautics Board. ''He became
aware in a very direct way that this wasn't a world in which you just got to the
right place and then got to the levers and really changed things.''

Mr. Ross fell into a deep depression and, after a year, resigned.

In 1978, he won a foundation grant to do a monograph on nuclear proliferation
and moved back to Boston. Now, the man who had always been upbeat, trying to
joke others out of blue moods, was brooding constantly.

Upset over a failed romance, he tried to slit his throat with a broken bottle
one night and ended up in the McLean Hospital, a private psychiatric clinic
outside Boston.

''After that,'' said Mr. Levine, ''we realized there was something quite wrong
with Lenny.''

He moved back to California and joined the faculty at Boalt Hall, the University
of California law school on the Berkeley campus.

But the center was not holding. He did not complete some of his courses and he
told one of his doctors that he came to a lecture one day and stood there mute
for half an hour until the students straggled out. A Frantic Search For a
Medical Solution He was still filled with ideas, some as brilliant as ever and
others making no sense at all. Desperately afraid of being a burden, he
concealed his moods with jokes. But his humor was more black than playful now.

Mr. Ross was convinced that his emotional problems had a physical cause, and he
turned his prodigious energy to finding it. He did research in the medical
library for hours, seeking new and unorthodox treatments.

He traveled the country, his friends said, trying everything from elaborate drug
regimes to shock treatments to brain surgery. His friends were increasingly
frightened by the amounts and combinations of drugs he was taking, sometimes 15
a day, all prescribed to balance his moods. He was not getting enough sleep and
his weight was wildly erratic.

He went to Massachusetts General Hospital for an operation called a cingulotomy,
in which surgeons snip a circuit in the limbic system, the part of the brain
concerned with emotion and motivation, according to a psychiatrist who treated
him in California and recommended the operation and the drug regimes. The
psychiatrist hoped that the operation would reduce his depression by half. It
did not.

One morning, students coming to class at Boalt Hall found Mr. Ross lying under a
car in a parking lot rehearsing his lecture for class, one friend recalled. Mr.
Ross was put into the hospital for a brief period, and soon after he resigned
from the faculty.

Mr. Ross took a job in a small law firm in San Francisco, where the partners
hoped he could serve as an idea man without having to do any strenuous legal
work. But he was no longer able to concentrate.

His friends were reaching out to help him, but no one knew what to do. They lent
him money and tried to find him jobs.

But now he had begun to believe that all his energy and brilliance would not
help him get rid of his depressions. ''That's when he began to see suicide as
relief,'' said Mr. Levine. ''It was a rational act.''

In his final months, although he had not kept close contact with his family over
the years, he accepted their help. He moved into his older brother's home in
Santa Clara at the end of April, so that his mother and brother could care for
him. He was found dead at the Capri Motel, about a mile and a half from the
house, on May 1. His brother, Daniel, told an investigator for the Santa Clara
coroner's office that Lenny did not know how to swim.

His friends were sad but not surprised. They still puzzle.

Speaking at the memorial service at Columbia Law School, his friend, Bruce
Ackerman, a professor there, asked: ''What could account for Lenny's remarkable
decline and despair? What is it about a world that made a genius like Lenny find
it so intolerable? I do not know. I do not even want to know.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Leonard Ross (UPI)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WOMAN IN THE NEWS;
PHYSICIAN TO THE SEXTUPLETS: CARRIE CASE WORCESTER

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 891 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Calif., May 25


Dr. Carrie Worcester was a United States Army captain in West Germany serving as
a pediatrician 10 years ago when she decided that a career of treating ''colds
and runny noses'' would not fulfill her ambitions.

So, when she and her husband returned to the United States, she entered the
field of critical care, not knowing that in a few years she would lead the
medical team treating the surviving septuplets born Tuesday to Patti and Sam
Frustaci in the largest multiple birth in American history.

''I'm just a very compulsive, precise person,'' Dr. Worcester said. ''I like
that level of excitement, of decision-making, rather than hearing about the
everyday problems of medicine, although they are important, too.''

Death of Smallest Baby

Dr. Worcester, who heads the newborn intensive care unit at Children's Hospital
of Orange County, has commanded a corps of physicians and nurses struggling to
overcome two critical lung and heart afflictions that threaten the babies'
lives. On Friday, the morale of the team was severely tested with the death of
the tiniest baby of the six who were born alive. The tearful doctor told her
dejected staff to search for humor to break the tension, and above all to not
look back.

The five remaining babies were in critical but stable condition today, though
four have shown improvements.

Dr. Worcester's forward-looking reaction came as no surprise to her husband, Dr.
Les Worcester, an internist she met at the University of Oregon where they both
attended medical school. He recalled that in the early 1970's they took a class
together in surgery. They both got the same grade on the final examination, but
when the course grades were issued he got an A and she got a C. ''The reason,
they said, was that she displayed too much emotion for the patients, got too
involved with them,'' he said. ''She just rolled up her sleeves and kept going.
She has never said, 'I am a woman and I can't do it.' She says, 'I am a woman
and I will do it.' ''

A few years ago the couple were at the Los Angeles International Airport on
their way to a medical conference when a member of their group went into cardiac
arrest, Les Worcester said. He and his wife gave the victim mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation for 45 minutes, until a emergency team arrived. They then boarded
the plane, only to find no mouthwash or toothpaste, so they ''gargled with a
martini.'' It showed him his wife's gift, he said, for ''going through something
and still come up smiling.''

'Alone With Rats and Monkeys'

Carrie Worcester had set out to be not a doctor but a biochemist, and she first
pursued a master's degree in that field at the University of Oregon. One day her
youthful self-awareness intervened. ''I was in the lab with the rats and getting
very depressed,'' she said. ''I was alone with rats and monkeys all the time,
and I love being with people.'' She credits her faculty adviser, Dr. Clarissa
Beatty, with urging her to enter pediatrics, a step she has ''never regretted.''

''This sounds corny,'' she said, ''but it's such a miracle to witness the birth
of a baby. The first minutes and hours of their lives are so critical, knowing
we can influence that baby's life forever, it's very, very rewarding.'' She was
in the delivery room at St. Joseph's Hospital and gave the first Frustaci
septuplet resuscitation, ''and knowing that there were six more, that was just
incredible.''

Carrie Case Worcester was born in Kansas City, Mo., on Sept. 25, 1943, the
daughter of Eve and Jay Case, who soon moved Carrie and her older brother,
Carter, to Portland, Ore. Her father, who has died, was a mechanical engineer.
No one in her family was in medicine, Mrs. Case said, but Carrie was interested
in science.

Elected Junior Prom Queen

She attended junior high and high school in Portland before attending Oregon
State University on a scholarship. She was a cheerleader in college as well as
in high school. Mrs. Case said her daughter was ''not a brain'' and studied so
hard to achieve nearly straight-A's that her parents worried about her.
Nevertheless, she said that when growing up, Dr. Worcester had been proudest of
being selected junior prom queen at Oregon State - ''that was a thrill.''

Dr. Worcester completed her master's degree in biochemistry, then entered
medical school, from which she was graduated cum laude.

In the early 1970's, in the Vietnam War, Les Worcester enlisted in the Army and
was sent to West Germany. Carrie Case then joined the Army to stay with him.
They were stationed at Hanau, West Germany, where they were married 10 years
ago.

She served as Chief of Pediatrics at the United States Army Corps Hospital there
from 1973 to 1975. Later, she completed a fellowship in neonatal-pulmonary
disease at the University of California at Irvine Medical Center, achieving her
expertise in infant lung diseases.

Carrie and Les Worcester have three children, two boys, 6 and 2 years old, and a
3-year-old girl. The oldest child was brain damaged in a near-fatal episode of
sudden infant death syndrome.

Dr. Worcester reads the romantic novels of Danielle Steele for leisure, and
spends whatever other free time she has cooking, traveling to France once a year
and taking aerobics, an activity she said she particularly enjoys. ''Old
cheerleaders never die, I guess,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Carrie Case Worcester (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnamese Force Kills 5 Thai Soldiers

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 107 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 25


A Vietnamese force killed five Thai soldiers and a civilian in a one-hour clash
with Thai border patrols in northeast Thailand, provincial officials said today.

They said Vietnamese soldiers crossed into the Thai province of Ubon Ratchathani
from northern Cambodian on Friday, apparently searching for Cambodian
guerrillas. The fighting prompted Thai provincial authorities to evacuate about
600 civilians from two border villages to safer areas in the Nam Yuen district.

The latest fighting took place in one of the border areas where the Vietnamese
occupation forces conducted a major dry-season campaign against Cambodian
rebels.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV: PBS'S 'ASHES,' ABOUT A BLACK VETERAN

BYLINE: By RICHARD F. SHEPARD

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 52, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 378 words


''INDEPENDENT FOCUS,'' the WNET/ Channel 13 series that provides viewers with a
glimpse of what independent film and video makers are doing for the
less-than-mass audience, presents an earnest and provocative film drama tonight
at 11 o'clock about the problems facing blacks in America.

''Ashes and Embers'' is the work of Haile Gerima, who has become recognized as a
strong voice on the black film making scene. This two-hour film, in color, is
the story of a veteran, back from the horror of Vietnam. He is an angry,
restless, pent-up, intelligent but uneducated young man who seems to want
nothing more than to wrap himself in his thoughts and reject the world, black
and white.

His journey from resentment and despair to redemption, in a movement dedicated
to reshaping society to assure blacks a fair share of its blessings, has been
made into a strong drama. The program is filled with vignettes of the black
condition: seamy city streets, the dirt-poor rural farm, the country church, the
meetings of black intellectuals, the terror that can grip two young blacks
apprehended by the police after running a red light.

There are surrealistic and poetic touches and much pictorial symbolism. Some of
the dialogue is riddled with strong expletives, but they fit into the
conversation so naturally that they are not shocking. On the other hand, the
quick cuts of picture and the echo effect of sound frequently make it difficult
to grasp the meaning of what is said and done. The script by Mr. Gerima, who
also is producer, director and editor, creates characters that are human, rather
than cardboard types. Toward the end, the film's redemptive finale bogs down in
several perorations that are hortatory in the manner of a heroic mural, but the
viewer will have had a good run until that point.

John Anderson gives an impressively powerful performance as the moody, erupting
veteran and Evelyn A. Blackwell is eloquent as a craggy, indomitable
grandmother, the type who is universal and eternal. Kathy Flewellen, Norman
Blalock and others in the cast lend an air of truth to what is being shown.
''Ashes and Embers'' is directed at a black audience, but it will be of great
interest to those who want to know what currents are surging in that community.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SEX ISSUE DIVIDES RIVERSIDE CHURCH

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 39, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1287 words


A debate on whether homosexuality is compatible with traditional Christian
teachings has recently opened deep divisions among members of Riverside Church,
divisions church leaders say are deeper than any aroused by an issue since the
Vietnam War.

The focus of the debate is a 526-word policy statement proposed by a special
church committee that would recognize homosexuals as ''equal members of the body
of Christ'' and accept homosexual relationships as part of the concept of
Christian family life.

Adding to the controversy was a sermon May 5 in which the Rev. Channing
Phillips, a member of the council, or collegium, of Riverside ministers,
countered that homosexuality deviates from Biblical teachings.

On one side of the debate are members who say that the congregation should
endorse a statement unconditionally offering homosexual Christians a spiritual
home. They assert that discrimination against homosexuals has been in large part
based on Christian doctrine and that Riverside, an interdenominational church
that prides itself on its liberal tradition and which has accepted openly
homosexual members for years, should act to fight that discrimination.

On the other side are members who contend that parts of the proposed statement
undermine the traditional Christian family. Many of these people say they are
not opposed to homosexuals as individuals but cannot endorse homosexuality as an
acceptable alternative to heterosexual relationships.

'Of Two Minds'

Some people who questioned the proposed statement asserted that they had not
been given a chance to express their own views on homosexuality. They have
requested a postponement of a June 2 vote by the congregation. But any delay,
proponents of the statement say, would be procrastination.

''We are of one heart but of two minds,'' the Rev. William Sloane Coffin, senior
minister at Riverside, said of the 2,750 members of the congregation.

But Mr. Coffin, known as an activist in social and political causes, said that
the debate could ultimately be good for the church. Until this point, he said,
''the church has been about as helpful as an empty well'' on the issue of
homosexuality and faith.

Mr. Coffin and other members of the collegium agree that no other issue has
caused as much debate within the church since clashes over American involvement
in Vietnam.

The focus of the debate, the ''Statement of Openness, Inclusion and Affirmation
of Gay and Lesbian Persons,'' was drafted by a church task force last November
to state the church's position on discrimination against New York's homosexual
community. The document was adopted March 25 by the Board of Deacons, a group of
30 members who oversee budgetary policies for all of the church's programs.

The statement asks that Riverside Church officially reaffirm that homosexuals
are accepted as full members of the church and that ''we recognize and embrace
single persons, lesbian/ gay relationships, extended families and all families
of support that are founded on the principles of love and justice.'''

A Sermon Divides

Discussion groups were then created to make church members familiar with the
statement. But some members, particularly parents in the Church School
Committee, said months passed before the statement was open to general
discussion. Advocates contend there were several opportunities for members to
become involved in the discussion before now.

Members on both sides of the issue say that disagreement was brought to a head
by Mr. Phillips's sermon. In it, he defined as ''the parable of human
sexuality'' marriage between man and woman, as described in the book of Genesis.

These ''hard words,'' Mr. Phillips said in his sermon, ''imply that deviation
from the parable of the heterosexual relationship ordained by Genesis is
contrary to God's will and is therefore, and I know we don't like to hear it, is
therefore sin.''

Several of the church's deacons observed many worshipers refusing communion
after the sermon. Then the Rev. Whit Hutchison, a Methodist minister who has
been associated with the church for some years, walked to the front of the
church and invited people with ''a strong need to express their difference with
the words spoken from the pulpit'' to gather in a circle around the communion
table. About 200 people joined him.

'So Much Pain'

Mr. Hutchison said he was protesting ''a real pastoral insensitivity to the
depth of pain and struggle in the people he was talking about.''

''My sense was there was so much pain that the service had already been
interrupted,'' he added.

Cas Ruell Dowden, co-chairman of Maranatha, the church committee for homosexual
rights, said: ''People were very upset. It's almost like there's been no real
feeling that it's O.K. for us to be here. That sort of reaffirmation hasn't
happened.''

The protest offended some members, like Kathy Wilcox, chairman of the church's
Black Christian Caucus.

''I was quite surprised to see that taking place during communion,'' she said.
''I just feel that communion is so sacred.''

Patricia Ali, chairman of the Church School Committee, expressed gratitude for
Mr. Phillips's sermon.

''I felt that from time to time people need to hear that,'' she said. ''It's not
nice, and it's not easy, but religion isn't supposed to be easy. I felt somewhat
comforted by it.''

Concern for the Children

Mrs. Ali helped write an open letter to the church that objects to the
''advocacy presentation'' of the original statement. At an open discussion held
last Sunday, she asked other members whether the church should pass such a
document. ''As parents, we're concerned because of our children,'' she said.
''Will this change the concept of family?''

''As a father of a 17-year-old I am no less concerned,'' responded Ronald
Johnson, a member of both the board of deacons and Maranatha. ''Concern for
children is not only a heterosexual concern.''

Sandy Milne, a co-chairman of the special church committee that drafted the
statement, said he feared that despite the subsequent sermons of Mr. Coffin and
the Rev. Eugene Laubach affirming their acceptance of homosexual Christians, Mr.
Phillips's sermon had alienated many young members.

''I wonder how many of those teens who are wondering about themselves were
seeing that sermon as a condemnation for life,'' he said. He disagreed with
proposals to delay the voting. ''It's time the issue was brought out to gay and
lesbian youth so they don't hate themselves for 30 years.''

Guilt About Homosexuality

Like the open discussion on Sunday, a recent meeting between the four members of
the church's collegium was often heated.

Both Mr. Coffin and Mr. Laubach in sermons after Mr. Phillips's, have endorsed
''unconditional acceptance'' of homosexuals as devout Christians. ''The real
issue,'' said Mr. Coffin, ''is do you need to feel guilty about being a
homosexual. That's where the real hurt came in.'' Mr. Phillips said another
factor in the debate is differences in ''understanding of the Christian faith.''
Some people, the ministers concluded, look to the church for spiritual guidance
while others look to it for political action designed to achieve social justice.

Despite a disagreement that touches on the deepest chords of their theological
training, the ministers of the collegium frequently held hands during the
meeting. Speaking for the group, Mr. Phillips said ''hopefully we'll find a
genuine language that defines all of our positions.''

Members of the church remain confident that the division will not be
insurmountable. ''The church will survive,'' said Jane Gropp, coordinator of
adult education at the church. ''We've had lots of struggles like this.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Rev. Eugene Laubach giving sermon, photo of parishioners
in congregation NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
'RAMBO' DELIVERS A REVENGE FANTASY

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1294 words


''What is it you want?'' the puzzled but admiring colonel of the Green Berets
asks Rambo (Sylvester Stallone), the ''pure fighting machine'' who has just
returned from a solo undercover operation in present-day Vietnam. Rambo, who
doesn't like to talk much, pulls his brain cells together. ''I wan' . . . I wan'
. . .,'' he says with some difficulty, ''I wan' this country to love us as much
as we loved it.''

The tense of that last verb could be wrong - it might be ''love'' instead of
''loved'' - but this is the pith of the final speech in ''Rambo: First Blood
Part II,'' the latest and potentially the most visible in what is turning into a
whole new crop of Vietnam films, not about the war as it was fought and as it
came to an end 10 years ago, but as it has come to look to the macho mind of
today.

Love is the nominal key. However, vengeance is the basic motive and fantastic,
larger-than-life action is the method of these films. More than anything else,
they reflect a revisionist popular attitude toward a war that, in the 1970's,
was seen as a harrowing American disgrace in movies like ''Apocalypse Now'' and
''Coming Home.''

The new Vietnam films - including ''Rambo,'' Chuck Norris's ''Missing in
Action'' (1984) and ''Missing in Action 2,'' released earlier this year, and
''Uncommon Valor'' (1983), plus segments of such TV shows as ''Magnum, P.I.''
and ''Airwolf'' - don't deny that the war was lost. That's not possible.
Instead, they restart the war that, they say, United States Government
fuddy-duddies would not allow to be won 10 years ago and, this time, score
decisive, totally fictitious victories over enemies that frequently look more
Chinese or Japanese than Vietnamese.

Of absolutely no interest to these films are the steps by which this country got
into the war, or the reasons behind the public reaction against it, which had
the effect of denying any glory and gratitude to the soldiers who had found
themselves caught in the middle, fighting it. Though these movies, like Mr.
Stallone's not-quite-tongue-tied Rambo, talk about giving credit, at last, to
unsung heroes, they are far more committed to changing history by adding new
chapters to it.

Their common plot: the search for - and rescue of -American prisoners of war,
officially listed as missing in action, either by one-man armies, like the
invincible, armor-plated though always bare-chested Rambo and Mr. Norris's
somewhat more modest, fleet-footed Colonel Braddock, or by ''Dirty Dozen''-like
commando teams, such as the one headed by Gene Hackman in ''Uncommon Valor.''

The immediate villains of the films are the mean, usually physically small
Vietnamese soldiers and their officers who, in ''Rambo,'' are the willing tools
of Russian ''advisers.'' Seen to be even worse, though, because they must be
regarded as mealy-mouthed opportunists, are individual Congressmen who, 10 years
ago, refused to sanction victory and today vehemently deny the possibility that
there are still Americans being held prisoner in Vietnam.

Why would any Congressman do this? Mr. Stallone and James Cameron, who wrote the
screenplay for ''Rambo,'' provide one lame explanation that, if I remember it
correctly, goes something like this: The war is over and done with. The American
public has forgotten it and the Government has other worries on its mind.
There's no need to create a new international crisis simply on behalf of a few
guys who have been written off anyway.

In ''Rambo,'' this gone-to-flab Congressman is a fellow named Murdock (Charles
Napier) who, through Rambo's former colonel (Richard Crenna) in the Green
Berets, sends America's most prominent pure fighting-machine back to Vietnam on
a mission sabotaged from the start. Equipped with the latest portable weaponry,
including an updated bow and arrow, plus a camera, Rambo is to be dropped into
Vietnam and obtain photographic evidence of M.I.A.'s reportedly being held in a
jungle prison camp. However, under no circumstances is he ''to engage the
enemy.''

''Yuh mean I just gotta take pickchas?'' says the unbelieving Rambo. That's
right, says the Congressman. Rambo, not having seen the pre-''Rambo'' movies we
have, doesn't suspect that, should he find any captive Americans, the
Congressman will attempt to destroy the evidence in the interests of the Greater
Good, which is exactly what happens.

If ''Rambo'' could make its own fictitious case plausible, it would be beside
the point that most experts today agree that it's extremely unlikely any
Americans have survived being held in Vietnam so many years after the United
States withdrawal. ''Rambo'' suggests that a number have not only survived but
really are in such good shape that they can run fairly well to make a rescue
helicopter.

Plausibility is not the film's strong point. Among other things, ''Rambo'' seems
to believe the Vietnamese, apparently out of sheer Asiatic cussedness, would
waste the manpower represented by 50 to 60 of their soldiers to guard a heavily
armed jungle prison, which contains no more than a dozen or so P.O.W.'s used as
farm laborers. If the Vietnamese are so hard up for labor, why not just use the
soldiers and get rid of the prisoners? Are these captors not only mean but also
stupid? Well you might ask, but answers are not forthcoming.

This is possibly because ''Rambo'' is almost as opportunistic as the Congressman
it pretends to abhor. In spite of everything it says, it's much less interested
in the M.I.A. question than it is in finding a topical frame for the kind of
action-adventure film in which Mr. Stallone - his torso and his vacant stare -
can do what his fans like best. That is, fight, outwit and kill, usually all by
himself, dozens of far better armed but lesser mortals.

Considering the extraordinary ratings obtained by the recent television showing
of ''First Blood,'' it seems likely that ''Rambo: First Blood Part II'' will
turn into another huge, if somewhat flawed, Stallone jackpot. ''First Blood,''
you may remember, is the 1982 film that introduced Mr. Stallone's Rambo
character as an emotionally damaged but remarkably able Vietnam vet who, through
a series of unfortunate misunderstandings, winds up fighting virtually every
member of the National Guards of both Oregon and Washington.

Though Stallone fans probably couldn't care less, ''Rambo'' isn't a film to be
compared with ''First Blood,'' which, as directed by Ted Kotcheff, has a lean,
clean narrative drive that effectively supports the ingeniously devised action
sequences. ''First Blood'' is essentially about one man's survival in a terrible
wilderness. ''Rambo,'' directed by George P. Cosmatos, does pretty much the same
thing in terms of action, but here the mayhem is supported only by what appears
to be the star's ego and a large budget for special effects, without even the
most primitive logic.

The Stallone career is one of the most eccentric of any contemporary film star.
Though a tremendous box-office draw in his own ''Rocky'' films (''Rocky IV'' is
coming up soon) he's made only one equally popular, non-''Rocky'' film - ''First
Blood.'' Everything else he's done has been a box-office disappointment if not
an outright failure -''F.I.S.T'' (a decent attempt to make fiction of the life
of Jimmy Hoffa), ''Paradise Alley,'' ''Victory'' (a good John Huston film set in
a P.O.W. camp during World War II), ''Nighthawks'' and ''Rhinestone.''

Mr. Stallone is a shrewd film writer, director and actor, but the public seems
to shy away from any movie displaying evidence that he's something more than the
physically assertive, primitive being he seems to be when playing either Rocky
or Rambo. They want him big, agile and virtually mute, though not dumb, which is
what they get in ''Rambo.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of scene from 'Rambo: First Blood II'

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION WATCH;
EXPATRIATE STUDENTS ARE OFTEN INNOCENTS AT HOME

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 727 words

DATELINE: NORTHFIELD, Mass.


When 16-year-old Xandra Castleton arrived in this country from Guinea-Bissau in
West Africa to attend boarding school she had trouble making a phone call.

''I kept trying to turn the dial the wrong way,'' she recalled.

Such incidents are commonplace for foreign students coping with life in a new
country, but Miss Castleton is an American - one of an increasing number of
teen-agers who have grown up abroad and are now living, in effect, as foreign
students in their homeland.

College preparatory schools are beginning to pay more attention to the special
needs of such students. ''Adolescence is a time for asking 'Who am I' kinds of
questions,'' said Eleanor Johnson, director of international programs at the
Northfield Mount Herman School. ''Kids who have lived abroad most of their lives
but know they are American get a lot of confusing signals.''

There are about 1,750,000 Americans living outside the United States.

No one knows how many of the children among them return to the United States for
high school, but Marjo Talbott, director of boarding schools for the National
Association of Independent Schools, said that the number seemed to be on the
increase. ''Private schools in Europe are becoming more expensive, and more and
more corporations are agreeing to pay the cost of air fare to this country,''
she said. ''This started four or five years ago when the dollar was weak, but
the habit has continued.''

At Northfield Mount Hermon, 86 of the 1,160 enrolled students are Americans from
overseas. Last fall many of them attended the three-day orientation program
organized for the school's 146 foreign students, and the international student
counselors are at their disposal.

But the expatriates differ from both foreign students and other Americans.
''When you learn another language, you learn another culture,'' said Kit
Ballard, an 18-year-old senior who has lived most of her life in France. ''Part
of me is French, and part of me is American. Sometimes I think my home is an
island in the middle of the Atlantic.''

Many students say that, at least at the beginning, they find themselves much
more at home with non-Americans. ''You've seen things the American kids haven't
seen and heard things they haven't heard,'' said Julie Rosamond, a senior who
has lived in Iran, France and Saudi Arabia. ''Other international students seem
to understand you better.''

Stories of culture shock abound. Eleanor Shelton, a senior whose home is in
Lagos, Nigeria, commented, ''I keep having to remember to eat certain things
with a knife and fork, not with my fingers.'' Aihoa Mahoney, a sophomore who has
lived in Vietnam, Pakistan, the Philippines and Gambia, recalls being perplexed
by a lacrosse poster. ''I saw this guy with a stick and a helmet, and I couldn't
figure out what it was,'' she said.

While expatriate students are quick to adjust to fads in dress and popular
music, they express continuing surprise at other aspects of American society,
such as the high divorce rate, the prevalence of drugs and the lack of respect
for teachers and parents. ''I mentioned in class one day that I loved my
parents, and everyone looked at me,'' said Miss Beech.

Mrs. Johnson, who herself grew up in Beirut, said that her office plans special
events for returning Americans, such as a trip to a local shopping mall. ''We
explain it as a covered bazaar,'' she said.

The expatriates are often shocked by the ignorance of fellow students. ''People
ask me whether I live in a pyramid and how many wives does my father have,''
said Amanda Pearson, a 17-year old who grew up in Jordan and Egypt. Some develop
strategies for dealing with classmates. ''Sometimes I have to hide what I know
because I realize it makes people uncomfortable,'' said Miss Ballard. Miss
Mahoney said that if someone asks where she is from, ''I just say I live in
Washington, D.C.''

Mrs. Johnson, the adviser, said that expatriate American students are for the
most part well-prepared academically and rarely pose disciplinary problems.
While social adjustments can be difficult, the skills they picked up in learning
to cope with foreign lands lend themselves readily to quaint customs they find
in the United States. ''Living in other countries makes you more open-minded,''
said Miss Ballard. ''There's no way you can't be more willing to accept other
people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of students at Northfield Mount Herman School (NYT/Edward B.
Fiske)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TONGS, TRIADS AND A CHINATOWN TRAGEDY

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 891 words


Wai Fun Wong, a 15-year-old Chinatown resident who immigrated to the United
States from Hong Kong eight years ago, was arrested last week and charged with
attempted murder. The police say he shot seven people on a crowded sidewalk on
East Broadway. A 4-year-old boy who was walking with his uncle was hit in the
head. A man dining in a restaurant was struck in the chest. The police said that
the five other victims, and the suspect himself, were members of youth gangs.

Chinatown, with its facade of restaurants, street stalls and gift shops, did not
blink. Though crowds of shoppers and tourists scurried for cover when the
gunfire erupted, they quickly returned after the ambulances hauled the victims
away. So did the youth gangs who, the police say, serve as the enforcers for the
criminal organizations that control gambling, drug dealing and extortion in New
York's exploding Chinese community.

Social workers and business leaders in the 40 square blocks of Chinatown in
lower Manhattan believe that no more than 500 young people out of a total
population of more than 100,000 have been involved in gang violence. Their power
and the power of Chinatown's criminal organizations for which they work have
grown because of a dramatic shift in immigration patterns and a jump in the
number of Chinese living here.

In 1960 most of Chinatown's 20,000 residents traced their origins to one county
near Canton in Guangdong province. The Chinese community citywide today numbers
300,000, with 1,400 new legal arrivals each month coming from China and Taiwan,
plus others from Chinese communities in Vietnam, Malaysia and Indonesia.

Almost everyone involved agrees that there are also thousands of illegal Chinese
aliens here. At current rates of growth the population will reach 500,000 by
1990.

Though most immigrants establish their first American residence in Chinatown,
housing is so scarce that many move to Queens as soon as they can afford to
leave.

In Flushing, Jackson Heights, Elmhurst and Astoria, they have established new
neighborhoods that are at least the size of Chinatown 25 years ago. Operating in
all of them, according to everyone from shopowners to waiters, is a secretive
and disciplined crime cartel. This coalition, still based in Chinatown, includes
criminal organizations known as tongs and triads that trace their roots to
patriotic groups organized more than a century ago to resist the Manchu
emperors.

Because of the character of the new wave of immigration, the Cantonese dominance
of the community's life has been eroding. The new arrivals from the Chinese
mainland, Taiwan and Southeast Asia have set up their own groups. One new gang
challenging the Cantonese Tong On (Eastern Peace) gang, which was implicated in
last week's shooting, for control of the East Broadway area is made up of
immigrants from Fujian province on the Chinese coast. Another consists mostly of
youngsters whose families came from Burma.

Burgeoning Boundaries

Traditionally, the tongs have divided Chinatown into territories. As a reporter
from one of New York's 10 Chinese-language daily newspapers put it last week,
''Everyone knows that Pell Street is Hip Sing turf, and no one would be crazy
enough to try to challenge them there.'' However, the immigrants have pushed
Chinatown's borders north to Houston Street and east toward the East River, and
there is more to fight for.

''Economic conditions are a lot more dynamic now than in the old days,'' said
Dr. Peter Kwong, author of ''Chinatown, N.Y.'' and a professor of politics at
the State University of New York at Old Westbury. ''Then, everyone was fighting
for a pittance.'' Chinese investors have poured so much money so quickly into
banks, real estate, trade and light manufacturing here that the Chinatown
Planning Council cannot keep track of the new firms. Much of the new money comes
from entrepreneurs from Hong Kong who want their families and their assets out
of the colony before 1997, when control will pass from Great Britain to the
Government in Peking. According to social workers and political activists in
Chinatown, factory and restaurant owners have frequently called on the tongs to
smash union efforts to organize their workers. Landlords have used them to
silence or evict complaining tenants. ''The toughs, the teen-agers, are being
used as muscle,'' said David S. Chen, the director of youth and community
programs for the Chinatown Planning Council.

The police speak of the situation with a mixture of exasperation and
resignation. ''You know Chinatown,'' said one officer. ''You know you're not
going to get the information you need.'' A special gang squad operates out of
the 5th Precinct, in the heart of Chinatown, in conjunction with the District
Attorney's office, but there are only 117 Asian-American officers on the force,
and only 37 officers out of 26,300 speak Chinese.

The residents of Chinatown are reluctant to turn to the police or other public
agencies. ''Out of a fear of authority, people here don't want to have much to
do with the police,'' said a prominent community leader. ''The police represent
tickets and fines, so they stay away.''

When disputes arise, people are more likely to turn to the tongs to resolve
things. That, according to Dr. Kwong, creates ''a social milieu imposed by fear
and violence.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
ALL QUIET ALONG THE POTOMAC

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 760 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Arlington National Cemetery, halfway between Robert E. Lee's house on the
Virginia slope of the Potomac and Mr. Lincoln's memorial on the other side, was
very quiet and beautiful this Memorial Day weekend.

Friday morning in the rain, the Old Guard of the Third Infantry planted a small
American flag on every one of the l69,000 graves. Then came the survivors of
three generations with their children and their grandchildren and their flowers,
transforming the cemetery into a symbol of birth and hope.

This, I suppose, is what Gen. John A. Logan, then Commander in Chief of the
Grand Army of the Republic, had in mind when, on May 5, l868, he issued an order
appointing May 30 of that year as a day to decorate the graves of the dead -
apparently choosing that day as the date of discharge of the last Union
volunteer in the War Between the States.

In those early days, it was called Decoration Day in some but not all states.
Later it became a national holiday called Memorial Day. The British gave it the
gentler name of Remembrance Day.

There is one popular view now, best expressed by the poet Christina Rossetti:
''Better far that you should forget and smile than that you should remember and
be sad.'' But presumably all these monuments in Washington weren't built to
remind us to forget.

Just up toward the Capitol from the Lincoln Memorial is the Vietnam Memorial
with 58,022 names etched on it. Stand in the swale and watch the families go by,
running their fingers down the names until they come to their guy, holding on to
one another, with the tears on their cheeks.

There is plenty to remember that has all but been forgotten. Not only the
carnage of the two world wars, which the Allies handled so badly in recent
weeks, but so many other atrocities that few people dare to recall them.

According to the Center for Defense Information in Washington, there have been
over 130 wars in this world since l945, in which over 16 million people have
been killed. This same source estimates that there are 41 wars, rebellions and
uprisings of one sort or another going on at the present time, the death toll of
which is beyond their calculation.

The Iraq-Iran war, for example, is one of the most brutal of the century, with
casualties well above even the slaughter of the Israeli-Arab wars -some
officials here put deaths not in the tens but the hundreds of thousands.

We can't calculate the death toll in the Arab-Israeli wars or in Lebanon because
most of the victims were civilians lost in the rubble; not to mention the tribal
wars of Africa, where nobody knows how many lives have been lost, or in
Afghanistan, where even Mikhail Gorbachev probably has only the vaguest idea of
what's going on.

One of the ironic things about many of these struggles is that most of the
combatants can't say what they're fighting about, other than that they want to
get rid of the other guy.

It's not like the old religious wars, where the battle was between believers,
each of whom thought there was only one road to heaven, and the Protestants were
sure it didn't run through Rome.

But now in Ireland and in the Indian continent we have religious wars not
between believers, but between factions of unbelievers, and in the Western
world, we have Memorial and Remembrance Days without knowing what it is we are
supposed to remember.

When President Wilson celebrated

Memorial Day during the First World War, he insisted not only on remembering the
dead who had defended the Republic but on trying to put an end to the wars that
had killed them and might threaten the nation in the future.

That is still the problem, and I suppose officials think about it when they have
to recite on Memorial Day; but somehow it isn't the thing that comes across.
Only the old folks can't help but remember. After the rain and the decoration of
the graves at Arlington, Washington took to its wheels and headed for the
seashore and the mountains, and why not?

In the last week of May, there is no lovelier stretch of country than from
Tidewater between the Potomac and the Rappahannock to the Blue Ridge, up through
the battlefields of the forgotten Civil War to the Skyline Drive.

Maybe Christina Rossetti was right that it's better to smile and forget than to
remember and be sad, but that's not really the choice before the American people
this Memorial Day. For if they look at Mr. Lee's house on the slope of Virginia
across the Potomac, at the White House, the Capitol and the monuments to Lincoln
and Jefferson, they can remember and be glad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CRAFT OF THE PLAYWRIGHT

SECTION: Section 6; Page 37, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4369 words


WHEN DAVID RABE'S first play, ''The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel,'' was
performed at New York's Public Theater, Neil Simon was already up to play No. 11
- ''The Prisoner of Second Avenue'' - and counting. Since that year, 1971, both
men have consolidated their reputations - Mr. Simon as America's most successful
and prolific playwright, Mr. Rabe as one of the most provocative.

Mr. Simon's 22d play, ''Biloxi Blues,'' and Mr. Rabe's seventh play,
''Hurlyburly,'' are among this year's nominees for a Tony for best play, to be
awarded next Sunday. (The others are William M. Hoffman's ''As Is'' and ''Ma
Rainey's Black Bottom'' by August Wilson.) On the face of it, Mr. Rabe and Mr.
Simon would seem to have little more in common, as playwrights, than their
nominations.

Mr. Simon, 57, is a Brooklyn-born Jew whose Depression childhood was the theme
of his hit ''Brighton Beach Memoirs,'' which opened in 1983.

Mr. Rabe, 45, was born in Dubuque, Iowa, and raised a Catholic. He found his
voice in the theater after combat in the Vietnam War, and four of his plays,
''Pavlo Hummel,'' ''Sticks and Bones,'' ''Streamers'' and ''The Orphan,'' draw
on that experience.

''Hurlyburly,'' a work he has referred to as his ''guys' play,'' is set in
Hollywood and peopled by a houseful of unraveling men and some of the women on
whom they vent their insecurities.

But when, at the invitation of The New York Times Magazine, these
representatives of different generations got together to talk about the theater,
their attitudes and methods of play writing turned out to be strikingly similar.
Their conversation, occasionally prompted by Samuel G. Freedman of The Times's
cultural staff and Michaela Williams, this magazine's cultural editor, follows
in edited form.

WRITING FOR THE THEATER

RABE: I grew up in the Midwest, and I never heard of the theater. I was maybe 15
before I saw a play. I didn't think about writing at that point, but it made a
big impression on me.

There is something in the thing with the audience, although I also have a
terrible personal reaction to the audience. I have a very hard time going near
the theater once they show up. SIMON: I have the same reaction. Not because I'm
afraid of the audience, I just seem to lose interest the minute the play has
opened.

As for what attracted me to the theater, my background was different. I grew up
in New York and worked in radio and in television for 10 years. Then I said,
''If I don't start to write a play and start to get out soon, I'll be writing
'My Three Sons' for the rest of my life,' which I did not want to do.

I hated the idea of working in television and having conferences with network
executives and advertising executives who told you what audiences wanted and in
what region they wanted it. I despised it. I said, ''There will never be any
satisfaction for me unless I can write what I feel I want to say.'' And so I
wrote that first play [''Come Blow Your Horn,''] - it was a matter of life and
death for me. RABE: I grew up seeing movies, and there was a point where I
consciously engaged the question of whether there was a larger opportunity to be
free as a writer in the theater or in film. And without any experience in
either, it struck me that the theater was more open.

But I think now, as I've gone on, it's deeper than that. I don't know quite what
the relationship is, but it's very, very deep in me, the theater. ON THE
DISTINCTION BETWEEN COMEDY AND DRAMA RABE: See, I think that in the real
theatrical tradition that split doesn't exist as strongly as people think it
does. It's an invention of Aristotle rather than of dramatists. I mean,
certainly in a lot of Shakepeare's tragedies, there are very funny, lively
moments.

I'm not a big fan of Aristotle. I think he really did everybody a lot of harm.
He interposed himself between the creative act and the thing itself. People
actually sit around and say, ''Did Shakespeare write tragedies?'' I mean, that's
truly nuts.

The whole formula Aristotle devised serves censorship more than it serves
creativity. It serves inhibition, and it stops more writers than it guides. If
you're going to meet his standards, his standards are abstract. They exist in a
definition; he defines something he didn't do. And he's laid himself down there
at about 300 B.C., and except for the geniuses like Shakespeare who burst
through and said, ''To hell with this guy,'' everybody else gets kind of punch
drunk from him. But those distinctions - I think if you pull out the feelings of
life, they mix together and you don't have to split them up.

My impulse has been to try to put as much variety of emotion as possible into a
play. You know, like a carnival or a roller-coaster ride. To me, the more one
play can hold, the better. SIMON: Mike Nichols and I were doing ''Plaza Suite''
in Boston many years ago, and the first act was too long - it wasn't that it was
too long, we were getting too many laughs in a scene that we thought was
basically serious. So Mike and I started to cut out all of the laugh lines, and
they started to laugh at other lines that they had never laughed at. They just
wanted to laugh! RABE: The laughs I get are the ones I'm hoping for, for the
most part. It's making the turn without getting resentment from the audience
that's the hard part. If you've overdone the comedy part, they just want to keep
laughing. SIMON: Oh, yes, I have that a lot. I'll write a scene that is really
funny, and then I try to switch it quickly, because I think that happens in life
a lot. You know, in the middle of some wonderful moment you get a phone call
with tragic news. There have been a few occasions in plays when I've done that,
and the audience is really thrown by it. Sometimes it works, and sometimes they
resent it. They feel that they've been taken or had a little bit.

Like in ''Prisoner of Second Avenue,'' in which I'm dealing basically with a
semiserious situation: A man who's 48 years old loses his job and is afraid
there's not going to be a future for him. But in the beginning of the play, all
of his complaints are funny. He complains about sitting on a sofa - the pillows
are just shoved up your back, and he says, ''You spend $900 for a sofa, and you
can't sit on it if the pillows are killing you.'' He's just complaining.

The very first thing he does gets a laugh. It is at night, and the room is dark,
and he comes out of the bedroom, sits down and lights a cigarette. You could
hardly see him - it was Peter Falk. He went, ''Aaaah,'' and the audience laughed
because they knew what that sigh meant. You had to do the sigh just right. But
at any rate, he later found out that the apartment was robbed, and still handled
that comedically, because the things that were stolen were so bizarre - they
took his toothbrush and everything, they just wiped him out.

And then in the second act, he has a nervous breakdown. He resents the fact that
his wife is going out and working and he has nothing to do. He goes to the park
every day, and he knows that the animals know him. They are saying, ''Here he
comes again. He didn't get a job, obviously.''

But it turned, it really turned, and the audience said, ''Well, that's not
funny.'' I said, ''Who said it was?'' RABE: Well, in that light, ''Hurlyburly''
is very tricky for me to talk about, because the turn is abrupter than I think
it has to be. The play is long, but it was longer, and there was groundwork for
the turns that is not present.

But what I've run into is a thing where I've expected recognition from an
audience and gotten just shock. In ''Sticks and Bones,'' I thought people were
really going to nod and say, ''Right, that is how it is. I hadn't thought of it
exactly in those terms, but that's how it is.'' And instead, people kind of
said, ''Whoa, don't do that!'' SIMON: I know that feeling. RABE: It's more than
laughs or not laughs. I expect I'm nailing something, or I'm articulating
something they have not had time to figure out because they're living another
kind of life, but that they'll recognize when they see it. SIMON: My experience
has been that if you write a situation well enough, the tension is so great that
the audience will laugh whether you provide it or not. But many times when it's
either laugh or cry, a lot of them don't want to cry. And they will pick out a
moment - a line, a gesture, whatever it is - to laugh at. It becomes part of the
play after a while. I expect it night after night - never having intended it in
the beginning. There's just so much that they can handle. You force the audience
to deal with a great deal in the theater. The thing I think most about when I'm
writing is what goes on in the bedroom between the husband and wife. I don't
mean the obvious, but what they really say to each other.

After a while, I see some of the people in the audience, and I say, ''I think
nothing goes on in the bedroom. I think they don't say anything, maybe for a
whole lifetime. And they go to the theater, and you force them to think. It
shakes them up, and sometimes they don't like it. They say, ''This play makes me
uncomfortable.''

I remember the masturbation scene in ''Brighton Beach Memoirs.'' I was standing
in the audience outside, and this young boy - he was about 14 or 15 - was
walking out with his parents, and he said, ''Well, now I can discuss some things
with you I never told you.'' It allowed him to say, ''This is O.K. for me to
talk about.'' THE ROLE OF THE UNCONSCIOUS RABE: I go through a thing in plays
where the play shocks me. I don't think I've ever written anything where there
wasn't a moment when I said, ''Oh, I don't want to write this,'' or ''Is that
me? Where's it coming from?'' I think my conscious mind is not as intelligent as
my unconscious. My conscious mind is very much interested in controlling
everything and making it more orderly - making it orderly in a familiar way.
Then the unconscious can come up with something original.

The only way I can do anything that's worthwhile is by not getting too far ahead
of myself. When I first started writing, if I didn't know what the next sentence
was, I couldn't allow myself to write the first sentence, so you never got
started. But the truth is, you have to say so what, so if you make a mistake you
throw it out. It's just paper.

But you go off on tacks that you had no anticipation of, and in my experience it
has provoked the best work. The more conscious brain is far more conventional.
It's good for getting to the store on time and stuff. But you have to get rid of
that voice, or subdue it on some level - the voice that says, ''O.K., that's a
great sentence, but what's the next one? And if you don't know the next one,
what good is this one?'' SIMON: I know. I know when my unconscious is doing the
writing, because when my conscious is doing it, it seems familiar to me when I
see it later on. Let's say I haven't seen the play in eight weeks or something,
and I go and watch it. I say, ''I didn't write that. That has nothing to do with
me. That came out of somebody else.'' I know that's the unconscious writing. And
that's where the surprises come from. And that's like mercury. You just grab
that if you can; it's really hard. I can't pin it down, but I know it's probably
very important to my psyche - that bit of information. I say, ''That's what I've
been keeping hidden.'' It's a dangerous game. If you don't grab it, then you
don't have it anymore. But it's also the most exhilarating. I can get up and go,
''What? That was terrific! You just caught a great long fly ball.''

I mean, you get ahold of an idea. It's just a wonderful idea. And you go on, and
you get to 20 pages, and maybe something takes you away from it for a while. And
then you look at it again, and you say, ''This is garbage. How could I have
written it?'' It takes a long while to make an accurate judgment. I would
generally put it aside for months - it could be six months at a time - and read
it again. And if it holds up at that time, then I get excited about it, and I
say, ''Yeah, I see where I'm going.'' But it could end mysteriously. I lose
faith very easily.

''Brighton Beach Memoirs'' took nine years from the inception of the idea. I let
it sit for six years. It just kept going in my mind. I would think about it, and
six years later I wrote 35 pages. I said, ''This is good, but I don't know how
to write the play.'' I'd never written a play like that - sort of a tapestry,
where everybody's story is very important. I generally had written plays about
two characters and the peripheral characters and how they are involved in it.
And it took a long time - another three years. And then I sat down and went
right through the play. But the unconscious is doing the work. It's typing away.
RABE: In the beginning - with ''Pavlo Hummel'' - I wrote until I had a draft,
and I didn't go to anything else. Once I had a draft, then I started writing
''Sticks and Bones.'' When I had a draft of that, I went back to the other one.
But as time has gone on, I've come to put them away more or do a note or a few
lines or a page and then come back and maybe work an intense period of time.

''Hurlyburly'' was like that - I had a note for about six years. It was
literally three or four lines. And then I got kicked into starting it, and when
I started it, I stayed on it for about three or four months to write the first
draft.

''Streamers'' was built the other way. I wrote a 25-page sort of one-act play.
It was actually the first thing I wrote when I got out of the Army. It was sort
of the movement of the first act of the play, only much shorter and without the
sergeants. And then that was that, and I put it away. Then, about three or four
years later, I rewrote it. It was about 50 pages, and it took about three or
four days. And then I'd put it away again.

I never thought about it a lot - I just didn't do anything to it. Anyway it took
a total of seven years from the beginning. Suddenly I sat down and in about
three or four days rewrote the whole play. And it was a full-length play now. I
don't know how I knew -there's no way to measure that. SIMON: I don't know what
it's like not to write. I don't do it every day of the year, and I do take time
off, but I feel empty if I don't have something to work on. The trick is not to
get caught up in something that's not working just for the sake of working. But
I feel very happy when I can say I've got an idea for something that I think is
worth doing. And then I can leave it alone and not work at all - it can just do
its own work there while I go to the beach or play some tennis. RABE: I think
keeping at it, on some level, is no more different from getting started. It's
the feeling that that's what you're going to do and have to do.

There's some part of me that's preoccupied with writing stuff all the time. I
mean, it never quite stops. It's like having a lot of people hammering at you,
you know -''Come and do it now.'' ''Me, me.'' ''What are you doing?'' So you
keep going.  I've hung in over a period of time, but with fewer plays than you,
Neil. But I think with ''Hurlyburly'' I established the fact that there's more
than just this guy who got shook up by the war. There's always a faction that
wants to dismiss everybody or be done with you on some level. It's just part of
human nature. MISOGYNY AND WRITING PARTS FOR WOMEN RABE: There are a lot of
opinions about the women in ''Hurlyburly'' and accusations of misogyny that I
don't think are particularly accurate. I find that the women are the forces for
feeling in the play. In many ways, that's the most positive thing in it.

I hadn't been to see ''Hurlyburly'' for a long time, and recently I went back
and sat upstairs. During an intermission, an usherette came up, and she said,
''You know, I identify with Eddie.'' She said, ''Most people won't do that.''
But, she's got to identify with him. That's the point.

I see a play as a psyche sort of thrashing in the world. And each audience
member should identify with the main character and follow it through, man or
woman. I mean, if I go to see ''Medea,'' I'd better identify with Medea.

What Eddie's struggling with, in my mind, is how to organize his life and his
feelings, and how many feelings to have and who can he trust, and does he have
to be boss to survive, what'll happen to him if he loses control. I don't think
those are exclusively male problems. I think they're human problems.

I have to write whatever shows up, that's the way it is. Otherwise it would be
artificial. You decide if you want to write a play about a go-go dancer, you
know, and then you do it. SIMON: I like writing women very much. I have shared
the confidences of women more than I have of men. Men are more closemouthed
about their real feelings, whereas women, if the situation is right, open up.
It's exotic for me to write about women, because they are so different.

''The Odd Couple'' [the play is being restaged with women in the lead roles] is
not a good example, because now I'm taking a man's play and turning it into a
woman's play. But it's not how I would write it if I had the idea to write about
the problems of two people trying to live together in today's world and decided
to use women instead of men. But the idea was to retain the basis of ''The Odd
Couple'' and see how it would fit for women. It's like taking all the colors out
of a painting and painting it again. RABE: I think I didn't have a strong enough
conscious grasp of the play [''Hurlyburly''] when I made some of the cuts, or I
might not have made them. But there was a lot of pressure; it was a long
evening. Now it's three hours. With the cuts back in, it would run maybe three
and a half hours. We didn't really see it all. One key scene was never even
rehearsed - a key scene in my mind. SIMON: Well, my plays have been getting
longer rather than shorter, starting with ''Chapter Two,'' which was two hours
and 45 minutes and the same with ''Brighton Beach,'' and ''Biloxi Blues'' runs
about that much.

Because of television, people might have shorter attention spans, I guess,
because it's broken up with commercials. But they actually spend more time
watching television programs. They spend a whole year watching ''Dynasty.'' You
see a miniseries, I mean, that's hours a night for five nights a week. You've
got to cancel all your plans to see ''Roots.'' So theater is short in
comparison. RABE: I'm not sure it's a real idea, the short attention span. If
their attention span has been shrunk, it can be expanded. I don't feel like
viewing the audience as limited or maimed.

If the play wants to be three hours long - it really wants to be - then it
should get to be. And then if they walk out, they walk out. THE URGE TO DIRECT
RABE: I tried to direct ''Goose and Tomtom,'' and I found that I was pretty good
at some things, but once there was any kind of actor problem or personality
thing I just went under. I couldn't cope with it. Once that came up, I just got
locked into it - I didn't have any way to distance myself. So the play got all
muddy. SIMON: Well, it's strange, because I've had the exact same feelings. If I
have a confrontation with an actor, I just shut off and walk away from it. But
it always amazes me - when I get a director I like and who likes the play, he
understands everything I mean, where the actor doesn't. The reason I won't
direct a play is that I will watch what a director does and say, ''I never
thought of it quite that way.''

I have a number of directors that I work with frequently. I haven't worked with
Mike [Nichols] in a number of years, but I did do four plays with Mike, and I
did four plays with Gene Saks and other people. You find someone that you have
shorthand battles with - you know, you don't have to have long discussions about
it, because they know what you're looking for. I don't like to sit at rehearsals
all day long, so I like to feel that I am being well represented. RABE: I used
to dream about a person who would just do every play and would really be on the
money. Like a soul mate or something. But I don't think I've encountered it. The
plays vary, and what people can cope with varies. If it's a good director, it's
coming somewhat from his own psyche through the play, and that varies. SIMON: I
was going to say that as good a relationship as you can have with a director,
and maybe even having had great success with him, it still depends on the play
you're doing. It's like casting and acting.

I find that actors relate much more to the director than they do to me. I tend
to sit back quietly and occasionally will throw in something to the director -
less often to the actor. The actor is to me a peculiar person. I don't mean that
in a negative way. It's one I don't fully understand. They have a much different
approach to the material. In the first place, most of the actors that I've
worked with, they open the script, take the yellow pencil and go through all of
their lines - which means to me that that's what they think the play is about
-the yellow lines, their part.

I just have to watch that process, and I see the directors able to communicate
to them in a way that I can't. I am much more direct in my attitude - if it were
up to me, and they said, ''How was that?'' I would say, ''Well, that just stunk.
I thought it was really lousy.'' I have to say that, because I say it to myself
about my own work. It's hard for me to be diplomatic and hands-off and know how
to work with the actors. So I tend to shy away from them. RABE: I find that, in
the early part of rehearsal, I'm very quiet, and as time goes on I have more and
more to say. If an actor does something I don't understand - ''How could he
possibly do that!'' -then I'm very upset. On the other hand, there are the times
when they do a thing that's so wonderful, that I never dreamed of. And that's
true of directors, too, that suddenly they bring something you just never
thought of.

And that's the balance. You see actors do their first drafts and their second
drafts in public. So they have to be allowed time to do what seems pointless to
me. You see how actors go through tremendous convolutions to figure out how to
erect some wall, some character, and then they can relate to the audience. You
see the same person try to give a talk at a dinner or a banquet or some public
place, and they can't do it. So, it's a creative thing that they go through. But
there is that direct desire for the public contact. THE FUTURE OF PLAYWRITING
SIMON: I'm naive and optimistic enough to think that plays will always be here
despite the fact that it's been a fairly grim season, and we're losing more and
more playwrights to films and to television - places where they're guaranteed to
make money. And the price of tickets makes it so difficult to put on certain
kinds of plays that don't promise to be a big smash hit.

Whenever I go to speak at a school, it's rarely for the drama class. It's always
for a film class. There are so few drama classes that are interested in the
theater. There'll be about four kids in the group who are interested in plays,
but most of them want to know about films. And they all want to direct - the
cliche. RABE: I have the feeling that the theater, since the late 1800's, has
been overridden by an idea of a form called ''realism,'' which I think has truly
run its course.

I think the time has come when people will understand that ''the well-made
play'' was developed out of other ideas, out of Darwin and Newton. I mean, the
well-made play is an idea based on how Newton said the universe worked - like a
big clock. It said theater was a pictorial, scientific, objective form, so it
invented the fourth wall. And it invented realistic behavior. If you had a real
elephant on stage, then that was great. It was trying, I think, to be movies.

Then movies came along, and they've done it all better. And theater is still
plodding along.

Until theater can offer an audience something that film can't, it's going to
struggle. It's robbed itself of some of its major devices. The things that it
has to offer are heightened language and soliloquies and that contact with the
audience that the ''fourth wall'' makes unacceptable. It has somehow to reclaim
this stuff, I believe.

Whether it can ever truly compete with the dominance of technology is another
question. I think one of the reasons musicals are so successful is they're
theatrical. They're allowed to be out and big and full, and I think people want
that at the theater. SIMON: I agree that musical theater is still the most
appealing thing to audiences. But we've reached the end of an era. I mean, we
see the revivals now of ''King and I'' and ''South Pacific,'' but it's another
generation that is liking that. There are no new musicals that have come along
in the last few years that have suddenly broken the mold the way ''Oklahoma''
did. Suddenly, holy mackerel, there's a story and there's a reason for doing it,
there's not tap dancing in every single number.

If it's difficult to draw on new playwrights, you'll find it even worse to draw
on new composers and lyricists and directors for musicals. Sondheim, in his
mid-50's, Michael Bennett, in his early 40's, they're the ''young'' generation.
RABE: As long as plays are sort of less effective movies and television -
stepchildren, poor relations . . . . Perhaps there is something else that can be
done in the theater that movies and TV can't do. SIMON: I think the question of
the money is the most overriding issue. Motion pictures are still $5. If plays
were $5, there wouldn't be enough theaters to fill the plays that were waiting
to get on. I mean, double it, say $11, and it would be the same thing. But once
you get into the bracket it is now, it's a whole other ballgame. It's going to
Tiffany's instead of someplace else. RABE: I've tried to figure out how it got
to be so expensive. But ultimately, I don't think that's my particular task. I
mean, my fate is somehow involved as a writer, but I don't know that I'm the one
to try to figure out how to correct it. SIMON: There must be a way to do it,
without cutting out the scenery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of David Babe and Neil Simon (NYT/Jose Lopez)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TAKING CHARGE

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb; lLeslie H. Gelb is The Times's national security
correspondent.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5398 words


IN THE BIG CORNER ROOM WHERE Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinski once held
sway, a few doors down from the Oval Office, Robert C. McFarlane sits on a couch
talking about his rise to the post of national security adviser. The 47-year-old
former marine sits quietly, hands in his lap, his speech slow and deliberate.
Back in October 1983, McFarlane says, he was the ''compromise choice.'' No one
saw him ''as a threat.''

Most Presidents have chosen strong-willed, independent-minded outsiders for the
job. When Ronald Reagan picked McFarlane, it seemed this would be an exception.
McFarlane was an insider to the core: loyal, efficient, knowledgeable, discreet.
The Secretaries of State and Defense could rest easy with this perennial No. 2
man.

But it hasn't turned out that way. Within the last few months, McFarlane has
suddenly emerged as a powerhouse in the formulation of Administration foreign
and defense policy, sometimes rivaling and sometimes overruling Secretary of
State George P. Shultz and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger. And his
influence is growing - inside and outside the Administration.

One sign of that dramatic change came in March when McFarlane was moved out of
the basement office occupied by his two immediate predecessors, Richard V. Allen
and William P. Clark, and moved into the large office close by the President.
The message of his being newly anointed was further spread within the
Administration when he and his wife, Jonda, were invited to private dinners with
the President and Nancy Reagan in the White House dining room.

Inside power feeds outside power, and vice versa. In recent months, Robert (Bud)
McFarlane has ended his careerlong isolation from the public. Where once he
talked with the press anonymously, identified simply as ''a senior Adminstration
official,'' today he briefs reporters in full view of the television cameras. He
has begun making the rounds of the Sunday television talk shows.

McFarlane's willingness to be interviewed on the record for this article is
itself an unprecedented move that reflects his new power. As a longtime
McFarlane friend puts it: ''Bud would never dream of doing this without the
complete backing of the President.'' And the national security adviser's candor
during the interview was also extraordinary.

He spoke, for example, of the failure of American policy in Lebanon last year
and how one possible approach - linking military force and diplomacy - had to be
ruled out because the ''hostility'' between the State and Defense Departments
made ''agile diplomacy'' impossible. He also revealed the White House diplomatic
agenda, as the President viewed it in 1983, as well as unknown details of how
foreign-policy decisions are now shaped in this Administration. According to
White House aides, that process includes a little-known band of top officials,
called the ''Family Group,'' that is dedicated to smoothing over internal
tensions.

The evidence of McFarlane's new clout is everywhere: According to White House
officials, when he feels he knows the President's mind on an issue, he often
signs decision memorandums ''Robert C. McFarlane for the President'' without
even showing the memos to the President. Recently, the State Department wanted
to allow Guatemala $75 million in commodity credits, but the Treasury Department
opposed the move unless Guatemala first put its finances in order. McFarlane
issued a decision memo, on his own, providing a total of $50 million in credits
in two installments. ''This happens often,'' says an aide. ''That's real
power.'' In March, before the American delegation left for the arms-control
talks in Geneva, McFarlane called a meeting of the National Security Council.
Officials say the meeting ran for about an hour, and that McFarlane took up most
of that time showing charts and outlining six options for the United States
position at the talks. After the session, he and his aides drafted a 14-page
decision memorandum, and President Reagan signed it without change. Earlier this
year, McFarlane knocked heads with Shultz and Weinberger when they pushed hard
for immediate and massive arms sales to Saudi Arabia and Jordan. According to an
aide, McFarlane told them: ''We've got lots of fights on the Hill first -the MX
missile, aid to the contras, arms control, the defense budget - and the Middle
East is fifth.'' McFarlane proposed instead a general review of Middle East
policy as a cover for the delay, and the two Secretaries agreed. The aide says
McFarlane told them: ''If the Arabs complain, lay it off on me, say the White
House wants the review.''

McFarlane's ascendance comes at a time when, according to the national security
adviser and other Administration officials, President Reagan now believes that
his military buildup and the economic recovery, coupled with a rash of Soviet
political and economic problems, have provided an opportunity for some
diplomatic initiatives - with the Soviet Union and around the world. ''We have
Page 22-23 been building the leverage,'' McFarlane says, ''and now is the time
to build more and use it.''

The national security adviser brings years of foreign-policy experience to the
task; he is far more knowledgeable in the area than any of the President's other
top aides. But if the President's talk of diplomatic initiatives is to amount to
anything, McFarlane will have to control two divisive elements of the last four
years:

First, the feuding between Secretary of State Shultz and Secretary of Defense
Weinberger that has made for considerable disarray in the policy process.

Second, the tendency - though somewhat muted over the last year - toward
inflammatory anti-Communist rhetoric, which could severely hamper negotiations
with the Russians. During President Reagan's recent trip to Western Europe, for
example, McFarlane himself rewrote a major Presidential speech, provided by the
White House communications director Patrick J. Buchanan, to soften its
anti-Soviet tone. McFarlane, who served two years on the staff of the Senate
Armed Services Committee, has also been given the job of finding some compromise
with Congress over aid to the Nicaraguan contras. Says Representative Les Aspin,
Democrat of Wisconsin and chairman of the House Armed Services Committee:
''There's only one man from the Administration anyone up here thinks about when
it comes to arms control or Central America, and that's McFarlane.''

Over the last two decades, Administrations have seldom been able to devise and
implement a cohesive foreign policy without the services of a wise, skillful and
powerful national security adviser. Whether Bud McFarlane has the personal and
intellectual qualities and Presidential backing that made Kissinger and
Brzezinski such crucial figures remains to be seen.

McFarlane's abilities, says William G. Hyland, editor of Foreign Affairs
magazine, are ''about to be tested as he works his way through the internal and
external mine fields.'' One explosive threat: His emphasis on diplomacy could
make him a prime target for conservatives within and outside the Administration.

But beyond such concerns looms a larger question. During President Reagan's
first term, his Administration was committed to a strong anti-Communist position
with little or no willingness to seek diplomatic compromises with the Soviet
Union and other adversaries. Interviews with McFarlane and dozens of high
Government officials reveal no indications of a basic change of heart.

The President's European tour - with its stop at the military cemetery in
Bitburg (which, according to McFarlane's aides, he opposed) and the loudly
voiced criticisms of Administration policies at the economic summit - suggests
some of the problems in the path of any diplomatic breakthroughs. For all his
growing power, it's not clear whether McFarlane has the will and the skill to
clear that path. THIRTY YEARS AGO, WHEN JONDA RILEY first met Bud McFarlane, she
liked him right away, she says, and she plotted - successfully - to get him to
ask her to a senior prom. ''He had direction, commitment,'' she recalls, ''and
it was fascinating to meet a man I had to work to get to know.''

According to those who work with him and those who try to write about him, he is
still that way - almost sphinxlike, opaque, his soft eyes fixed on the other
person, his words and gestures under total control. Only occasionally does he
come up with a wisecrack or a humorous tale. His colleagues tell of a 1982 White
House meeting called to find a new and appealing name for the MX missile. When
someone suggested ''Peacemaker,'' which was the name finally selected, McFarlane
is said to have countered, ''I suppose Widowmaker wouldn't do?''

One of his favorite stories dates back to the 1970's, when McFarlane was an aide
to national security adviser Henry Kissinger. One day, McFarlane says, Kissinger
suffered through yet another unsuccessful attempt to convince the Joint Chiefs
of Staff that they should accept new concessions to the Russians on strategic
arms. Kissinger came storming back to his office, screamed, threw papers around
and finally turned toward his aide. McFarlane repeats his former boss's words in
a deep Germanic baritone: ''Bud, I will visit my marines because they alone
among all the services have never made any pretense at intelligence.'' Then
McFarlane adds: ''Just to prove he was right, at the time I thought that was a
compliment.''

McFarlane was born in 1937 in Washington where his father, William Doddridge
McFarlane, was a Democratic Congressman from the 13th Congressional District of
Texas from 1932 to 1938 - a New Dealer who like many New Dealers became
increasingly conservative over the years. Graham, Tex., was the family's
hometown, and young Bud grew up with what was, by most accounts, his father's
basic persona: polite, self-effacing, deferential to his elders.

Today, the national security adviser's staff quotes his working credo as:
''There is no limit to what a man can do or where he can go if he doesn't mind
who gets the credit.'' McFarlane's humility has sometimes extended to stunning
expressions of inadequacy. Friends recall his saying, when he took his present
post, ''This job is way beyond me. They should have gotten somebody better, like
Kissinger.'' Recently, though, his aides say, such comments have not been heard.

McFarlane was graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1958 with a
major in electrical engineering, and joined the Marines. Over the next years he
served in Japan and Korea and he led his artillery battery ashore in Danang in
1965 -it was the first American combat unit in Vietnam.

McFarlane studied international relations at the University of Geneva in
Switzerland, and in 1971 he was named a White House fellow in the Nixon
Administration. Then came his stint with Kissinger, and when Lieut. Gen. Brent
Scowcroft, the deputy adviser, succeeded Kissinger, McFarlane stayed on. These
were the years when Bud McFarlane built his reputation, brick by brick, as a
loyal, efficient staff man - the start of a political and foreign-policy network
of mentors and admirers that would later stand him in such good stead.

When Jimmy Carter came in, McFarlane landed at the National Defense University,
and in 1979, by this time a lieutenant colonel, McFarlane resigned from the
Marine Corps.

McFarlane's long years in the military had deepened his already fierce
patriotism and his sense of service. He also, according to friends and
colleagues, had learned how to be tough, even stiff-necked, when he felt the
occasion demanded. They tell of a dinner in Honduras late last year hosted by
top Honduran generals and officials. As one aide tells it: ''They started to
give Bud a hard time, saying that we had not done enough for them, that they
needed written commitments and a mutual defense treaty. When dessert came,
McFarlane responded that our military exercises, aid, and the President's word
were commitments, and if the President's word wasn't good enough, 'I don't know
what I can do for you.' '' At which point McFarlane stood up and walked out.
''They were stunned,'' the aide says, ''but they also stopped pressing us for a
treaty.''

After resigning from the corps, McFarlane spent two years on the staff of the
Senate Armed Services Committee, where his mentor was Senator John Tower. Then
Ronald Reagan's election lit a fire under McFarlane's career. He was tapped by
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. to become the Department's counselor. A
year later, when William P. Clark left the State Department and took over as
national security adviser, he brought McFarlane along as his deputy.

Bud McFarlane has his critics, who claim that he is wooden, unimaginative, not
much of a conceptual thinker, but even they hasten to add that he is solid and
steady and that, under his direction, the National Security Council staff -
often criticized in the past for its incompetence and ideological rigidity - now
runs a much more professional operation. His aides claim that McFarlane's
low-key, nonconfrontational style has its advantages.

''At meetings, he is a listener, talks less than anyone else,'' says one
colleague. ''With Shultz and Weinberger, he'll ask a lot of questions based on
the facts he knows and they don't, and that backs them off.''

Within the bureaucracy, McFarlane can also be a calculating infighter. He has
been known to have startlingly indiscreet conversations with legislators and
journalists when it suits his purpose, sometimes to distance himself from
certain positions taken within the Administration.

Today, it is clear that McFarlane wants to be much more than the consummate
bureaucrat. Given his growing power, he seems to have a new vision of what he
can be, perhaps a mixture of two of his predecessors. He speaks reverently of
Brent Scowcroft, the tactful, skillful behind-the-scenes operator. But he also
yearns to be seen as the brilliant strategic thinker, in the tradition of Henry
Kissinger. UNLIKE A KISSINGER OR A BRZEZINSKI, McFarlane has written little that
reveals his thinking about major foreign-policy issues. But Lawrence S.
Eagleburger - a former Under Secretary of State who worked closely with
McFarlane and is now the president of Kissinger Associates, a foreign-policy
consulting firm - captures the general view when he quips, ''Bud has a very
conservative outlook, but he lets pragmatism get the better of him.''

Perhaps the most revealing the national security adviser has ever been on the
record was in the course of an interview for this article. His analysis of why
American policy in Lebanon failed last year, for example, is remarkably candid.
It also illustrates Eagleburger's point, showing McFarlane as a hard-liner who
is, ultimately, a realist.

''In Lebanon - and I, it's still a very painful experience and I may have just
been flat wrong -this Government in February of 1984 was sharply divided over
political-military strategy, and there were two courses that I could recommend.
A course that could have preserved United States interests in Lebanon, but at
great cost, would have been to go to war with Syria. Or, we could disengage
there.

''But the third option, theoretically possible, of the careful bringing to bear,
the selective use of force here and there in support of an agile diplomacy,
simply wasn't in the cards. We didn't have that kind of responsiveness between
State and Defense that could have facilitated that kind of diplomacy.

''So I recommended to the President that, since we could not go to war with
Syria, that we ought to get out of there. I did feel that there was a way we
could have gotten out that would have preserved our interests, and I still think
that, had it not been for the total collapse of Lebanon's Army, that we could
have.

''But it did collapse and I think I should have recognized the inevitability of
that collapse perhaps earlier on.

''I suppose one can say that I split the difference in my policy
recommendation'' - between Shultz, who wanted to use force, and Weinberger, who
wanted to get out. ''It was a judgment of the reality of the condition of our
Government at that time -that there was such hostility between the key actors
that you couldn't expect to sustain an effective military strategy.''

In the end, McFarlane is saying, he took the Weinberger line. But clearly, his
instinct was closer to that reflected in recent speeches by Shultz - the use of
military force in the service of diplomacy. It was reminiscent, as well, of
Henry Kissinger's classical balance-of-power approach to diplomacy. ''That's
exactly how Bud thinks,'' says a member of the National Security Council staff.

In a little-noticed speech in March, McFarlane called for ''a proportional
military response against bona fide military targets in a state which directs
terrorist actions against us.'' Nor, he continued, ''should we need to prove
beyond all reasonable doubt that a particular element or individual in that
state is responsible for such terrorist acts.'' Once again, the position is
close to that of Shultz and goes much beyond that of Weinberger.

Yet, according to Administration officials, when it comes to Central America,
McFarlane's reasoning is much like the Pentagon's and often in conflict with the
State Department's. There is Administration-wide agreement on helping the
contras and bringing pressure of various kinds on the Nicaraguan Government. But
unlike Shultz, the national security adviser opposes direct negotiations with
Managua - both because he doesn't trust the Sandinistas and because such moves
create great anxiety among America's allies in the region. McFarlane also has
greater confidence than Shultz in the growth of contra strength.

McFarlane's analysis of Soviet-American relations grows out of the overall
military balance between the nations. He considers the Soviet leadership highly
cautious in general, but once Russia attained military parity, McFarlane argued
in a speech last year, it began testing the West - aiding Marxists in Angola and
Ethiopia, for example.''Absent an apparent coordinated Western opposition,'' he
went on, the Russians ''were encouraged to use their own forces in
Afghanistan.'' Still, as McFarlane indicated in another speech last year, he
believes that, though Moscow is clearly ''expansionist,'' both countries ''share
a fundamental interest in avoiding nuclear conflict and in reducing tension.''

Says an old friend and colleague: ''There's nothing fancy in his thinking. He's
not an ideological fanatic, but he knows what he wants.'' The goal: a stronger
America more willing to exercise its military and diplomatic power. Yet, as
McFarlane is quick to acknowledge, what he wants is circumscribed by what he can
get within the Administration. THE PREVAILING VIEW IN THE ADMINISTRA-tion is
that Bud McFarlane has more power to achieve his ends than did his immediate
predecessors. Richard Allen had some background in foreign policy but little
personal clout in the White House. William Clark had a close personal
relationship with the President but little foreign-policy experience. McFarlane
has both the knowledge and an ever-closer relationship with the President.

Of course, the national security adviser has been a potential powerhouse since
the position was first created. Modern Presidents have increasingly demanded
quick responses to their political and policy needs - responses that were not
always readily forthcoming from such large and entrenched institutions as the
Departments of State and Defense, each with its own interests and perspectives.

As McFarlane sees it, this is how foreign policy is now formulated and where he
fits into the process:

''Well, the President has a clear sense of a goal . . . . He says, 'Go figure
out a way to do that.'. . . So, we'll have an N.S.C. meeting or two, usually
preceded by work'' done under the guidance of Assistant Secretaries of State.
''We get up a paper and we send the paper to him and he digests that and then we
have a couple of morning oral briefings.'' These briefings of the President,
which last about 15 minutes each, are in preparation for the formal National
Security Council meeting.

Then, at the council session, the President ''listens to what his Cabinet
officers have to say for the purpose -not for shaping the strategy, but for
hearing his Cabinet officers. And then the next day I'll go back to his office
and say, 'What did you think about that?' And he says, 'Well, thus and so, and I
tend to believe he's right and he's wrong, but give me a couple of options on
this so I can think about it some more.'

''That's usually a pretty short phase, sometimes 24 hours or less. Then, I come
back to him and say, 'Well, here's what you can do and here's another way.'

''And he signs the directive,'' the formal decision that is then passed along
through the bureaucracy to be implemented. In effect, the directive says: ''The
strategy will be thus and so. Here are your fallback options, and here's who I
want to be in charge of it, and here are some milestones.''

The decision-making process described by McFarlane is a dramatic deviation from
most past Administrations. The devotion to a formal, Cabinet-style system is
remarkable. According to White House aides, the President has participated in
about 225 National Security Council meetings in a little more than four years.
Nixon, in more than five years, attended only 86 meetings; Ford attended 39 in
two years; Carter, 41 in four years.

What emerges from the Reagan Administration's N.S.C. meetings are consensus
decisions, unusually broad policy directives stitched together by McFarlane that
manage to incorporate the various views around the table. These decisions are
then passed along to the lower echelons of the Departments of State and Defense
for implementation.

But the broader the policy, the more room it allows for different
interpretations. In the current Administration, that has meant a flow of power
out of the White House and into the hands of aides in the Pentagon and the State
Department. In the process of implementing policy, they are making it. ''There
has never been a better time to be an Assistant Secretary,'' says one longtime
member of the N.S.C. staff. ''They have enormous running room.''

In past Administrations, the President and his chief foreign-policy advisers had
the foreign-policy expertise to make focused decisions and issue concrete
marching orders. Under Nixon, for example, the President, Kissinger and
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird were all experienced in foreign-policy
matters.

The Reagan Cabinet-style system has often led to stalemate. When there are
internal disagreements over such major issues as arms control or Central
American policy, Assistant Secretaries cannot resolve them; they lack the power
to knock heads and make deals. For more than four years, for example, the
Administration - caught in the feuding between Assistant Secretary of State for
European Affairs Richard R. Burt and Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Policy Richard N. Perle - has had no clear arms-control
policy.

In recent months, however, an informal network has developed to fill in some of
the cracks and crevices of the Cabinet-style system. According to a number of
White House and Administration officials, the genesis of the change was a
little-known exchange between President Reagan and Shultz after the election.
The Secretary of State indicated he wasn't sure he could continue to work with
Secretary of Defense Weinberger and C.I.A. chief William J. Casey. The President
met with the three men and McFarlane, and eventually the four aides agreed to
stay on in the Administration and to work at overcoming their differences.

Since then, Shultz, Weinberger, Casey and McFarlane have held a number of
private sessions (they call themselves ''The Family Group''), and this has, in
turn, helped clear the air at the regular Wednesday breakfast meetings attended
by Weinberger, Shultz and McFarlane. Officials say that these informal sessions
have often been more important than the National Security Council meetings as a
mechanism for resolving problems and making decisions.

In this informal network, three alliances have become pivotal.

Shultz and the President: The Secretary of State, over all, remains the most
powerful of the foreign-policy advisers. He is a respected elder statesman, with
broad experience in economic matters.

Shultz and McFarlane: According to their aides, the national security adviser
and the Secretary of State agree about 80 percent of the time. But, as a high
State Department official says, ''We no longer assume agreement, and we no
longer can count on Shultz beating Bud the way we used to.''

McFarlane and the President: The President's confidence in his national security
adviser is said to be based on the sense that ''Bud is straightforward and not
tricky,'' as one official puts it. Another says, ''Bud's advice has kept him and
gotten him out of trouble.''

McFarlane's access to President Reagan is virtually unmatched -three or four
meetings each day with the President, often alone. ''This gives Bud enormous
potential power, mostly because the President is not terribly critical or
demanding and mostly accepts what Bud recommends,'' says a former senior
official who knows that relationship well. ''But Bud doesn't abuse this.''
Except for Shultz, McFarlane seems to have outdistanced the competition. By all
accounts, Caspar Weinberger's personal connection to the President continues
strong, but his power has waned.

What's more, McFarlane has little competition within the White House itself. The
powerful political troika that ruled the White House in President Reagan's first
term - chief of staff James A. Baker 3d, his deputy Michael K. Deaver, and
counselor Edwin Meese 3d - has been broken up. And Donald Regan, the new chief
of staff, has given McFarlane his head.

As the power of national security advisers has grown over the years, so has the
competition with the Secretary of State. Notorious battles have been fought by
Kissinger and William P. Rogers, Brzezinski and Cyrus R. Vance, Allen and Haig.
Today, the relationship is more harmonious than at any time in the last decade,
with the exception of the brief period when Scowcroft was the adviser and
Kissinger was Secretary of State.

The Shultz-McFarlane axis now has the power to dominate inside the
Administration. When they agree, most officials say, they are strong enough to
overcome any opposition - including that of the right wing of the Republican
Party.

E IGHTEEN MONTHS AGO, Bud McFarlane sent President Reagan a memorandum
suggesting that it was time for the Administration to get moving on the
diplomatic front. On Thanksgiving Day, the national security adviser met with
the President. According to McFarlane, this is what the President had to say:

''We have reversed the decline of our strength and restored that foundation, or
begun to. For the first term, I think that's probably as much as we can hope to
achieve. . . . We are going into an election year, a bad time to forge sensible
policy.

''I think we ought to spend next year'' - 1984 - ''at least for the first half
of it, focusing upon preventing catastrophe in the debt situation and adding
another year of authorization and appropriations in the defense modernizations.
And beyond that, in about mid-year'' - 1985 - ''you ought to start in earnest .
. . on where we want to go.''

McFarlane's time has now arrived, and he and his aides say that a plan and a
strategy are ready. It looks like this:

Move soon before the President's political clout lessens in the closing years of
his term. Push for the economic revitalization of Western Europe. Maintain a
healthy economy while continuing to build military strength. Try to improve
relations with Moscow, but don't give away too much. Provide more help to our
friends around the world while trying to wean Soviet friends away from Moscow.

Over the last two years, McFarlane and other top Administration officials have
been urging that American policy should focus more on Asia, but that is
changing. McFarlane's aides say that the Administration now intends to avoid any
further drift of economic and strategic priorities toward the Far East by
concentrating on the economic and military concerns of Western Europe. This, the
officials say, was an important underlying premise of President Reagan's
approach at the recent economic summit in Bonn.

The Administration holds that if the Soviet Union wants real diplomatic change,
it will have to take the first steps - and maybe the second. Given Moscow's
internal economic problems and the drain of the war in Afghanistan, the
Administration believes, Russia needs agreements more than the United States.
''We have to pay more attention to Soviet vulnerabilities,'' says a senior
member of the National Security Council staff.

''What we're going to do,'' says the senior aide, ''is create incentives for
Soviet friends or clients to have a more balanced relationship with the West.''
Specifically, he and others say, there may be efforts to court nations such as
India, Algeria, Mozambique and Angola.

This diplomatic largesse will not, however, include Vietnam, Cuba and Nicaragua.
The Administration expects to increase military and economic pressures against
them, and against Soviet forces in Afghanistan. Echoing the views of many
officials, a senior Administration aide comments: ''Trying with Cuba isn't worth
the problems it'll cause with the right wing here. And besides, with Cuba,
Vietnam and the Sandinistas, you can't make agreements with them because they
won't keep them.''

As for the ongoing arms-control negotiations, McFarlane and his Administration
colleagues continue to insist that the President is prepared to be ''very
flexible.'' But McFarlane and Weinberger give every indication of being true
believers in the President's strategic defense intiative, also known as ''Star
Wars.'' And neither they nor outside experts feel there is much chance of a
breakthrough with Moscow on offensive nuclear weapons unless limits are set on
defense systems.

Administration officials offer winks and nods about a secret bargaining
strategy. But among Administration experts, the betting is against a new
nuclear-arms pact. They do, however, anticipate an overall reduction in
Soviet-American tensions because, they feel, neither Washington nor Moscow would
benefit from confrontations. They seem almost unconcerned about how Moscow will
react to being pressured across the board on Star Wars, Nicaragua, Afghanistan
and elsewhere.

The diplomatic picture is similarly bleak as concerns the Middle East,
notwithstanding Shultz's foray there this month. The Administration's apparent
game plan will be to encourage others - the Israelis, Egyptians and Jordanians -
to raise the level of diplomatic activity while Washington stays in the
background, waiting for conditions to ripen.

Behind all of the Administration voices lurks the melancholy notion that there
may be no diplomatic solutions to most international problems. That may turn
into a self-fulfilling prophecy because McFarlane and most of the other policy
makers find it hard, in principle, to argue for compromises with most Communist
leaders and because they believe that compromises in the past have often proved
costly to the United States.

Yet, during the interview in his office, Bud McFarlane seemed reluctant to go
where his own logic was taking him. ''You can mind the store and maintain the
status quo,'' he said, ''or you can try to solve a couple of problems. And if
you are going to do that, you have got to think ahead.

''Well, where is the President going to be spending his time in the first six
months of this year? Is he going to be focusing on tax reforms or can he give
his time to foreign policy? And if so, how am I going to use what time I get? .
. . I mean how much time can he reasonably take? How much travel? And what ought
to be the division of labor within the Government? What should the Secretary of
State do, and what should the rest of us do?

''That is the toughest part.'' McFarlane paused a moment. ''No,'' he went on,
''it's not the toughest. It's the most frustrating.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Robert McFarlane (David Burnett/Contact)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1291 words


May 26, 1985 Fiction

* 1 5 18 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.

* 2 8 2 HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
Continuing the family saga begun in ''A Woman of Substance.''

* 3 1 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) In this 18th novel of
the Sackett saga, a restless explorer scouts the American wilderness.

* 4 6 12 FAMILY ALBUM, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $16.95.) A married couple
with five children cope with the crises of contemporary America.

* 5 7 10 INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A
traditionalist Jew's quest for identity in glittery contemporary America.

* 6 3 10 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States with the
Soviet Union's most advanced nuclear secrets.

* 7 1 13 THINNER, by Richard Bachman. (NAL Books, $12.95.) In this pseudonymous
novel by Stephen King, a young lawyer finds his body mysteriously wasting away.

* 8 2 6 CHAPTERHOUSE: DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $17.95.) A new world
rises from the Old Empire's ashes in this volume of the ''Dune'' series.

* 9 4 5 THE CLASS, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $17.95.) What happened to five
members of the class of 1958 after they left Harvard Yard. 10 10 6 QUEENIE, by
Michael Korda. (Linden Press/ Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The glamorous career of
Dawn Avalon, whose life was not unlike that of the late Merle Oberon. 11* 1 THE
CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a Maine orphanage
earlier in this century. 12 13 3 A CREED FOR THE THIRD MILLENNIUM, by Colleen
McCullough. (Harper & Row, $17.95.) A man and a woman set out to salvage a
spiritually exhausted America in the not-too-distant future. 13* 9 8 THE LONELY
SILVER RAIN, by John D. MacDonald. (Knopf, $15.95.) A yacht's disappearance, a
debutante's murder and other puzzles Travis McGee must solve to save his life.
14 11 10 PROOF, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $16.95.) A young wine merchant gets
caught in a scam involving murder and vengeance. 15 12 16 GLITZ, by Elmore
Leonard. (Arbor House, $14.95.) The escapades, romantic and melodramatic, of a
cop who needs a rest after being shot in Miami. Nonfiction

* 1 1 30 IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
$19.95.) The rise of the automobile executive from immigrants' son to top jobs
at Ford and Chrysler.

* 2 2 8 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
(Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze the successes
and failures of modern women in looking for acceptable men.

* 3 3 3 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin (Random House,
$19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 4 5 4 ONCE UPON A TIME, by Gloria Vanderbilt. (Knopf, $16.95.) Memories of the
first 17 years of a ''poor little rich girl.''

* 5 10 2 MY MOTHER'S KEEPER, by B. D. Hyman. (Morrow, $16.95.) A portrait of the
actress Bette Davis, by her daughter.

* 6 6 39 LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/Holt, $13.95.) Suggestions
for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the fullest.''

* 7 4 13 BREAKING WITH MOSCOW, by Arkady N. Shevchenko. (Knopf, $18.95.) The
autobiography of the highest-ranking Soviet official ever to defect.

* 8 8 6 THE SOONG DYNASTY, by Sterling Seagrave. (Harper & Row, $22.50.) The
tangled lives of Charlie Soong and his six children, who shaped much of China's
modern history.

* 9 7 15 THE COURAGE TO CHANGE, by Dennis Wholey. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.)
Conversations with two dozen men and women, many of them celebrities, about
their problems with alcoholism. 10 9 5 THE BLOOD OF ABRAHAM, by Jimmy Carter.
(Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The problems of the Middle East and what can be done
about them, as seen by the former President. 11 11 11 ''SURELY YOU'RE JOKING,
MR. FEYNMAN,'' by Richard P. Feynman. (Norton, $15.95.) A Nobel laureate in
physics recounts his curious misadventures inside and outside his profession. 12
13 131 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $13.50.) Light
verse and drawings. 13 15 2 CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope with Dwayne
Netland. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Memories of more than 50 years of golfing, by the
comedian. 14 12 38 THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.)
The author of ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' tells of his search for love. 15 2
NO MORE VIETNAMS, by Richard Nixon. (Arbor House, $14.95.) The former
President's view of 10 years of change in American foreign policy. And Bear in
Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest) ZUCKERMAN
BOUND, by Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Cloth, $22.50. Paper, $9.95.)
This volume contains the three previous Zuckerman novels and adds a fourth,
''The Prague Orgy,'' in which Zuckerman's marvelous obsessions with art, life,
America, Judaism and himself apparently come to a close.

HER FIRST AMERICAN, by Lore Segal. (Knopf, $15.95.)

Somewhere in Nevada, Ilka Weissnix, a 21-year-old Viennese refugee, meets Carter
Bayoux, a wounded, self-destructive, protocol-obsessed American black. What
follows is a witty, virtuosic novel of education by love, loss and change.

RANDALL JARRELL'S LETTERS: An Autobiographical and

Literary Selection, edited by Mary Jarrell with Stuart Wright. (Houghton
Mifflin, $29.95.) Correspondence of America's outstanding poetry critic from the
1940's through the early 60's. RED BAKER, by Robert Ward. (Doubleday, $14.95.) A
spare and graphic novel that explores what it is like in America to be a
workingman whose job is abolished, and with it his identity.

THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS, by Isabel Allende. (Knopf, $17.95.)

In this absorbing first novel, a Chilean writer (and niece of Chile's late
President Allende) invokes a typically South American literary cosmos of male
authority, political strife and class warfare, but her female protagonist seeks
to overcome disaster and transcend violence and despair through forgiveness. THE
CALL, by John Hersey (Knopf, $19.95.) David Treadup, a missionary in China,
gains faith in men but loses God in a novel that deals with issues as large as
how to change the world.

THE FALL OF SAIGON: Scenes From the Sudden End of a Long

War, by David Butler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Detailed and sometimes
poignant vignettes of the last 55 days of the war. Advice and Self-Help

* 1 2 8 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for
delicious dishes prepared at moderate cost.

* 2 3 19 WEIGHT WATCHERS QUICK START PROGRAM COOKBOOK, by Jean Nidetch. (NAL
Books, $17.95.) A cuisine that slims.

* 3 1 25 NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to
buy real estate with little or no money; revised edition of a 1980 book.

* 4 5 32 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983.

* 5 4 36 WHAT THEY DON'T TEACH YOU AT HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL, by Mark H.
McCormack. (Bantam, $16.95.) Notes and tips of a ''street-smart'' executive. The
listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable. *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

DEFEATED BY VICTORY

BYLINE: By Robert Manning; Robert Manning is editor in chief of the Boston
Publishing Company and its 20-volume history, ''The Vietnam Experience.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words


A VIETCONG MEMOIR By Truong Nhu Tang. With David Chanoff and Doan Van Toai.
Illustrated. 350 pp. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $17.95.

THE torrent of books about the Vietnam War brings to mind King Richard II's
woeful invitation, ''Let us sit upon the ground and tell sad stories of the
death of kings.'' If there are any but sad stories about those 30 years of
strife between Westerners and Asians, they are yet to be told. The literature is
a litany of death - deaths of men, women and children; of governments and
reputations; of ideals and morals; of buddies and innocents, heroes and
poltroons. ''A Vietcong Memoir'' by Truong Nhu Tang is about the death of a
dream, a dream of an independent, peaceful and democratic Vietnam.

Mr. Tang is a dedicated nationalist who was never a Communist but was willing to
work with the Communists to achieve national independence - the kind of
Vietnamese the French and Americans never sufficiently understood and whom the
Communists understood all too well. His dream appeared in 1945 when, as one of
six sons of an affluent Saigon family, he went to study in Paris and met Ho Chi
Minh. He was captivated by Ho's ''simplicity, his charm, his familiarity'' and
his ''burning patriotism.'' He finally broke with his family to join the
Communist underground.

At first he led a double life in Saigon, working as an ostensibly proper bank
official while proselytizing ''for the revolution.'' Exposed by a cell member
who confessed under torture by the Saigon regime, Mr. Tang survived several
months in prison, then went into the jungle - not as a combatant but as a
politician - to help form the National Liberation Front and later the
Provisional Revolutionary Government that was supposed to govern South Vietnam
when the Americans were driven out and their imposed government collapsed. That
the Provisional Government would someday prevail, Mr. Tang seems not to have
doubted, even though all its orders came from the Communists in Hanoi. It was
the North, in fact, that shaped the Government's ''14 points'' with their
promise of democracy and a reconciliation of all Vietnamese, whatever their
earlier loyalties, once independence was achieved.

Mr. Tang worked for the cause and watched with admiration as the Communist
strategy, danh va dam (fighting and talking), gradually eviscerated a succession
of South Vietnamese governments and nullified the overwhelming military might of
the United States. His version of what happened between the mid-1960's, when
America made Vietnam its war, and the mid-1970's, when the Communists took over
South Vietnam, makes this one of the most interesting of the books now issuing
from the other side of the struggle. It is literate, mercifully free of the
stridencies and banalities that characterize the Communists' agitprop prose;
this may be Mr. Tang's own doing, or it may be the work of his two
collaborators, who share the copyright of the book but curiously are not
identified by the publisher except by name (Mr. Chanoff, in fact, is an
assistant professor of political science at Harvard University; Mr. Toai, who
has written about being in prison, under both the Saigon and Hanoi regimes, is
at the University of California's Institute of East Asian Studies at Berkeley).
At any rate, the prose is readable and gives off an aura of authenticity and
reasonableness.

For example, Mr. Tang sees in the American and South Vietnamese Governments'
refusal to entertain the notion of a coalition the reasons for the death of his
and the other non-Communist nationalists' dream. ''With hindsight,'' he says,
''one can speculate on the survival potential of a coalition government, one
faction backed by Hanoi, one by the United States, while 'third force'
neutralists were wooed by both. China, it was clear even then, would have found
practical ways to support such a regime, and it is not too imaginative to
believe that many Third World and Western nations would have done the same.''
But the sparse history of coalition with Communists suggests a questionable
trust in hope over experience.

The author's beloved Provisional Revolutionary Government came to power, if it
can be called that, very briefly in 1975, ''riding on the back of the North
Vietnamese Army's tiger; precarious and tentative guests in our own house.'' The
prospect of a separate South Vietnamese republic governed by Southerners melted
as quickly as a Mekong Delta mist before the sun. Communist cadres from the
North quickly elbowed aside most of the non-Communists in the Provisional
Government. Mr. Tang, one of the few who was not, was made Minister of Justice,
but he knew by then it was all a charade.

Fourteen years after he helped launch the ''revolution'' in the jungles,
Minister of Justice Truong Nhu Tang returned home to find his father had died,
his mother terrified by what was happening, his brothers imprisoned or in
jeopardy. His second wife had divorced him and fled to America; his son and
daughter had also fled the country. O N May 15, 1975, he stood on the reviewing
stand for Saigon's tumultuous independence parade, waiting impatiently for the
South's veterans, the Vietcong soldiers, to appear. They finally came, unkempt
and ragtag, trailing after newly uniformed soldiers of the North Vietnamese Army
in colonial-style pith helmets, and the only flag they carried was red with the
single yellow star of the North. The North Vietnamese functionary standing next
to Mr. Tang said, ''The Army has already been unified.'' Now not even the
charade remained. Instead of the program of ''reconciliation'' that had been a
central promise of the Provisional Government and its Northern mentors,
Southerners who had ever associated with the South Vietnamese army or any of its
succession of regimes, with the Americans or wartime business interests, were
rounded up and sent to ''re-education camps.'' Some were told to bring clothing
and food for 10 days, some for 30 days. More than 300,000 were swept away in the
first year. Days, weeks, months, years passed before many returned. According to
Mr. Tang and to other sources, many still have not.

By 1977, Mr. Tang saw no glimmer in the few tatters that were left of his dream.
''They were the conquerors,'' he said of the North, ''and we were the
vanquished.'' After a year of preparation, he and a large band of Saigonese
jammed into a small river boat, made their way to sea, survived an attack by
pirates and reached exile. Today he lives in Paris, where 40 years ago he first
discovered the seeds of independence. He now wonders whether, after they had
been ''injected into the founding of a new nation'' by revolutionaries like
himself, these seeds ''will yet bear fruit.'' He doubtless will not live long
enough to know.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 9, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

Because of erroneous information supplied by the publisher, a review May 26 of
Truong Nhu Tang's ''Vietcong Memoir'' misidentified a co-author. David Chanoff
is a freelance writer who has taught in Harvard University's summer school
program.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tuong Nhu Tang

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Rituals of Memory

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 366 words


Coming up to this Memorial Day, Americans have already done their share of
remembering and misremembering, but the observances of victory in Europe and
failure in Vietnam are not the end of it. Still ahead lie the 40th anniversaries
of the atomic bombing and surrender of Japan, and the 35th anniversary of the
start of the Korean War. The memories of war are relentless, and for good
reason: America has waged war in 42 of its 209 years, not counting endless
battles against Indians and interventions in the Caribbean.

One year of war for every four of peace. That is reason enough to relish a
decade of peace. The respite is a good time to ponder what our rituals of memory
ought to mean.

For older Americans, war was a compelling and unifying experience. For younger
adults, war was mostly hell. Our wars have not been equally just. Our sacrifices
in war have not been equally necessary.

Yet for too long over the last decade too many Americans have confused the
soldier and his mission. Some let resentment against our most recent war turn
into neglect of Vietnam veterans and disrespect for the military. Others have
recently tried to claim the belated tributes to Vietnam's warriors as support
for the war itself. Though we owe our liberty and safety to many veterans of
many wars, we owe to all, above all, gratitude and honesty.

Memorial Day should resonate with this obligation. It began in 1866, as an
undifferentiated tribute to the Civil War dead of North and South. Some say the
annual decoration of war graves started in Waterloo, N.Y. Others say it started
one week earlier in Columbus, Miss. The inspiration for both towns seems to have
been the floral decoration of military graves in Germany, a custom the world
recently observed again at Bitburg.

America's involvement in Bitburg was a travesty because it let sentiment
obliterate history and make reverence the enemy of truth. Yet every military
cemetery does convey a universal message. Each is a monument to the organized
ferocity of men, to their inability to curb their claims upon each other, to
their failure to find peace except by means of war. Memorial Day ought to be for
commemorating warriors, not wars.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FACELESS GUARD AT UNKNOWNS' TOMB

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 26


When Sgt. Larry J. Redmon stands alone in the dark at the head of the tomb,
silently posed on the hill above Washington and the thousands of other graves
arrayed down the slope before him, he thinks only of his duty.

''How can you get scared when your comrades are out there resting in peace?''
asked the sergeant, one of two dozen guards who keep the 24-hour vigil at the
Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Arlington National Cemetery. ''It never leaves
your mind that there's over 190,000 servicemen buried in the cemetery who have
given their lives.''

This Memorial Day, more than 5,000 veterans, dignitaries and tourists are
expected to attend a memorial service in the amphitheater at the tomb, where lie
the remains of the first unknown soldier buried there on Armistice Day in 1921,
as well as the remains of three other unknowns from World War II, the Korean War
and the Vietnam War. The day will be one of pomp and ceremony, with President
Reagan placing a wreath on the tomb, but for the guards, the routine will not
vary. It never does.

As on every other day at the cemetery, each sentry will keep the vigil, stiffly
pacing 21 steps before the unknowns in his 10-pound blue wool uniform,
bayonet-equipped rifle ready, spit-shined black boots clicking as he turns and
catches the sun on sunglasses that hide his eyes. Who Are These Sentinels?  The
tourists will crowd around, cameras snapping.

For those who wonder who these sentinels are, and how they got such stern duty,
the answer is that they are special infantry soldiers who take half-an-hour
shifts in daylight and two-hour shifts at night, whatever the date or weather,
and that they have been specially picked after volunteering and competing for
the job. It is coveted, proud duty, with those chosen practicing endlessly in
front of the mirror in the guard quarters, taking up to four hours daily to
press uniforms and polish rifles and other equipment in preparation for their
tours at the tomb.

Sergeant Redmon, a 23-year-old from Indiana who has been in the Army for four
and a half years, says he sought tomb duty for several reasons. ''Those men out
there died for us,'' he said; ''they died for you, they died for a lot of things
we enjoy. To be able to carry on the vigil and make sure those men get all the
respect and honor that they deserve is the highest honor I can have.''

Tomb guards are drawn from the ranks of the United States Army's Old Guard, the
elite ceremonial unit that performs at various events in the nation's capital.
They have all served at least six months with the Old Guard at Fort Myer, next
to the cemetery, before joining the tomb unit, then must go through another
three or four months before they can ''walk the tomb'' on a regular basis.

Once an official tomb guard, the pressure is still on. Despite weather
conditions or intimidation from unruly junior high school students on field
trips, if a guard drops his rifle, breaks pace or so much as sneezes while on
duty, he can be ordered back to the barracks, in shame.

Fainting Is Unacceptable

To avoid heatstroke in the sweltering weeks of summer, the guards do not eat
during the day and increase their salt intake to retain water. ''Fainting is not
acceptable,'' said Sergeant Redmon, who heads a group of seven tomb guards.

If a tomb guard performs ''honorably'' for nine months, he may be awarded the
prestigious Tomb of the Unknown Soldier Identification Badge. The sterling
silver medal - a relief of the tomb and the words ''Honor Guard'' - is rare,
given to only 286 guards since it was first struck in 1958.

One of those bearing a badge on his blues is 22-year-old Sgt. Carnell I. Nettles
of Baltimore, a guard for almost two years.

'' You're just thinking 21, 21,'' he said, explaing the stylized march before
the tomb.

Patterned on 21-Gun Salute

The walk is patterned after the internationally accepted military symbol of
respect, the 21-gun salute. Taking 21 steps before the tomb, the guard turns 90
degrees, faces the tomb for 21 seconds, turns again and heads back, taking
another 21 steps.

Sergeant Nettles said he was so shy as a boy and bothered by cemeteries that
becoming a tomb guard was a personal challenge.

''Since I've been here I've learned a lot about myself, done a bit of growing
up,'' he said. ''And once I leave here there isn't anything in the world that
will be out of my grasp.''

After about 18 months at the tomb, the guards move on.

''Every job in the Army is important,'' said Sergeant Redmon, who expects to go
overseas. ''But I will probably always feel that this job here is the
ultimate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of soldier keeping watch (NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Rituals of Memory

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 366 words


Coming up to this Memorial Day, Americans have already done their share of
remembering and misremembering, but the observances of victory in Europe and
failure in Vietnam are not the end of it. Still ahead lie the 40th anniversaries
of the atomic bombing and surrender of Japan, and the 35th anniversary of the
start of the Korean War. The memories of war are relentless, and for good
reason: America has waged war in 42 of its 209 years, not counting endless
battles against Indians and interventions in the Caribbean.

One year of war for every four of peace. That is reason enough to relish a
decade of peace. The respite is a good time to ponder what our rituals of memory
ought to mean.

For older Americans, war was a compelling and unifying experience. For younger
adults, war was mostly hell. Our wars have not been equally just. Our sacrifices
in war have not been equally necessary.

Yet for too long over the last decade too many Americans have confused the
soldier and his mission. Some let resentment against our most recent war turn
into neglect of Vietnam veterans and disrespect for the military. Others have
recently tried to claim the belated tributes to Vietnam's warriors as support
for the war itself. Though we owe our liberty and safety to many veterans of
many wars, we owe to all, above all, gratitude and honesty.

Memorial Day should resonate with this obligation. It began in 1866, as an
undifferentiated tribute to the Civil War dead of North and South. Some say the
annual decoration of war graves started in Waterloo, N.Y. Others say it started
one week earlier in Columbus, Miss. The inspiration for both towns seems to have
been the floral decoration of military graves in Germany, a custom the world
recently observed again at Bitburg.

America's involvement in Bitburg was a travesty because it let sentiment
obliterate history and make reverence the enemy of truth. Yet every military
cemetery does convey a universal message. Each is a monument to the organized
ferocity of men, to their inability to curb their claims upon each other, to
their failure to find peace except by means of war. Memorial Day ought to be for
commemorating warriors, not wars.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 28, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
HARD MILITARY CHOICES

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 779 words


Memorial Day, when we pay tribute to the Americans who died in the Civil War and
on the battlefields of Cuba, the Philippines, Europe, Siberia, the Pacific,
Korea, Vietnam, Lebanon and Grenada, is a good time to think about the vitally
important debate on the 1986 military budget. The costly Reagan buildup will be
slowed, but how and by how much?

That buildup has focused primarily on new weapons and hardware - not all of it
necessary or effective - rather than on the efficiency and readiness of the
armed forces. These facts from the Center for Defense Information in Washington
offer a vivid picture of what has been happening:

* After adjusting for inflation, Congress has approved 95.7 percent of
Administration requests for the military in fiscal years 1981 through 1985.

* In the last six years, beginning in the Carter Administration, the military
budget more than doubled; weapons procurement has nearly tripled from the $35.3
billion Congress approved in 1980, making spending for new weapons the
fastest-growing element in the Federal budget, outstripping even the growth in
debt service.

* The cost of preparing for nuclear war with the Soviet Union - even under
President Reagan's sensible dictum that such a war can not be won and must never
be fought - has grown from $29.8 billion in 1980 to the $77.5 billion he
requested for 1986; and by his estimates, the costs of United States nuclear
war-fighting forces will total $400 billion to $500 billion between now and
1990.

* For eight major weapons systems - the MX missile and the Trident II, the
Pershing 2 and the Midgetman ballistic missiles, sea- and ground-launched cruise
missiles, the B-1B bomber and Mr. Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative - costs
have expanded from $1.2 billion in 1980 to a requested $20 billion in 1986.

* Navy shipbuilding costs have expanded from $8.6 billion in 1980 to $11.6
billion in 1985, with $25.1 billion more projected for 1986 and 1987.

To keep these figures in perspective, it is necessary to understand what the
Center for Defense Information calls the ''funding wedge'' pattern. That is,
''costs are relatively small in the beginning while weapons are in the early
stage of development, but climb very rapidly once production begins.'' So when
Congress approved a number of new weapons systems requested by Mr. Reagan in
1981 and 1982, it let itself and the taxpayers in for greatly increased spending
three to eight years later.

Once begun, moreover, even as fiscal and international circumstances change, the
momentum of weapons development programs makes them hard to stop, or even slow -
witness the many lives of the MX missile, even though it has no secure basing
mode and no real mission. Not only is Congress reluctant to cut off a new weapon
and sacrifice the huge sums already spent on it, but most such weapons develop
powerful constituencies in the Pentagon and among military contractors and
defense workers in numerous states and Congressional districts. Partially for
these reasons, the Pentagon, when proposing new weapons, often underestimates
their long-term costs. C.D.I. figures show that on average during the 1970's,
''weapons price estimates grew 50 percent between development and actual
production.'' Similarly, the General Accounting Office estimates that if average
historical trends continue, the Pentagon's 1984-1988 military spending will be
at least $173 billion higher than originally estimated.

These realities suggest that what the Pentagon spends taxpayers' money for is as
important as how much it spends. The C.D.I. notes that last year Congress cut
Mr. Reagan's military requests by $20.5 billion but took no big ''funding
wedges'' permanently out of the budget. It is easier to cut personnel costs and
appropriations for routine items like spare parts and ammunition than it is to
eliminate big tickets - the useless MX program ($10.4 billion already spent) or
the faulty Sergeant York Air Defense Gun ($2.4 billion already spent).

The C.D.I. estimates that $12.6 billion could be saved in 1986 alone by
canceling or slowing these and other questionable procurement programs.

But it recommends increasing Administration proposals by $1 billion to eliminate
a proposed civilian personnel pay cut, and by $600 million to expand Army
ammunition stocks.

The pending Congressional budget resolution, setting only the Pentagon's overall
spending limit, is a vital first step. If restrictive enough, it might even
force the Armed Services and Appropriations Committees, later this year, to make
hard decisions to cancel expensive, unnecessary weapons and hardware and focus
instead on military effectiveness.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 28, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A TASTE OF LAZY SUMMERTIME FOR HOLIDAY CROWDS

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 672 words


All winter long, Bernard Mendez dreamed of a day like yesterday: a warm, sunny
holiday he could while away at the beach with friends.

''I can't think of a better way to start the summer,'' said Mr. Mendez, a
21-year-old student at Queensborough Community College, as he surveyed the scene
at Coney Island. ''The beach is my second home, and it's looking even better
this year than last.''

Countless others shared Mr. Mendez's delight yesterday, as the combination of
the long Memorial Day weekend and temperatures in the high 80's sent hundreds of
thousands of people flocking to beaches, parks and picnic grounds around the New
York metropolitan area.

The day's official high of 86 degrees at Central Park at 4 P.M. fell short of
the record of 96, set in 1880. But that made the weather all the better for
softball games, cycling, kite flying, sunbathing, backyard barbecues and the
other summertime activities that Memorial Day traditionally brings with it. Much
cooler air was moving into the region last night.

Paying Tribute

The day was also one of somber remembrance and the commemoration of sacrifice.

Veterans carrying flags and battle streamers marched in parades throughout New
York, New Jersey and Connecticut in honor of the war dead, and others took part
in memorial services at churches and cemeteries.

At the Vietnam War Memorial in lower Manhattan, couples with small children in
tow read the inscriptions and posed for photographs.

Nearby, Vietnam veterans, some wearing medals or other service insignia, stood
silently or in small clusters, talking quietly among themselves.

Alvin Cook of the Bronx, who served as an electrician in Da Nang, Vietnam, in
1971 and on the aircraft carrier Midway, was one of them. ''I'm here to pay
tribute to those we left behind,'' he said.

At midday, Walter and Catherine Eckes of East 75th Street in Manhattan, were
there wearing buttons that read ''M.I.A. - missing or prisoners?'' For them,
they said, the occasion summoned up mixed emotions.

''Our son came home from the war, but our nephew didn't,'' said Mr. Eckes,
showing a photograph of the nephew, Roy Butts. ''He was killed when his jeep
blew up.''

A woman offered sympathy. ''At least they're not forgotten, right?'' she said.

Ceremony on the Intrepid

Afterward, the Eckes went uptown and joined other invited guests for a ceremony
aboard the Intrepid Sea-Air Space Museum. After a concert by the 26th Army Band,
a wreath honoring America's war dead was tossed into the Hudson River.

At Coney Island, the chief attraction was a display of precision flying by the
Navy's Blue Angels. The widely advertised show helped draw a huge crowd that
created a huge traffic jam and brought a bonanza to the operators of food stalls
and carnival rides.

''This is the biggest Memorial Day weekend crowd we have had in several
decades,'' said Milton Berger, a spokesman for the Coney Island Chamber of
Commerce. Surveying a Boardwalk that was jammed for its two-and-a-half-mile
length, he estimated the crowd at two million.

Barbecue and Sunshine

Harrison Ballard, 33, a computer systems analyst who lives in Queens, was there
with his wife, Sheila, and their sons, William, 5, and Julian, 8 months. They
were strolling the boardwalk, taking in the sun as they waited for the Blue
Angels' performance to begin.

''Afterwards we'll go home, invite anybody in the neighborhood who's around to
come over and have some barbecue with us,'' said Mr. Ballard. ''We've got ribs,
hamburgers, chicken and hot dogs, all ready to go.''

Nearby, residents of the 1000 block of Shore Parkway decided to enjoy a barbecue
with the air show. Their picnic table, on a common lawn, was loaded with
cheeses, delicatessen meats and pastries, as the residents waited for a
neighbor, Peter Cosenza, to finish grilling hot dogs and hamburgers.

''It's a little relaxation for all of us,'' said William Neilson, sitting in a
lawn chair and watching the six Navy jets overhead. ''It's a quiet way to
celebrate the holiday.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of people enjoying the day

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 29, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN POLICY: LOT OF TABLE THUMPING GOING ON

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 28


Representative John McCain of Arizona has been negotiating with some fellow
Republicans over a formula for providing aid to the insurgent forces in
Nicaragua. As Mr. McCain tells the story, one lawmaker agreed to support
nonmilitary aid to the rebels, including trucks, but he was worried about how
''trucks'' would be defined in the bill.

''Now we're at the point of really micromanaging foreign policy,'' said Mr.
McCain, a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. ''We're defining
whether trucks are humanitarian or nonhumanitarian aid.''

It is just this sort of intervention by members of Congress that prompted
President Reagan to erupt last week in a meeting with Republican leaders over
Nicaraguan policy. According to those leaders, Mr. Reagan pounded the table as
he said, ''We have got to get where we can run a foreign policy without a
committee of 535 telling us what we can do.''

Familiar Words

Mr. Reagan's words were familiar; at some point, most Presidents find cause to
complain about foreign policy directives emanating from Capitol Hill. But
Congress's determination to reshape and restrict foreign policy seems to be
growing.

Congress has already turned down the President's request for $14 million in aid
to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras. Next week it is scheduled to take up
the issue again and is likely to place tight limits on any aid approved. Right
behind that will come legislation to limit United States investment in South
Africa and a foreign aid bill that includes dozens of policy prescriptions.

''I have sympathy for the President,'' said Representative McCain, who is
running for the Senate next year, ''but that's the real world we're living in,
and the White House needs to show more understanding. The President doesn't have
to deal with 535 members, but there are certainly 75 of them around here he does
have to deal with.''

Some say this trend toward Congressional activism is damaging the Administration
and its policies.

''I think he's right on target,'' Representative Dick Cheney, a Wyoming
Republican, said of the President. ''We tend to nitpick on foreign policy, and
that should be the President's role. He's got to put up with every member of
Congress with a Xerox machine and a credit card running around the world cutting
deals with heads of state.''

But a more common view on Capitol Hill is that Mr. Reagan does not fully
appreciate the balance of powers ordained by the Constitution.

''It's a messy process, and I can understand the frustration of the executive
branch, but that's the system of government we've got,'' said Senator Jeff
Bingaman, Democrat of New Mexico.

Congress's rising foreign policy role has caused many embassies here to focus
more attention on Capitol Hill. The Japanese, for instance, have been vigorously
lobbying against bills aimed at forcing them to open their markets to American
goods. The Turks have hired a public relations concern to spruce up their image
and make their case for more aid.

''Ambassadors today have become lobbyists, that's one of their roles,'' said
Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, ranking Democrat on the Foreign
Affairs Committee. ''I have so many requests from ambassadors, asking to come in
and talk, that I can't meet them all.''

Heads of state are also regular visitors to Capitol Hill, and last week
President Jose Napoleon Duarte of El Salvador spent more time in the halls of
Congress than did some Senators.

''When I first came to Washington,'' Mr. Hamilton said, ''a head of government
would visit the President, the Secretary of State, the World Bank, and go home.
Today, it's rare for a head of state to come to Washington without meeting
members of Congress.''

Lawmakers in both parties agree that the trend began with Vietnam and the
pervasive belief that Congress had been duped by President Johnson into
supporting the war. In debates on Central America, lawmakers insist repeatedly
that they want to avoid another Gulf of Tonkin resolution, the act that Mr.
Johnson frequently used to justify deepening involvement in Southeast Asia.

'Don't Want to Be Embarrassed'

''Members of Congress don't want to be embarrassed later by votes cast in the
dark,'' said Representative George Miller, a California Democrat. ''The Gulf of
Tonkin resolution was a major event in the history of Congress. I don't know
anybody who would cast that vote again.''

Mr. Hamilton said, ''Many of us in this institution were heavily criticized
during Vietnam for not playing a larger role in foreign policy, and that's had
an impact on Congress.'' And Mr. Cheney added, ''The most important
consideration in Congress is to limit Presidential authority, out of fear that
someone will abuse it the way that Nixon and Johnson did.''

Representative C. W. Bill Young, a Florida Republican, says some Democrats have
made foreign policy ''a political issue'' in recent years. In addition, he says,
they have been victimized by the Soviet Union and its allies, who have
deliberately tried to spread ''disinformation'' and manipulate United States
politicians.

But critics of the Administration contend that Mr. Reagan has accelerated
Congressional activism in Central America by failing to articulate a coherent
policy toward the region.

''Congress only gets involved when it perceives the President is not following a
wise policy,'' said Senator Christopher J. Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat. ''When
there's a consensus behind the President, you don't find Congress getting
involved.''

''The President has to make a stronger case for the action he's taking,'' added
Senator Mark Andrews, a North Dakota Republican. ''He can't get the country
behind his position on the contras unless his position is clearly outlined.''

Mr. Miller asserted that Congress had been ''blindsided'' by several disclosures
on United States policy in Latin America. ''Sometimes, what we do frustates the
President,'' he said, ''and sometimes what the President does frustrates us.
There's a lot of table thumping up here, too.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of House Foreign Affairs Committee

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 29, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REPORT SAYS U.S. MUST ALLOW PRESS IN WAR ZONE

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words


The presence of journalists in war zones where American forces are fighting is
essential - ''not a luxury, but a necessity'' - according to a report issued
yesterday on the relationship between the military and news organizations.

The responsibility for making policy decisions on press access and censorship in
military actions should rest with the President and his civilian advisers, not
with the military, asserted the report, issued by a nonpartisan research
organization.

The report, ''Battle Lines: Report of the Twentieth Century Fund Task Force on
the Military and the Media,'' also described a ''culture gap'' that threatens to
turn the adversary relationship between journalists and the military into
hostility that would be damaging to both.

Young journalists and young military officers, with little sympathy or in-depth
knowledge of the other's calling, view each other with increasing suspicion, the
report concluded, and such a trend could be dangerous for the nation.

A 13-Member Task Force

No representatives of Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger have seen the
report yet, according to Edward N. Costikyan, a lawyer based in New York and
chairman of the 13-member task force.

The task force consisted of former military and Government officials, scholars
and journalists, and heard presentations from military officials, journalists
and others. The Twentieth Century Fund, a nonprofit and nonpartisan research
foundation in New York, has done similar reports on other public policy issues.

The creation of the task force was prompted by the exclusion of news
organizations from covering the early stages of the United States invasion of
Grenada in October 1983, according to Mr. Costikyan.

The decision to exclude news organizations was made by military authorities
after they had been given authority over press access by Mr. Weinberger.
Military officials said they based their decision on security concerns.

From before World War II until the Grenada invasion, setting information policy
in a war zone had been considered a civilian decision, rather than a military
one, according to the report.

'Tacit Agreement' Until Grenada

''There was tacit agreement between the military and the media that the
President, in his role as Commander in Chief, and his civilian subordinates
assumed responsibility for media policy,'' the report stated.

The report called on ''the President and his civilian deputies'' to assume
responsibility for policy decisions on press access and censorship, a
responsibility that the report found had not been clearly re-established since
the Grenada invasion. Should the President and his deputies fail to do so, the
report said, Congress should ''exert its influence to guarantee a speedy
restoration of the historic understanding between the military and the media.''

''The Secretary of Defense has taken the welcome step of assembling his own
advisory group of veteran journalists,'' the report said, ''but he has yet to
give unequivocal support to the notion that information policy is a civilian
responsibility and not one that can be delegated, as it was during the Grenada
invasion, to military commanders.''

Fullest Possible Access

The report noted that the panel on press-military relations known as the Sidle
commission after its chairman, Winant Sidle, a retired major general of the
Army, was instituted by the military, not the Secretary of Defense.

The Sidle panel, whose findings were commended by the report issued yesterday,
was formed after an outpouring of press complaints following the Grenada
invasion. It recommended that the press be given the fullest possible access to
military operations.

The recommendation was endorsed by Mr. Weinberger when the report was made
public last August, but Mr. Weinberger said military security would remain the
paramount consideration in guidelines for news coverage.

The Twentieth Century Fund report said that ''no valid security reason existed
for excluding all reporters'' from the Grenada invasion, and it recommended a
policy of voluntary guidelines for reporting military actions, with ''procedural
details to be left to commanders in the field.''

The report said the presence of journalists in war zones had resulted in few
security violations in World War II, the Korean War or the Vietnam War.

A Post-Vietnam 'Culture Gap'

But the legacy of Vietnam has helped to create a dangerous ''culture gap''
between journalists and military officials, the report found. The gap is most
pronounced, it said, among younger journalists and officers who increasingly
view each other with hostility born of a lack of understanding and experience.

The task force concluded that while an adversary relationship between the press
and the military was healthy, an antagonistic one was not.

The report noted that unlike previous generations of journalists, many younger
journalists today have no military experience. Many came of age in the 1960's
and early 70's when the military was unpopular on campuses.

While most military officers view the press with some antagonism, the report
asserted, many older officers have had personal experiences with individual
journalists in the field that have tempered their suspicion with understanding.
Younger officers have often had no such personal experience with journalists,
the report added, and have been influenced by ''powerful myths'' that news
organizations were responsible for military defeat in Vietnam.

A copy of the report may be obtained for $10 from the Twentieth Century Fund, 41
East 70th Street, New York, N.Y. 10021.

The members of the task force were: EDWARD N. COSTIKYAN, chairman, partner in
law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison and author of ''Behind
Closed Doors: Politics in the Public Interest.''

PETER BRAESTRUP, editor of The Wilson

Quarterly. CHARLES CORDDRY, defense correspondent for The Baltimore Sun.

SHELBY FOOTE, author of ''The Civil

War: A Narrative.'' EDWARD M. FOUHY, executive producer for NBC News. JERRY W.
FRIEDHEIM, executive vice president of the American Newspaper Publishers'
Association.

ROSWELL L. GILPATRIC, lawyer with

Cravath, Swaine & Moore and Deputy Secretary of Defense from 1961 to 1964.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT, national correspondent for ''The MacNeil-Lehrer
Newshour.'' SAMUEL P. HUNTINGTON, Eaton Professor of the Science of Government
and director of the Center for International Affairs at Harvard University.
ROBERT J. MURRAY, director of national security programs at the John F. Kennedy
School of Government at Harvard University and former Under Secretary of the
Navy. COL. HARRY G. SUMMERS JR., holder of the Gen. Douglas MacArthur Chair of
Military Research at the Army War College. CRAIG R. WHITNEY, assistant managing
editor of The New York Times. ADM. ELMO R. ZUMWALT JR., president of Admiral
Zumwalt and Associates Inc., a consulting firm, and Chief of Naval Operations
and member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from 1970 to 1974.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 29, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE RULES ON ALLOCATION OF THE AGENT ORANGE FUND

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. FRIED

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 848 words


A Federal judge ruled yesterday that $150 million of a $200 million fund for
Vietnam veterans claiming harm from Agent Orange should be given to the totally
disabled and to the families of those who have died.

In his long-awaited ruling on the issue yesterday, Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein
of Federal District Court in Brooklyn said the money should be used to establish
a ''payment program to individual veterans and family members.''

A fund of $180 million was established last year by the manufacturers of Agent
Orange to settle a class-action suit brought by Vietnam veterans and their
families. With interest, the fund has grown to about $200 million and is
expected to grow to well above that.

How to distribute the money among the 245,000 Vietnam veterans and their
relatives who have claimed a share of the money has been a major issue. $3,400
Death Benefit Judge Weinstein estimated that under his ruling, the death
benefits, which are to be paid in a lump sum, would average $1,800, with a
$3,400 maximum, and would go to 18,000 families during the 10-year payment
program.

He said the total-disability payments would average $5,700, with a $12,800
maximum, and would go to an estimated 31,000 veterans. The disability payments
would be made in annual installments. Neither payment would be taxable.

No direct payments would be made to those who claim injury from Agent Orange
exposure but not total disability. But the judge ordered that $45 million be
used to establish a foundation to finance services for all veterans and their
families who contend they were injured by Agent Orange, which American troops in
Vietnam used to defoliate jungle and roadside areas.

According to the judge, the foundation's programs could include aid to families
''coping with birth defects'' that veterans attribute to their own exposure to
Agent Orange, as well as referral services to for treatment of the various
illnesses attributed to exposure to Agent Orange. These include cancer and liver
ailments in the veterans, miscarriages by their wives and birth defects in their
children.

The seven chemical companies that agreed last year to create the fund said they
continued to believe that Agent Orange was not responsible for such harm. The
companies, including Dow Chemical and Monsanto, say they settled, among other
reasons, to avoid years of continued litigation.

Judge Weinstein himself said yesterday, as he had before, that ''no substantial
scientific evidence supports a finding of causal connection between Agent Orange
exposure and any specific disease except chloracne,'' a severe skin ailment that
can leave large scars.

This view is one of the reasons, he said, that he was ''limiting the program to
death and total-disability benefits without requiring proof of a specific
disease or a causal connection.'' A totally disabled Vietnam veteran or a dead
veteran's family need show only that the veteran was exposed to Agent Orange in
or near Vietnam, and that the death or disability was not ''predominantly caused
by trauma,'' such as an accident.

Another reason for the limiting payments to death and total disability, the
judge said, is that ''the settlement fund, though large in absolute terms, is
not sufficient to satisfy the claimed losses.''

Last January, in another ruling, the judge awarded attorneys' fees and expenses
totaling $9.3 million from the fund to more than 80 lawyers and law firms for
having represented the veterans and their relatives. This was considerably less
than the $40 million or more the lawyers were thought to have requested.

The judge said that no payments would be made until appeals of the settlement
had been decided, ''and the last of them probably will not be decided until
1986.'' These appeals are being brought by veterans who contend the settlement
is inadequate.

Even if the settlement is upheld, it is conceivable that such a court could
overturn the judge's plan for distributing the money, said Kenneth R. Feinberg,
a Washington lawyer whom the judge appointed to help implement the settlement.
Mr. Feinberg's report serve as the basis for yesterday's ruling.

Judge Weinstein also ordered that about $4 million of the fund be made available
''to be administered separately for the benefit'' of members of the Australian
and New Zealand armed forces who served in Vietnam.

Initial reaction to the 174-page distribution ruling appeared to be divided.

''We are absolutely elated,'' said Frank McCarthy, president of Vietnam Veterans
Agent Orange Victims Inc., based in Stamford, Conn. ''It's the first time in the
seven-year history of the Agent Orange issue that something has been established
that is credible and provides direct help for the victims.''

''I'm sure we will have many objections to it,'' said Gene Locks, a lawyer from
Philadelphia who was part of the team that managed the veterans' suit leading to
the settlement fund. He said that he had not yet seen the ruling, but that ''any
plan based solely on disability or death without taking into account any
causative aspects is inappropriate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 29, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 861 words


WEDNESDAY, MAY 29, 1985



International

Palestinian forces counterattacked from a besieged refugee settlement in Beirut,
killing 20 Shiite Moslem militiamen and Lebanese Army soldiers and wounding 62
people, according to the authorities. The Palestinians emerged from underground
tunnels and briefly recaptured a seven-story building in the 10th day of
fighting around the three refugee settlements. [Page A1, Columns 1-2.]

Beirut gunmen seized an American, David Jacobsen, the director of the American
University of Beirut medical center. He is the sixth United States citizen being
held by kidnappers in Lebanon. [A12:3-4.]

A new Pentagon nuclear war plan being devised calls for integrating offensive
nuclear forces with the Administration's planned antimissile shield, according
to United States and Canadian officials. [A8:1-4.]

National

President Reagan urged Americans to back the transformation of an
''un-American'' income tax system into one that is ''clear, simple and fair for
all.'' Opening his drive for overhauling the Federal tax code, Mr. Reagan
declared that his plan would ''reduce the tax burdens of the working people of
this country'' and halt ''the special interest raids of the few.'' [A1:3-6.]

Most families would pay lower taxes under President Reagan's tax revision plan.
About one in five taxpayers would pay higher Federal income taxes. The winners
would generally be those in the lowest income groups and upper-income taxpayers
whose income is chiefly derived from salaries, interest and capital gains. The
losers would generally be taxpayers who make substantial use of itemized
deductions, including individuals who invest heavily in tax shelters and who
live in high-tax states, particularly New York. [A1:3.]

Democrats generally voiced support for most of President Reagan's tax
restructuring proposals. Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House
Ways and Means Committee, called the plan ''a starting point'' that the
Democrats would seek to revise ''to make it fairer.'' [A19:1-2.]

Medicare payments were set too high for hospitals this year and must be frozen
next year to correct the 6.1 percent error, the Reagan Administration has
concluded. [A1:4-6.]

Alexandra Isles testified that Claus von Bulow had told her he spent most of
Dec. 27, 1979 watching his wealthy wife, Martha, slip deeper onto coma, but then
decided ''he couldn't go through with it'' and called a doctor. It was the first
time Mrs. Isles said publicly what her former lover had told her about the
events of that day, one of two dates on which he is accused of trying to kill
his wife with an overdose of insulin. [A1:1.]

A father-son spy team ''badly hurt'' United States security, according to
Patrick J. Leahy, the ranking Democrat on the Senate intelligence committee. He
spoke in an interview as the Government indicted John A. Walker, a retired Navy
communications officer, and his son, Michael, a seaman, on charges of spying for
the Soviet Union. [B10:1.]

The Navy communications specialist charged with spying for Moscow, John A.
Walker, projected the image of a gadget-loving, politically ultra-conservative
detective who romanticized undercover assignments that often went awry.
[B10:3-6.]

The police arrested 200 Christians in demonstrations outside the White House,
the Soviet Embassy and other major buildings in Washington. The activists
arrested were among more than 1,000 people protesting on a range of issues,
including nuclear arms, war in Central America and the death penalty. [B10:2-5.]

Eight accused high school vigilantes resorted to violence in a misguided effort
to rid a Fort Worth school of crime and drugs, according to the police. The
eight youths, mostly honor students and athletes who belong to a group called
the Legion of Doom, were charged by a grand jury with 33 counts of violence
against other students. [A14:1.]

Lawyers may use printed advertising to seek clients for specific cases, the
Supreme Court ruled. The 5-to-3 decision was the most expansive in an eight-year
series of Supreme Court rulings on the constitutional right of lawyers to
advertise. [A15:1-4.]

Metropolitan

The bulk of an Agent Orange fund should go to Vietnam veterans who are totally
disabled or to the families of those who have died, a Federal District judge
ruled. A $180 million fund was established last year by manufacturers of the
herbicide to settle a class-action lawsuit brought by 245,000 Vietnam veterans
and their families. [B3:5-6.]

Eight abused children have died of abuse or neglect in New York City since
January, according to Eric B. Brettschneider, the new chief of the Koch
administration's child-protection agency. He provided statistics to show that
slightly fewer children were dying of abuse this year than last year. [B1:6.]

Despite an increase in assaults, the number of crimes reported in New York City
declined 5.8 percent in the first three months of this year, compared with the
same period last year, the Police Department said. The crime statistics have
dropped each year since 1981. [B4:1.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Henry L. Miller, 66, Produced Voice of America Programs

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 191 words


Henry L. Miller, who produced, directed and announced radio programs in the Far
East for the Voice of America, died of cancer May 22 at his home in McLean, Va.
He was 66 years old.

Mr. Miller worked for the United States Information Agency from 1947, when it
was still called the Office of War Information, until 1977.

He started his career with U.S.I.A. as a special events producer and announcer
for the Voice of America in New York and his work producing radio shows and
advising developing countries on how to start radio stations took him to Hong
Kong, Manila, Laos, Liberia, and Vietnam. He also headed Voice of America's
worldwide English section and organized its foreign correspondents' center in
Washington.

He was born in Lafayette, Ind., and graduated from Purdue University with a
Bachelor of Science in 1940. During World War II, he held the rank of major in
the psychological warfare branch in the Office of War Information.

He is survived by his wife, Anne; his daughters Sarah Pease of Carmel Valley,
Calif., Jenny Garmendia of Santa Ana, Calif., a foster daughter, Rosemary Lee of
Hong Kong, and seven grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
SYLVESTER STALLONE'S HIT FORMULA

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1260 words


THE trailer for Sylvester Stallone's ''Rocky IV'' begins with a shot of Soviet
feet.

Then the camera pans slowly up the torso of a sweating, gleaming Soviet boxer,
who sneers that he is ''going to bury your Rocky Balboa.'' In the background, we
see a hammer and sickle against a red background. On the soundtrack, we hear
horns tooting Bill Conti's familiar ''Rocky'' score.

The theater showing this trailer also had cards available at the concession
stand, advertising a poster book for Mr. Stallone's ''Rambo.'' For $3.50, you
can order a volume containing ''12 Giant Posters!'' It bears the legend
''Stallone: This Time He's Fighting For All of Us.''

Contrary to what he may think, Mr. Stallone is not making anyone sleep easier,
unless it's the executives at Tri-Star (''Rambo: First Blood Part II'' opened at
a record-breaking 2,074 theaters and had the third-largest opening gross in
movie history -$32,548,262 in its first six days). He is, however, driving
audiences wild. ''Rambo'' is the biggest crowd-participation movie in a long
while. Audiences really scream when Mr. Stallone's John Rambo is tortured. They
cheer and cheer when he embarks on his revenge.

With ''Rambo,'' which has been very energetically directed by George P.
Cosmatos, Mr. Stallone has made a sweeping action movie of the sort that has all
but gone out of style. The close-ups are enormous; the noise and music are
relentless; the star's he-man posturing really fills the screen. The film's
politics are primitive, with Rambo seen single-handedly evening the score of the
Vietnam War.

But its adventure sequences bespeak a certain sophistication. Mr. Stallone,
clearly the author of his films regardless of whether he actually directs them,
knows enough about the now dated wide-screen adventure film to have imitated its
conventions skillfully. The rippling muscles, the gigantic angry profiles in
two-shots, the torture scenes in which Rambo is shocked with enough electricity
to make the lights dim - all is familiar in a highly effective way.

Why then must Mr. Stallone re-fight our wars, when he could just as effectively
be playing Hercules? The conventions of ''Rambo,'' for all the plot's supposed
topicality, could apply as well to a Biblical epic or a western. And Mr.
Stallone, on the evidence of this new film, might be just as successful without
carrying such weighty burdens on his well-oiled shoulders. It would be a shame
if Rocky boxed himself into a corner.

In the '70s, relations between the sexes was the subject Hollywood approached
most uneasily; now it's money. ''Brewster's Millions'' is the latest film to
advocate the idea that money isn't everything while still allowing its hero to
end up filthy rich. ''Arthur'' and ''Trading Places'' were also comedies about
wayward millionaires, and also ended by letting their characters laugh all the
way to the bank.

At the moment, films about less-than-affluent characters are definitely in the
minority, unless their setting is rural and picturesque. And among the urban
well-off, it's only the Yuppie (as played by Stephen Collins in ''Brewster's
Millions,'' or Boyd Gaines in ''The Sure Thing'') who can comfortably be made a
figure of fun. Prosperity is so thoroughly taken for granted that Brian De
Palma, in ''Scarface,'' had to give Al Pacino's gangster a house with red
brocade wallpaper and four fountains in the entrance hall to make the point that
he was too rich. Anything less, presumably, might have been mistaken for the
norm.

''Beverly Hills Cop'' had the temerity to send its hero back to Detroit in his
sweatshirt, and that looks in retrospect like a wise maneuver. In addition to
paving the way for a sequel, it also leaves the joke intact. Mr. Murphy's
detective, after a brief adventure in a high-priced setting, is more likable for
retaining his original values. It's hard for an audience to accept the
spectacle, as in ''Brewster's Millions,'' of a hero being compromised by his
sudden good fortune.

''Do you have 'Frankenstein?'' the customer asked. ''We have ''Young
Frankenstein,' '' said the clerk at the video store. Meanwhile, across the
aisle, a mother debated the merits of ''Silkwood'' with her teen-age son. She
thought it was a documentary. He thought it was fiction. She thought it starred
Jane Fonda, he thought it starred ''the other one.'' They both agreed, finally,
that Cher was the star and that they didn't want to see it anyhow. At that point
along came another patron, a woman acting on written instructions from her
husband. The only titles that struck his fancy were ''The Woman in Red'' and
''Author, Author,'' and he had warned her not to accept any substitutes.

Confusion reigns at the video store; just visit one if you have any doubts. In
the days before a movie became something that could be brought home in a box,
viewers generally made decisions on the basis of fewer options and a lot more
information. And a trip to the movie theater was a sufficiently ambitious
undertaking to mean one was going for compelling reasons. But video stores,
rather than luring customers on the basis of particular performers or subjects,
mean to invite browsing. So they have made possible the moviegoers' equivalent
of an impulse buy.

Most of the larger video-rental stores stock television and theatrical films
interchangeably. And they throw in other titles that are often completely
unidentifiable. So a film that has failed miserably in a brief theatrical run
can, with the right packaging, have a whole new life on the shelf. And the right
packaging is anything that will catch the eye. The cassette for ''Psycho''
depicts Janet Leigh in a bra and slip, screaming, though anyone familiar with
the film knows she did her real screaming in the shower.

If a film has experienced a name change on its way to videocassette, the package
isn't likely to provide that information; even if it began as a television film,
the packager may be reluctant to emphasize its origins. (The cassette for ''A
Case of Libel,'' which starred Edward Asner and Daniel Travanti and was shown on
Showtime, describes this as ''a feature-length film'' because of its
90-odd-minute running time). And it's not always easy to tell the film you came
in for from one a lot like it. How difficult would it be to confuse ''Terror in
the Aisles,'' a collection of horror-film snippets narrated by Nancy Allen, with
''Coming Soon,'' a collection of Universal trailers hosted by Jamie Lee Curtis?

Even if you're familiar with the films that are available, fathoming the store's
cataloguing system can be a problem. Video Shack on Broadway and 49th Street has
a Religion section including Biblical epics, made-for-video theological tracts
and ''I Confess,'' the Hitchcock film in which Montgomery Clift wears a clerical
collar. At Tower Video earlier this week, a copy of Bo Derek's ''Bolero''
somehow had been filed in the Drama section.

In the short run, there are no major, immediate risks to renting a stinker; if
you don't like a movie, you can take it back and find another. But the kind of
indiscriminate movie choices that home video encourages don't bode well.
Audiences are gradually being conditioned to weigh a film's merits more
casually, and to lose patience if the first 15 minutes aren't sufficiently
strong. Distributors are discovering that almost anything can be foisted upon
the viewers at home. And those still intrepid enough to make it to the theaters
may find that the movie there isn't even truly devised for the wide screen. It
may only be passing through.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sylvester Stallone

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NAVY RELIEVES 3 OF DUTY OVER $659 ASHTRAYS

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 30


Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger announced today that three Navy officers,
including an admiral with 33 years of service, were being relieved of their
duties because a supply depot under their command paid the Grumman Aerospace
Corporation $659 for each of seven airplane ashtrays.

The Secretary's announcement, at a news conference here, was the latest move in
his campaign to repair the Pentagon's reputation for diligence in dealing with
its suppliers.

Mr. Weinberger said that in future cases of overpricing or fraud it ''is going
to be standard practice'' at the Pentagon to discharge or transfer ''anyone who
is responsible for permitting this to happen.''

The Navy identified the three officers as Rear Adm. Thomas J. Cassidy Jr.,
commander of fighter and early warning aircraft for the Pacific fleet; Capt.
Gary E. Hakanson, commander of the Naval Air Station at Miramar, Calif., and
Comdr. Jerry L. Fronabarger, a Miramar supply officer.

Two Officers Intend to Retire

A Navy official said Admiral Cassidy, who has 33 years of service, and Capt.
Hakanson, a 26-year veteran, recently submitted requests to retire this summer.
The Navy said no decision had been made on where the other officer would be
transferred.

A spokesman at the air station, Lieut. John Semcken, said the three men were not
available for comment. He said Admiral Cassidy and Captain Hakanson, pilots
decorated for combat in Vietnam, were ''two of the best fighter pilots the Navy
has.''

A Navy official said the men were informed of the action minutes before Mr.
Weinberger's news conference.

Navy officials said they believed it was the first time anyone of an admiral's
rank had been removed as a result of a procurement controversy.

Four hours after Mr. Weinberger ended his news conference, the Navy issued a
statement tonight saying the three men had been relieved of their duties ''as a
result of irregularities'' in spare parts purchasing at the Miramar station and
for ignoring a contract review last September that pointed to the
irregularities.

The statement said the decision to remove the men had been made by Navy
Secretary John F. Lehman Jr. and approved by Mr. Weinberger.

A Navy spokesman said ''a full investigation'' of the episode was under way but
refused to comment on what would happen if it found the three innocent.

Several Navy officers said bitterly that the Defense Secretary had been extreme
in making an example of the men. ''The Department needed some sacrificial
lambs,'' said one, who spoke on the condition he not be named.

Navy officials said removal of an officer before completion of an investigation
was an extraordinary step. For example, Admiral Joseph Metcalf was not suspended
from his duties while being investigated for smuggling Soviet automatic rifles
back from the invasion of Grenada, and the captain of the aircraft carrier Coral
Sea has kept his command while the Navy investigates his vessel's
multimillion-dollar collision.

In the news conference, his first since Congress voted to freeze the military
budget, the Defense Secretary also defended himself against charges by
Congressmen that he had padded his budget to ease the pain of cuts. And he
complained that a House committee's cuts in the budget for the President's
proposed missile defense plan played into the hands of the Soviet Union. He also
declared that three men recently arrested for spying had caused ''a serious
loss'' to national security.

No 'Defeat' on Budget

Mr. Weinberger said he felt no sense of ''personal defeat'' in the agreement
between President Reagan and Congress that has cut nearly $20 billion from the
proposed military budget, but said he regretted that Congress had decided that
reducing the Federal deficit was a higher priority than the military buildup.

He left unanswered a question about whether he intended to remain in office
through the President's second term.

Mr. Weinberger's decision to announce personally the removal of three top Navy
officers indicated his eagerness to prove he has taken the offensive in the
battle against waste.

As he has in the past, the Defense Secretary said he feels the Pentagon's image
has been damaged by stories of overpricing and contractor fraud, while the
military has not gotten credit for uncovering the abuses.

The case of the ashtrays was uncovered last week by an investigator for the
House Government Operations Committee, in a review of spare parts purchasing
records at the Miramar Naval Air Station near San Diego.

Under a spare parts purchasing agreement with Grumman, supply officers had
ordered seven of the $659 ashtrays, a number of $404 socket wrenches and other
items between 1981 and last April.

According to Navy audits and other documents, the Navy's own contract
supervisers had warned that the purchasing agreement, which allowed the air
station to buy small orders by phone without bidding, opened the way to
overpricing. The agreement was cancelled earlier this month.

'Enough Fault to Go Around'

A Grumman spokesman, Joseph Vranich, said the high prices resulted from the
Navy's practice of buying custom-made parts in tiny batches. He said the Navy
had been offered a partial refund, and the company had urged that the military
find other sources for such items in the future.

Mr. Weinberger said today: ''There's enough fault to go around many times over
with that particularly silly transaction.'' He jokingly suggested the Pentagon
would explore using ''old mayonnaise jars'' for ashtrays in the future, or ban
smoking on its planes.

''We are not going to pay $50 or $10 or anything else to dispose of ashes from
used cigarettes,'' he declared.

Mr. Weinberger began his news conference by denying charges that the Pentagon
systematically padded its budget by exaggerating inflation in order to absorb
cuts from Congress more easily.

The charges began when Mr. Weinberger announced earlier this month that the
Pentagon had found $4 billion in savings from lower-than expected inflation
which could be used to cushion cuts in its budget for the fiscal year beginning
Oct. 1.

Mr. Weinberger said today the $4 billion was found in a routine annual
readjustment of budget estimates based on new inflation projections.

The Defense Secretary said that in earlier years, when inflation ran higher than
predicted, Congress did not increase the military budget to compensate for it.

''In budgetary terminology,'' he said,''we had to eat that amount.''

He said the cuts Congress had proposed in the 1986 budget ''can't possibly be
accommodated through accounting changes or some funds that the Pentagon has
supposedly secretly amassed.''

Mr. Weinberger also attacked the House Armed Services Committee for voting to
cut $1.3 billion the President's $3.7 billion request for research on the
missile defense program called the Strategic Defense Initiative.

Mr. Weinberger said the action, which would slow research aimed at inventing
defenses against nuclear missiles, was ''rather consistent with some of the
things that the Soviet negotiators have insisted upon at Geneva.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT U.N., WALTERS HOPES TO AVERT 'LYNCHING' OF U.S.

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 971 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., May 30


The new United States delegate, Lieut. Gen. Vernon A. Walters, says his top
priority will be to increase support for American positions by refusing to
tolerate unfair criticism of the United States, while at the same time paying
attention to developing nations.

''The United Nations has become a place where many countries seek to achieve a
lynching of the United States by resolution,'' the retired general asserted in
an interview this week. ''It is a most shamefully unfair attitude and one that
arouses serious opposition from me.''

As for diplomatic tactics toward the developing nations, he said, ''You can try
to enlighten them to the true motives of the United States; you can show them
how it's to their advantage to vote with us and you can make plain that voting
against us will have some cost in our bilateral relations.''

''Withholding of aid should be considered on a case-by-case basis,'' he said,
''but I would certainly never advocate withholding aid from starving people.''

General Walters, who assumed his new post last week, was reluctant to discuss
how his style would differ from that of his predecessor, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick.
''Obviously, she came from academia and I come from an army background,'' he
said. ''But I think we are entirely on the same wavelength in the defense of the
U.S. and its values and its interests.''

Needs to Learn About Mideast

One area that General Walters said he would have to learn more about is the
Middle East. ''This problem is the biggest single challenge in the world,'' he
said. ''I've sought to avoid it in the past, but I won't be able to avoid it
here.''

Despite what he said was a lifelong belief in the value of talking to one's
foes, General Walters said he would have no dealings with the Palestine
Liberation Organization at the United Nations. ''The fact is,'' he said, ''the
P.L.O. is committed to the destruction of Israel and therefore we cannot deal
with them.''

On the subject of apartheid in South Africa, General Walters called it ''a
doctrine that is abhorrent to every freedom-loving American.''

But how he deals with the matter at the United Nations, he said, will depend
''on how the issue arises.''

General Walters, 68 years old, who visited 108 countries in the past four years
as President Reagan's Ambassador at Large, speaks seven foreign languages, five
of them fluently, and whenever possible intends to speak to colleagues in their
own tongue.

He'll Socialize in the Lounge

Unlike Dr. Kirkpatrick, he said he planned to spend time socializing with
colleagues in the United Nations delegates' lounge. And he said he would attend
as many meetings of the Security Council as he could, and not just when he made
a speech.

''That's what I came here for,'' he said.

General Walters said he was confident that his background as Deputy Director of
Central Intelligence would not hurt his ability to deal with his colleagues.

''I've dealt with some people very hostile to the United States,'' he said. ''It
didn't seem to bother them. After all, they run fairly large intelligence
services of their own.''

Nor, he said, did he believe that the transition from secret diplomacy to one of
the most highly visible diplomatic posts in the world would be difficult.

''I'm not intimidated and I don't have apprehensions,'' he said. ''I'm not a
timid man - nor a modest one.''

''I'd describe myself as a pragmatist tinged with idealism,'' he added.

'Slightly Right of Center'

He said he was ''slightly right of center, not a superpatriot, a believer in the
values of the country,'' and criticized those who characterize him as an ultra
rightist, calling them ''chic liberal.''

''If you're not in that mainstream,'' he said, ''you're an ultrarightist.''

A Roman Catholic, General Walters says he draws inspiration from a paraphrased
version of what is called the serenity prayer: ''Lord, enable me to change the
things I can, the ability to live with the things I can't, but above all, Lord,
give me the wisdom to know the difference, so I don't waste my time beating my
head against a stone wall.''

As for his heroes, ''Jesus Christ stands at the head of the list.'' He also
admires Sir Winston Churchill, Dwight D. Eisenhower and Charles de Gaulle as men
of courage.

He calls President Reagan ''a man who has given the country back a pride of
being American.''

'One of the Noblest Wars'

General Walters said he feels more strongly than ever that the Vietnam War was,
as he wrote in his memoirs, ''one of the noblest and most unselfish wars'' in
American history.

''When American bombs were falling everywhere in Vietnam, when there was
fighting in every village, when all the young men were drafted into the South
Vietnamese Army, there were no boat people,'' he said. ''It took the coming of a
Communist government in Saigon to drive two million people to the sea in open
boats.'' According to the most recent United Nations figures, 555,073 Vietnamese
have fled by boat since 1975. Many others have fled on foot.

He said he remained committed to the use of covert action ''if we use it
effectively.''

He went on: ''The only problem is that it is difficult to use in the United
States. When the Soviet Union lands a tank battalion in El Bluff in Nicaragua,
that's O.K. If we landed a battalion of tanks to support the contras it would be
one of the greatest storms of modern times. There's an inequity here.'' El Bluff
is the port where Soviet bloc ships are reported to have delivered military
equipment.

As the chief delegate to the United Nations, he says he intends to study charges
made by the Senate Intelligence Committee last week that one-fourth of the 800
Soviet employees at the United Nations are spying.

''I hesitate this early in my career to utter a pontification on this,'' he
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lieut. Gen. Vernon Walters (NYT/Jim Wilson)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
An Eloquent Silence

BYLINE: By Deirdre Carmody and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 278 words


It is an island of silences and voices.

The silences belong to those who have come to see the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
They do not speak when they approach the glass-brick wall. Somehow, the tumult
of lower Manhattan does not penetrate this space.

The voices belong to those who served in Vietnam and the people back home who
waited for their return to ''the world.'' Taken mostly from their
correspondence, these words are etched in the wall's green-gray surface.

Other voices have become part of the memorial since its dedication three weeks
ago. They are expressed in the mementos left at the monument - on the granite
shelves that are meant to hold them, on the ground below, or taped to the wall
itself.

''It is a growing reality,'' said Brig. Gen. Peter M. Dawkins, U.S.A, retired,
who has headed the drive to raise money for the memorial and for a jobs program
to help Vietnam veterans.

General Dawkins keeps watch of the wall as he goes to and from his office at
Shearson Lehman Brothers, at 55 Water Street, just north of the memorial plaza.

''One card said, 'We marched in the parade for Mike, Bill and Larry, who
couldn't be here,' '' he recalled.

The general and others came to the wall yesterday to announce that they had
chosen a coalition of private groups, the Vietnam Veterans Leadership Program
and the Private Industry Council, to administer the jobs program under contract
with the city.

After a few brief speeches, the officials departed.

What remained at the wall were a dozen small American flags snapping in the
breeze, sprays and bouquets of flowers, candles, newspaper clippings,
photographs, and, on one shelf, a green beret.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ART: STUDIO MUSEUM IN BLACK ART OF THE 60'S

BYLINE: By MICHAEL BRENSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1435 words


''TRADITION AND CONFLICT: IMAGES OF A TURBULENT DECADE, 1963-1973'' is one of
the most ambitious exhibitions ever mounted by the Studio Museum in Harlem. It
presents the artistic achievements of black artists during a 10-year period from
the March on Washington to the United States' departure from Vietnam. The
exhibition defines the effect of that period on black artists and argues for the
importance of black art that was inspired or given direction by the civil rights
struggle or what is also known as the Black Revolution.

There are 150 works by 55 artists. They include Romare Bearden, Sam Gilliam,
Jacob Lawrence and Faith Ringgold, and photographers such as Gordon Parks,
Robert Sengstacke and Moneta Sleet Jr. There is also a section called ''Antiwar
and Feminism,'' which documents the influence of the black struggle on other
radical movements.

The exhibition is accompanied by a catalogue with essays by Vincent Harding,
Lucy R. Lippard and Mary Schmidt Campbell, the executive director of the museum
and curator of the show. Mrs. Campbell provides an impassioned black political
and social history of the ''turbulent decade'' and places the artists in the
show within social and artistic contexts.

The exhibition - through June 30 -has six sections. The one nearest the
entrance, ''Freedom and Justice for All: Images of the American Flag,'' is one
of the most emphatic. It brings together several images of the flag seen through
the eyes of artists for whom the American Dream was more illusion than reality.
In Ringgold's 1969 painting, ''Flag for the Moon: Die Nigger,'' the stripes of
the flag form the word ''nigger.'' The letters also create a maze in which our
eyes scamper about like trapped rats. There are also images of the flag in the
highly effective photography section, which provides the show with an
indispensable historical texture.

The section called ''Toward an American Myth: Metaphors of the African-American
Experience'' includes other defiant works in which a familiar cultural icon is
attacked or turned upside down. There are several images of a liberated and
radicalized Aunt Jemima. In Joe Overstreet's 1964 ''New Jemima,'' the figure is
still smiling and still on a box, but the box is now larger than life-size, and
she is wielding a gun.

Despite the impressive energy and will in and behind the exhibition, however,
the art cannot support the political, intellectual and artistic weight it has
been asked to bear. The problem is serious. If the exhibition intends to use the
artistic responses of these 10 years as an argument for the stature of these
artists and for the necessity of socially and politically engaged art now, then
we must believe that these responses either contain or generate the kind of
human and artistic insight that is worth following. However sympathetic the
political aims, the art that was produced in direct response to this decade of
social upheaval and change was, on the whole, modest.

There are, nevertheless, a number of strong images - particularly by artists who
were well versed in the language of painting and sculpture. In the collages
Romare Bearden began to do during this decade, black faces and black magic are
brewed together in works that continue to cast a spell. Benny Andrews's angry
and immediate 1968 collage on canvas called ''The Champion'' contrasts sharply
with the exhibition's idealized images of Muhammad Ali and Jack Johnson.
Andrews's black fighter is sitting in his corner between rounds, his body
abused. He is literally and figuratively ''on the ropes.''

Nothing in the show is more striking than Mel Edwards's ''Lynch Fragments.''
Mrs. Campbell writes that this series of steel sculptures evolved from stories
about lynchings that Edwards heard as a child in Houston. The sculptures are
small, they hang on the wall like hooks for harnesses or chains, and they bear
the signs of use. They have a strong connection with tribal sculpture. Edwards
has taken something terrible and both fixed it as a reminder of racial violence
and tamed it by assimilating it within the social and artistic fabric of its
victims.

The Studio Museum in Harlem, at 144 West 125th Street, is open Wednesday through
Friday from 10 to 5 and Saturday and Sunday from 1 to 6. Funding for the
exhibition was provided by grants from the Ford Foundation, the National
Endowment for the Arts, the New York State Council on the Arts, the New York
Council for the Humanities and the National Endowment for the Humanities. The
show will travel to Claremont, Cal., Albany and Little Rock, Ark. Also of
interest this week: Mark di Suvero (Oil and Steel Gallery, 157 Chambers Street):
Mark di Suvero is a sculptor who would like his welded steel pieces to do
everything at once. He wants his multi-shaped chunks of hovering, soaring and
jutting steel to be seen - to be esthetic experiences that can be absorbed
visually. Some of the works in this show - which complements the di Suvero
retrospective now at the Storm King Art Center - verge on the two-dimensional
and pictorial.

Di Suvero also wants his partly mobile works to be heard. The actual sounds they
produce depend upon the intensity of their movements. If they are rocked, they
can sound like chimes. If the mobile parts are pushed up and down, they can make
the whole gallery clang and clamor like a steelyard. Like di Suvero's imagery,
the different sounds evoke opposing cultures and worlds - in this case, the age
of bronze, the age of cathedrals and the industrial age of steel.

Di Suvero also wants us to involve ourselves physically in his works. In the
centerpiece of the show, ''A Gain,'' a swing is suspended from the horizontal
beam that presses against the ceiling. We are invited not only to sit on it and
rock back and forth but also to lie down. Just as our sense of di Suvero's work
changes as we move around it and vary the speed of the movements, so does it
change when we are physically part of it. The scale of ''A Gain'' now seems
intimate, and the huge, often menacing sections of steel seem welcoming and
protective for the first time. (Through June 28.) Joel Perlman (Andre Emmerich
Gallery, 41 East 57th Street): Joel Perlman's elegant, sometimes eloquent
abstract steel sculptures come out of David Smith and a broad tradition of
20th-century sculpture, but they have a tone and a pace of their own. They
slowly rise and fall, tumble and plunge through a space that seems almost
liquid. Perlman begins with a feeling for the properties and textures of steel
and ends with an architectural sculpture of the mind where laws of regularity
and gravity do not apply, but where everything, finally, has an order and place.

In ''Square Tilt,'' a 10-foot-high and 8-foot-wide sculpture, a large, open,
square frame stands on one of its corners. Isolated forms hang from or cluster
around parts of the frames's rims. Some objects - which, as Lisa Mintz Messinger
points out in the catalogue, resemble the forms in Russian Suprematist paintings
-lean off the work, push upward or recline on their sides. Everything within
this regular geometric vocabularly seems irregular, and there is movement
suggested in every conceivable direction. But the speed of the movements always
seems the same, and everything is finally suspended in a dynamic equilibrium
that tries to balance not only a wide range of human emotions but also the New
and Old Worlds. (Through June 28.) Peter Drake (Sharpe Gallery, 175 Avenue B and
328 East 11th Street): Peter Drake creates narratives about solitude, cruelty
and frustration. Up to this point, he has worked primarily with ink on paper,
working out his images not only with his pen, but also sometimes with needles
and sandpaper, with which he scratches and scrapes the paper down like wood or
engravings. Drake's intimate involvement with the graphic process makes his
lines, shapes and textures come alive and gives his work the potential for a
strange and disturbing power.

Other aspects of Drake's pictorial language, however, are eclectic. While the
wide angles, the steep perspectives and the contrasts of light and dark suggest
German Expressionism, Drake's typical figure -naked, with a pinhead and long,
almost insectlike arms and legs - suggests Surrealist figures and, above all,
Germaine Richier. In his paintings, Drake is still in the process of searching
for the kind of link with his medium that will give them a personal stamp and
distinguish them from conventional Surrealism. In the meantime, Drake remains an
obsessive and committed artist with an impressive graphic gift. (Through
Sunday.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of ''Whose Burden Are You?''

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ARCHITECTURE: A LOOK AT THE IMPACT OF 12 BUILDINGS

BYLINE: By PAUL GOLDBERGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 28, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1331 words


Architecture exhibitions, even the best of them, tend to have fairly
conventional themes. They show us photographs and drawings and models of
buildings, sometimes organized in terms of the career of a single architect,
sometimes in terms of the architecture of a particular place. But ''The Critical
Edge: Controversy in Recent American Architecture,'' an exhibition that will be
on view through June 18 at the Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum at Rutgers
University in New Brunswick, N.J., takes neither of these standard approaches.
The idea here is to look less at architecture itself than at critical reaction
to it - to look less at buildings as purely esthetic objects than as events
possessing a social impact.

The exhibition presents 12 buildings that ''were the most controversial
buildings in the last 15 years, the buildings people were talking about and the
press was writing about,'' in the words of Tod A. Marder, the professor of art
history at Rutgers who organized the exhibition with Jeffrey Wechsler. We are
shown photographs, models, original drawings and, most important, reactions from
critics and the public to the selected buildings.

To anyone who has paid enough attention to architecture in the last decade to
know that Mies van der Rohe is no longer the latest rage, the subject matter
will seem familiar. The choices are obvious, if no less valid for this: the
A.T.&T. Building by Philip Johnson and John Burgee, the Portland Building by
Michael Graves, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial by Maya Ying Lin, the East
Building of the National Gallery of Art by I. M. Pei, the Gehry House by Frank
O. Gehry, the Bronx Developmental Center by Richard Meier are perhaps the best
known.

The approach is evenhanded, almost to a fault: beside the models and photographs
of each building are text panels containing reactions, both pro and con. While
the show is blessedly free of the rhetoric of the architects themselves, whose
words often cast more shadow than light on an understanding of their work, the
quotes from others are often brief, and there is a sense that many of them are
chosen as much to balance each other as to make a larger point.

What is most fascinating is to compare the reactions to some buildings over
time. The East Building of the National Gallery, for example, may have been the
most acclaimed structure in the United States in the 1970's; it is now admired,
but one hears far more reservations about it, and the comments in the text
panels of the exhibition reflect this. On the other hand, Michael Graves's
Portland Building and Frank Gehry's house were denounced by all but a fairly
small circle of architectural cognoscenti at first, and are now more widely
accepted.

The Vietnam Veterans Memorial is not only accepted, it has also become a virtual
icon in the two years since its completion. But John Portman's Renaissance
Center in Detroit and Wallace K. Harrison's Empire State Plaza at Albany, also
among the included projects, have elicited mainly critical response from the
beginning, and still do. If there is any conclusion we can draw from all this,
it is that the effect of dazzling, large-scale projects tends to pall over time,
while the quality of more subtle works comes to be gradually accepted.

What the exhibition all adds up to, however, is less than its aims. ''The
Critical Edge'' does not quite manage to evaluate architecture criticism or its
impact, or even to tell us quite what it is that has gotten the public so
involved in architecture in the last 10 or 15 years. It does present 12
genuinely important buildings in a thoughtful way, however - and in that it does
more than most architecture exhibitions to make the leap between academic issues
and the concerns of the people who look at buildings every day.

More the old-style kind of exhibition, but considerably fresher in its material,
is ''New Public Architecture: Recent Projects by Fumihiko Maki and Arata
Isozaki,'' which will be on view at the Japan House Gallery, 333 East 47th
Street, through June 30. Mr. Maki and Mr. Isozaki are unquestionably the
pre-eminent architects now practicing in Japan, and this is the first formal
exhibition of their work in New York, although Mr. Isozaki has already completed
one project in the city, the Palladium discotheque on East 14th Street, and is
at work on the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles.

Japanese architecture is coming to have a greater impact on the United States
than it has at any time since the early years of this century. The exhibition
will explain some of the growing fascination with new Japanese architecture in
this country, but by no means all of it. The photographs, drawings and models
project a sense of direct, self-assured and utterly unself-conscious form that
both architects share.

What may be most remarkable about Mr. Maki and Mr. Isozaki, and what
distinguishes them from most of their American colleagues, is the extent to
which they feel no conflict between the forms of history and the forms of
modernism - their work employs both, without anguish. Mr. Isozaki's work has
been more frank in revealing the inspiration of classical form, but both
architects have managed to create architecture that brings simple geometric form
to great eloquence.

One can never understand architecture fully without seeing it, and Mr. Isozaki
in particular seems to understand the failings of the vicarious experience of a
museum exhibition. He has included, as an ironic reminder of how limited the
material is that we are seeing, stacks and stacks of working drawings for one of
his buildings, bound in folios and piled one above the other. He knew, of
course, that the stacks of paper would be a potent work of sculpture in
themselves, and would stand as perhaps the most precise realization of the
Japanese esthetic in the exhibition.

It is striking, in this age of historical revival, to see so determined a
practitioner of modernism as Arthur Erickson, the Vancouver-based architect who
has for some time been Canada's most acclaimed architectural export. Mr.
Erickson occupies a position in Canada that might be considered a mix of the
roles filled by I. M. Pei and Paul Rudolph in the United States - he is awash in
well-to-do corporate and institutional clients, but he pursues his work with a
deeply impressive sense of commitment.

Mr. Erickson's architecture is the subject of a retrospective at the Center for
Inter-American Relations, 680 Park Avenue at 68th Street, where it will remain
on view through June 6. Curiously for an architect whose work is noted for a
certain flashiness, the models here are for the most part understated, even
primitive; some are even like the cardboard models students make. The show is
none the weaker for this; indeed, it is in some ways stronger, for it
demonstrates a devotion to the process of design that is missing in many such
exhibitions.

Mr. Erickson has not flinched from showing us how a design is developed - we see
several versions of many schemes, in drawings, sketches and models. This sense
of process is especially welcome in two New York skyscraper projects, neither of
which was built. They both show the architect trying valiantly to prove his
respect for the contextual demands of building in Manhattan, but his heart does
not appear to have been in it, and version after version lacks the grace of his
better designs.

There is extensive material on the new Canadian Chancery, to be built on
Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, perhaps Mr. Erickson's finest public
building, and on California Plaza, the reflective glass high-rise complex in Los
Angeles that seems, even before its completion, sadly dated. It is hard not to
conclude that Mr. Erickson's real problem is with verticality - all of his best
projects, from the Chancery to the Vancouver Law Courts to the splendid Museum
of Anthropology in Vancouver, are horizontal, low, sprawling buildings set out
more or less alone in the landscape.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of silk screen of building

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Chinese Reported To Fend Off Vietnamese

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 94 words

DATELINE: PEKING, June 1


Chinese border guards repulsed a regiment of Vietnamese soldiers backed by
artillery fire, the official New China News Agency said.

The Vietnamese launched several attacks on the Laoshan area of Yunnan Province,
the report said Friday. It gave no casualty figures and provided no other
details.

Laoshan is a frequent flashpoint in a border conflict that began in 1979 when
China invaded Vietnam to punish it for invading Cambodia. Statements by both
sides cannot be verified because neither side allows independent observers into
the mountainous battle zone.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AT SEASON'S END, THE THEATER LOOKS TO A BRIGHTER TOMORROW

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2924 words


Tonight the Broadway theater community will put on black tie and happy faces for
its annual spring rite of revelry, the nationally broadcast Tony Awards show.
But however much merriment is staged for the benefit of the television cameras,
the gaiety is likely to be as forced as that of the cafe-society party scenes in
Hollywood movies made during the Depression. While the American theater in
general may be entering an artistic boom period - and while the 1984-85 Broadway
season offered more than a few artistic triumphs - the street has been unable to
halt its galloping case of economic blues. Even as some members of the
commercial theater establishment pledged their hearts and purses to worthy
theatrical endeavors, they had to face the fact that, for much of the season,
the only ''new'' Broadway show to cause a public stampede was Yul Brynner in
''The King and I.''

The litany of the season's woes is well known: Attendance is down, box-office
receipts are down, production is down. The number of plays staged on Broadway
this season was the lowest of the century; there were so few musicals that three
Tony Award categories in that field had to be unceremoniously scrapped. And,
underlying the statistics, is the widespread fear that the whole notion of a
Broadway theater community may be a nostalgic fantasy. The indigenous,
once-faithful New York audience for Broadway plays seems to be eroding (even as
tourists and special-occasion theatergoers continue to flock to the big
musicals), and, as it does, the showmen who've traditionally mounted those
plays, the independent producers, have become an endangered species.

It's paradoxical, not to mention alarming, that Broadway's decline in attendance
and productivity comes when the quality of serious plays is up. The American
theater has no shortage of artists, and some of them were represented on
Broadway this season. Tonight's Tony nominees for Best Play - William M.
Hoffman's ''As Is,'' Neil Simon's ''Biloxi Blues,'' David Rabe's ''Hurlyburly,''
August Wilson's ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom'' - may each have their particular
partisans and detractors, but they all represent major efforts by gifted
American playwrights. While it is a commonplace to blame Broadway's faltering
attendance on a faltering American theater, the best plays tell another story:
Our theater may be becoming healthier in inverse relation to Broadway's decline.

That health is most visible, as usual, at theatrical institutions Off Broadway
and around the country. To be sure, not all institutional theater work is
first-rate. (Witness the Manhattan Theater Club's largely perfunctory season, or
a Louisville Actors Theater import like ''The Octette Bridge Club''). Yet it's
hardly coincidence that three of the four Best Play nominees - and the only
remotely legitimate Best Musical nominee, ''Big River'' - are the products of
such nonprofit theaters. What's more, those institutional productions which
transfer to Broadway represent only a small fraction of the theatrical vitality
beyond the Times Square neighborhood. When one takes in the full panorama of
American theater of the 1984-85 season, there's encouraging news to be found on
a variety of esthetic (and geographical) fronts.

In playwriting, there were several vigorous developments. Both the Circle
Repertory Company's ''As Is'' and the Public Theater's ''Normal Heart'' (by
Larry Kramer) - two very different and complementary treatments of the AIDS
crisis - demonstrated that our writers can respond with urgent theatricality to
public issues that are usually fodder for television's movie-of-the-week
assembly line. At Playwrights Horizons, another, adventurous style of writing is
reaching maturation: Peter Parnell's ''Romance Language'' and Keith Reddin's
''Life and Limb'' depart from both realistic and absurdist conventions as they
radically reexamine the iconography of both our official classical culture
(19th-century literature) and ''classic'' pop culture (vintage movies and
situation comedies) to explain the world we live in now.

This was also a season in which some established American playwrights, with
varying success, lit out for new territory: Mr. Rabe, Mr. Simon, Michael Weller
(''The Ballad of Soapy Smith''). Some younger playwriting voices found their
own, firm pitch this year - notably Craig Lucas (with ''Blue Window,'' at the
Production Company), Stephen Metcalfe (''The Incredibly Famous Willy Rivers,''
at the WPA) and Richard Greenberg (''Life Under Water,'' at the increasingly
invaluable Ensemble Studio Theater).

Imaginative young directors were also in profuse supply. If neither Broadway nor
Off Broadway produced a fully satisfying new musical, Des McAnuff (who staged
''Big River'') and Andrew Cadiff (of ''Three Guys Naked From the Waist Down'')
have the talent to help fill that void, provided that the theater can develop
more new librettists and songwriters at their high level of inventiveness. Two
other young director-actors, Gary Sinise and John Malkovich of Chicago's
Steppenwolf Company, sustained the expectations they raised in New York with
their 1982 production of ''True West.'' In Mr. Malkovich's staging of Lanford
Wilson's ''Balm in Gilead'' and Mr. Sinise's of Lyle Kessler's ''Orphans,'' one
finds a tumultuous new brand of American acting that bridges rock-and-roll and
theatrical performance. Though obviously not applicable to all plays, the
kinetic Steppenwolf style could well prove as influential in this Sam Shepard
era as the Method was in its day.

The theater along the post-modernist frontier was also active this year. While I
found more literal-mindedness than inspiration in such pieces as Martha Clarke's
''Garden of Earthly Delights'' and Ping Chong's ''Nosferatu,'' I was haunted by
nothing so much all season as the three-hour fragment of Robert Wilson's
marathon epic, ''The Civil Wars,'' presented at the American Repertory Theater
in Cambridge, Mass. In this work - or at least this one excerpt from it - the
hallucinatory images and choreographic manipulation of actors produced an
intensely dramatic statement about the horrors and twisted cultural roots of
war; to see this piece shortly after the revival of ''Einstein on the Beach'' at
the Brooklyn Academy of Music was to realize how much Mr. Wilson has grown in a
decade. ''The Civil Wars,'' which has been performed piecemeal throughout the
world, was to have been presented in toto at last summer's Olympic Arts Festival
in Los Angeles, but that plan was abandoned when financing fell through. One
only hopes that someone will figure out how to pick up the pieces in New York
sometime soon.

''The Civil Wars'' won't happen on Broadway, needless to say - and neither would
a ''Romance Language'' or ''Balm in Gilead.'' The stakes are just too high for
the commercial theater to risk underwriting such flamboyant theatrical visions.
Such is Broadway's state that three of the Tony-nominated best plays are
currently struggling to survive - a fate that has also afflicted such acclaimed
1984-85 revivals as ''Joe Egg'' and ''Strange Interlude.'' Even the Royal
Shakespeare Company's ''Much Ado About Nothing'' and ''Cyrano de Bergerac'' had
a few lean weeks of half-full houses during their limited run this season; one
could also argue that such hits of the previous season as ''The Real Thing,''
''Noises Off'' and ''Glengarry Glen Ross,'' all now departed, might have lasted
longer in a balmier Broadway climate.

Is this attrition in attendance a cyclical phenomenon - or does it reflect a
seismic shift that will ultimately drain Broadway of all theatergoers except
those seeking spectacles and other light entertainments? The question is as yet
unanswerable, but it is not inconceivable that, come Labor Day, there will be
only three or four plays performing alongside Broadway's long-running musicals,
and that all or most of those plays will be by Mr. Simon.

There are many theories to explain this upsetting situation, but each can be
knocked down as easily as it can be advanced. The ticket-price argument, of
course, is the handiest: The high prices, it's said, have driven away the
serious theatergoer. Certainly the prices have broken the casual theatergoing
habit for far too many; regular theatergoers of the 1950's or 60's are now often
found on the subscriber lists of Off Broadway institutional theaters, if they go
to theater at all.

Yet it's equally arguable that the list price of most theater tickets is a
fiction. Broadway is not immune to the marketplace pressures of supply and
demand. Only three musicals and one play consistently command the official top
dollar (or more, on the black market). Every other Broadway production can be
seen at an Off Broadway price (or less), whether through widely distributed
discount coupons or the tickets sold daily at the half-price booths.
Furthermore, it's possible that the wealthy audience -always a backbone of
Broadway -has fled in numbers matching those of the middle class. If the 1950's
advertising executive in the gray flannel suit spent a night out at the latest
Broadway play, his descendants, the Yuppies, may be more likely to spend the
price of two Broadway seats at restaurants in the Upper West Side or TriBeCa.
Not for nothing do those restaurants' interior designs resemble extravagant
stage sets.

Critics are also blamed for Broadway's ills, and yet it was always thus: Now, as
ever, predominantly negative reviews bring a fast demise to Broadway plays. But
if critics really have so much power, how do we explain Broadway's latest
phenomenon? We've now reached the point where a production can flop even with
mostly favorable reviews - unless that production is either a musical, a Simon
play or a platform for movie stars as lustrous as Dustin Hoffman or William
Hurt. And sometimes it takes two stars: ''The Real Thing'' faltered as soon as
Jeremy Irons and Glenn Close left, in spite of having just swept last season's
Tony Awards, and the sell-out crowds did not return even after Mr. Irons did.

The other most persistent theory has it that there have been too many terrible
plays: Once or twice burned, an audience doesn't go back. But this argument
seems specious as well. How many people, aside from drama critics and relatives
of the cast, really do see such turkeys as ''The Loves of Anatol'' or ''The
Three Musketeers''?

Let's not worry about the flops; the crux of Broadway's present stalemate is to
be found its artistic hits. As long as such well received, relatively
conventional works as ''As Is'' or ''Joe Egg'' have to fight to find an audience
once moved uptown, no producer will take a chance on transferring a more
experimental work from an institutional theater. Yet if Broadway cannot afford
to airlift more of the front-line excitement happening in American theaters
beyond its precincts, what plays will it use to make the street an alluring
center of theatrical activity again? To retrieve its audience, especially a
young sophisticated audience, Broadway will have to convince the public that it
is what it was in its heyday: A neighborhood full of occupied theaters, with a
sizable number of those theaters occupied by fresh creations at the forefront of
the art. It's indicative of what's happened that the most widely produced
American playwright of our time, Mr. Shepard, has never even had a play done on
Broadway. (His plays have been performed on national television and even on
London's West End.) It's hard to imagine that the Broadway of the 1940's and
50's, for all its own boulevard entertainments, would have flourished without
the plays of Eugene O'Neill, Tennessee Williams or Arthur Miller.

But who will bring Broadway a Shepard play - or find the new Shepards who might
recharge the street? For the first time in its history, the commercial theater
is now almost entirely bereft of the entrepreneurs who have normally filled that
role. Those entrepreneurs are producers - a producer being defined not merely as
a money-raiser but as someone capable of uncovering worthwhile new scripts and
nurturing them from first draft to opening night. Too many, if not all, of
today's Broadway producers are merely importers - some tasteful, some not. All
they can do is shop at institutional theaters or in London, hoping to find
products that can be transported to and sold in New York. When those theaters
offer plays that, however artistically adventurous, are judged unlikely to
appeal to Broadway's diminishing audience, we end up with a season like this
one, with the lowest production rate of the century. And, to complete the
vicious cycle, the somnambulent production rate then diminishes the audience
further.

It is the absence of creative producers that also partially explains the decline
of stageworthy American musicals. The periodic ''Big River'' (or ''Sunday in the
Park With George'' or ''A Chorus Line'') excepted, musicals cannot be imported
from institutional theaters - because institutional theaters can't afford to
stage them. As a consequence, American musicals are about the only remaining
theatrical works that Broadway still has to manufacture by itself. The steep
decline of Broadway producing expertise can be seen by studying the dim
creations that result. ''Grind'' is a $4-million-plus extravaganza with seven
producers, and yet none of them, apparently, could exercise the leadership
required to accomplish the rudimentary goal of making that musical's complicated
plot coherent to the audience.

''Leader of the Pack,'' another typical production by committee, started with
the huge advantage of all-but-foolproof material - the girl-group rock songs of
the early 60's -and yet the Las Vegas-style show itself manages to strip the
music of the very virtues (innocent sexuality, simplicity, sweetness) that are
responsible for its continued popularity. Maybe Broadway's legendary producers
of the past - the David Merricks and Jed Harrises - never won any popularity
contests, but they did, at least, know how to put on shows; they made the most
of the many projects (some good, some not) they chose to mount.

Although Broadway still has a few survivors of that producing era -and a few
promising successors to them - the ranks are too thin to create the new plays
and musicals that will bring the regenerative electricity of fresh creativity
back to Broadway. Such is the commercial theater's cost structure that it's hard
for even the few genuine producers to mount plays in any volume without breaking
the bank. Until those costs are brought down - a task some Broadway minds began
to address this season - more old producing hands will be driven away and
newcomers will be discouraged from arriving.

If anyone needs to remember what Broadway producers once were - and might be
again - he need only look at the most active institutional theater major domos,
of whom the most prominent is Joseph Papp. Part fund-raiser, part promoter and
part showman, Mr. Papp very much fits the profile of the old-time Broadway
producer; working in the less expensive arena of the nonprofit theater, he was
able to assemble the type of season at the Public that Broadway producers
routinely used to mount 40 blocks north. He produced large, elaborate American
plays by significant writers (Mr. Weller's ''Soapy Smith,'' Christopher Durang's
''Marriage of Bette and Boo,'' Albert Innaurato's ''Coming of Age in Soho,'' Mr.
Kramer's ''Normal Heart''); he imported a collective theater piece that, in
spite of its difficult subject (the Vietnam war), proved to be a crowd-pleaser
(''Tracers''); he brought in some conventional London plays (''Virginia,'' ''Tom
and Viv,'' ''Salonika'') as well as a London-fringe political firebomb (''Rat in
the Skull''). He also concocted a cynically commercial musical (the updated ''La
Boheme'') and gave his audience stars (Jessica Tandy, Kate Nelligan, Linda
Ronstadt).

Was every production terrific? Of course not. But every one of them was staged
as skillfully (and lavishly) as the material could warrant, and, in one case
(Mr. Innaurato's play), Mr. Papp even shut down a production in previews so that
the writer could rewrite and recast the entire work to improve it. (How many
active Broadway producers would be capable of exercising that patience and
editorial judgment, even if they could afford to do so?) By Broadway standards,
of course, the Public Theater's season was a failure; not a single show moved
uptown. But Mr. Papp did field nearly a third as many productions as all of
Broadway did - some of them invigorating and all of them involving major
figures, whether writers or actors or directors or designers, in the American
and English theater.

Broadway won't renew itself as a theatrical hub until it again finds such
producers who are able to harness and support our theater's many talents, and
until it makes the economies that both increase production and lower ticket
prices. When that happens, the audience may return, too. Walking into the
Public's lobby any night this season, one found teeming, animated throngs,
pouring into the four or five wildly varied attractions available any given
week. The sense of excitement and activity was so dynamic that it even carried
crowds into the more mediocre or poorly reviewed Public plays. This is exactly
the same kind of engaged theatergoing audience that once converged regularly on
a thriving Broadway - but that, this sad season, will gather in full force only
while dispersed around television sets on Tony Awards night.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of scenes from current Broadway plays

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
RICHARD PRYOR IN SEARCH OF HIS COMIC GENIUS

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1696 words


Watching Richard Pryor as he forces himself to cavort with simulated abandon in
''Brewster's Millions,'' his new comedy directed by Walter Hill, is like
watching the extremely busy shadow of someone who has disappeared. The contours
of the shadow are familiar but the substance is elsewhere. ''Brewster's
Millions'' is another in the series of earnest attempts to tame - to make
genteel - one of the most original, most provocative, most unpredictably comic
personalities to come onto the American scene in the last 20 years.

''Brewster's Millions'' seems to be a particularly half-baked choice of what, in
Hollywood, is known as a ''property,'' certainly as a property for Mr. Pryor.
The novel, written by George Barr McCutcheon (1866-1928), was a best seller when
it was published in 1903 and later, adapted by Winchell Smith and Byron Ongley,
it became the sort of durable play that no high school drama society could have
gotten along without. Probably only Brandon Thomas's ''Charley's Aunt'' has seen
greater service.

The essential gimmick of ''Brewster's Millions,'' as it has survived in the new
screenplay by Herschel Weingrod and Timothy Harris, is this: a man is given 30
days in which to dispose of $30 million, and required to have nothing to show
for all his spending at the end of that time, in order to demonstrate that he
knows, after all, that money isn't everything, thus to be worthy of inheriting a
fortune of $300 million. This, of course, suggests that even if money isn't
everything, it's a great substitute.

''Brewster's Millions'' is the sort of comedy that seems always to sound funnier
than it plays, and it has been played by all sorts of people, from Bebe Daniels
in an adaptation called ''Miss Brewster's Millions'' (1926), to Jack Buchanan in
a 1935 film-musical version, to Dennis O'Keefe (1945) and Jack Watling in a 1961
English film titled ''Three on a Spree.''

In its latest incarnation, Montgomery Brewster (Mr. Pryor) is an over-the-hill
pitcher for a minor league baseball team in Hackensack, N.J. His dream: to pitch
either for or against the New York Yankees. His life is suddenly changed when
his late, white grandfather (Hume Cronyn), seen on a film clip photographed just
before his death, announces the bizarre terms of Monty's inheritance. Not only
must he spend the $30 million in 30 days, but he must keep the reasons for his
unusual behavior a secret from his friends or forfeit the jackpot.

The new screenplay is not great on invention. Monty makes crazy investments and
long-shot bets, all of which pay off handsomely to his deep distress, but mostly
he just spends money loosely, which, as all of us know today, isn't very
difficult, prices being what they are and con-artists being in endless supply.
Among other things, he throws away a fortune during a New York mayoral campaign
to persuade the public to vote for neither of the two wimpish, major-party
candiates, nor for himself, in order to force a new election in which the
important issues will be discussed. He also puts up a bundle of loot to finance
an exhibition game in which his old Hackensack team faces the Yankees.

What the screenplay fails to supply is any real character for Mr. Pryor to play.
His Monty Brewster is not quite a fall guy, nor is he recognizably eccentric, as
is his sidekick, played far more energetically by the rotund John Candy. Monty
Brewster is, to all intents and purposes, a polite straight man, a role, I
suspect, that appeals to Mr. Pryor's sense of dignified self but one that
deprives the rest of us of the remarkable gifts we know he possesses.

Mr. Pryor may not want to play Hamlet, though, as he shows in ''Bustin' Loose''
(1981), in which he befriends a busload of homeless kids, he may aspire to the
all-American lovability now represented by Bill Cosby. Lovability, however,
doesn't come naturally to him. He's an emotional anarchist. Given his age -
early 40's - and looks, he can't play Eddie Murphy, whose extraordinary success
has been made possible, at least in part, by Mr. Pryor's career.

Mr. Murphy, with his squeaky-clean youthfulness and disarming smile, projects
the slyly mischievous, instinctive resiliency of a black Huck Finn for the
homogenized 1980's. Mr. Pryor is something entirely other - a troubled, raging
bear of a man, imprisoned by both a comparatively slight, rather ordinary
physique and an overwhelming desire to succeed in a game you feel he doesn't
really approve of. He can change his face to fit the needs of the most witless
comedy routines he finds himself in, but, if you notice, his eyes remain somehow
removed, almost fixed, as if they are photographing the idiocies of the
situation in which he is being photographed.

It's still too early to tell whether or not the new version of ''Brewster's
Millions'' will be a box-office hit. If the system of rewards and punishments in
this universe worked the way it should, ''Brewster's Millions'' would become
only a moderate success. It's not awful. It's a perfunctory comedy, a
refurbished used car in which this most seriously gifted of contemporary comic
performers revs himself down to the speed of a vehicle that moves at about
one-third of the rate of his intelligence.

Mr. Pryor has appeared in worse comedies, including the joyless ''The Toy''
(1982), a remake of Pierre Richard's not-super 1979 French comedy; the
sentimental ''Bustin' Loose,'' and the manic ''Stir Crazy'' (1980), which,
though foolish, allowed Mr. Pryor to do some wildly comic riffs entirely on his
own. Since each of these films was a box-office bonanza, it's obvious that
quality has nothing to do with the success or failure of his films. Indeed, most
of them, whether good, bad or indifferent, have been such hits that a sarcastic
Billy Wilder was quoted as saying several years ago that Hollywood producers, at
least those who attempt to operate scientifically, use public opinion polls,
analyze the results, put all the data into a computer, and then say, ''Get
Richard Pryor.''

But what, actually, are they getting? According to the evidence to date, they're
buying a brilliantly split public personality.

One side of him is the comparatively straight character actor, who first came to
wide notice as Billie Holiday's faithful, philosophical ''Piano Man'' in ''Lady
Sings the Blues'' and then went on to play variations on that straight man - in
a solemn, socially conscious film like Paul Schrader's ''Blue Collar'' and in
ambitiously satiric films like ''Which Way is Up?,'' a fuzzily conceived remake
of Lina Wertmuller's ''Seduction of Mimi,'' and ''Some Kind of Hero,'' directed
by Michael Pressman and adapted from a novel by James Kirkwood, which is Mr.
Pryor's best narrative film to date.

Though ''Some Kind of Hero'' was not a big hit with the public, the oddball,
comic intensity of the story, about a Candide-like Vietnam vet who refuses to
comprehend the full nastiness of the world around him, utilized his gifts as a
most particular perfomer more than any of his other movies.

The other Richard Pryor - the one who can do no wrong with the public even in
ordinary films like ''Brewster's Millions'' - is the professional funny man of
fairly conventional personality, a popeyed wise guy, given to double takes, a
fellow who suffers all sorts of indignities throughout a movie until his
shrewdness triumphs at the end. It seems clear that Mr. Pryor likes these roles.
He wouldn't mind at all being considered a straight leading man who plays
comedy, rather than as a great comedian.

Unlike the younger superstar, Eddie Murphy, for whom all romantic liaisons
appear to be forbidden (with the exception of the brief encounter that opened
the terrible ''Best Defense''), Mr. Pryor has attained a position that allows
him to express fairly normal sexual and emotional attachments.

Yet something important is missing from both the ''straight'' Richard Pryor of
''Blue Collar'' and ''Some Kind of Hero'' and from the Richard Pryor who stars
in conventional comedies with white co-stars like Gene Wilder (''The Silver
Streak'' and ''Stir Crazy''), Jackie Gleason (''The Toy'') and John Candy
(''Brewster's Millions'').

That missing something is the Richard Pryor we've come to know in his
extraordinary concert films, the stand-up poet of the absurd, whose routines
were once described by my colleague, Mel Gussow, in his review of Mr. Pryor's
performance at Radio City Music Hall in 1982, as ''autobiographical performance
art.''

There have been brief, wonderful glimpses of this Richard Pryor as God in Marty
Feldman's ''In God We Trust,'' as Pharaoh in ''Wholly Moses'' and as Daddy Rich,
the shepherd-in-chief of the Church of Divine Spirituality, in ''Car Wash,'' but
the real, the most fascinating and the most moving Richard Pryor remains the man
we've watched in ''Richard Pryor Live in Concert'' (1979), ''Richard Pryor Live
on the Sunset Strip'' (1982) and ''Richard Pryor Here and Now'' (1983).

It's in these films, in which the star appears on a bare stage, with only a
stool and a hand mike as props, that the peculiar genius of Richard Pryor is
most effortlessly communicated. He can imitate anything - various parts of the
body, including the heart that aggressively attacked him several years ago, as
well as animals, people and inanimate objects. He speaks what can only be called
an oral diary, recalling in hair-raising detail the events of the night he was
almost fatally burned while free-basing cocaine or, another time, when he was
arrested for shooting out the tires on his car. His explanation to the police:
he didn't want his wife, who was threatening to leave him, to drive off in his
automobile.

The personality exposed in these films is as raw as his language. He's also a
man with a black heritage and proud of it. I've no idea if this is the ''real''
Richard Pryor, but the performance is electrifying and the character on stage so
complex that those we see in his narrative films inevitably disappoint. In films
on the order of ''Brewster's Millions,'' he comes as close to being colorless as
it's possible for anyone to be, whether black, white, yellow, red or brown.
That's a wicked waste.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABHORRING A POLICY VACUUM IS CONGRESS'S NATURE

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In recent weeks, it has sometimes seemed that Robert C. McFarlane, the
President's national security adviser, had opened a branch office on Capitol
Hill. Before Congress went home for its Memorial Day recess, Mr. McFarlane was
spending much of his time negotiating with lawmakers over such issues as
deployment of the MX missile, aid to the Nicaraguan rebels and adherence to the
Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty.

When Congress returns to work tomorrow, he will probably be back, searching for
compromises on foreign policy issues that will be high on the legislative
agenda.

Mr. McFarlane's attention to Capitol Hill reflects the growing determination of
many members of Congress to have their say on foreign policy, and the
Administration makes no secret of its increasing irritation with this trend.
President Reagan pounded the table in frustration during a recent meeting with
Republican leaders. Secretary of State George P. Shultz has said that
Congressional reluctance to aid the Nicaraguan insurgents was ''hastening the
day'' when the United States might have to send combat troops to Central
America.

But critics say the activism has been triggered by the Administration's failure
to articulate a coherent set of policies. According to Senator Christopher J.
Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, when there is a policy-making vacuum, ''Congress
has historically moved into that vacuum, to the frustration of the President.''

This week the House and the Senate again take up aid to the Nicaraguan rebels,
known as contras. Originally, Mr. Reagan wanted to provide them with $14 million
in military assistance, but Congressional opposition forced him to retreat and
submit a modified plan limited to nonmilitary aid. Even that proposal was
rejected, but the votes were close. Lawmakers now seem more inclined to approve
some form of ''humanitarian'' help.

There is still no consensus, however, on such important questions as who will
administer the aid and how it can be used. Moreover, Congress remains sharply
divided over a law, due to run out at the end of September, that bars any form
of American military help to the rebels. Democratic leaders have made retention
of the law their top priority.

This debate points up another reason why Congress is flexing its muscles on
foreign policy. The shadow of Vietnam still hangs over Capitol Hill, making
lawmakers wary of White House intentions in Central America. Those suspicions
were aggravated by the mining of Nicaraguan harbors and other paramilitary
actions masterminded by the Central Intelligence Agency.

As a result, said Representative John McCain, an Arizona Republican who was a
prisoner of war in Vietnam, ''there is an inordinate fear in Congress that
another Administration will get us enmeshed in another conflict.''
Representative Dick Cheney, a Wyoming Republican, says: ''There is a great deal
of self-doubt, a lack of national confidence about our role in the world and how
we should wield power.''

Mistrust Over Arms Control

Many Congressmen are mistrustful of Administration intentions on arms control.
As a result, the White House has been forced to accept a compromise that would
limit deployment of the MX missiles to 50, half of the President's original
request. Under the compromise, already adopted by the Senate, only 12 new
missiles could be built next year, and all would have to be used as test
vehicles or spares. When the House takes up the issue later this month, it is
likely to adopt an even stricter amendment limiting deployment to 40 missiles
and omitting all new purchases.

This impulse to restrict weapons production and prod the Administration toward
more intense arms control efforts seems certain to resurface when the Senate
resumes debate on the defense bill. Mr. Reagan has requested about $3 billion
for research on his Strategic Defense Initiative, designed to build a
space-based shield against incoming missiles, but faces a fight over that
figure.

Another fight is expected over Administration compliance with the SALT II
treaty, which runs out at the end of this year. While the United States has
never ratified the pact, Washington and Moscow have agreed to abide by its
provisions, which limit the number of strategic weapons each country can deploy.
When a new American nuclear-powered submarine loaded with missiles starts sea
trials later this year, the United States will exceed those limits. President
Reagan was required by Congress to state his intentions by June 1.

On Friday, the Administration said it was postponing that report by a week.
Congressional leaders said the issue was causing considerable turmoil within the
Administration, and it is just as divisive on Capitol Hill. A group of liberals
is prepared to offer an amendment urging the Administration to stick by the
pact; conservatives are threatening to advance their own resolution, counselling
abandonment of the treaty.

In yet another area where Congress perceives a ''vacuum'' in Administration
policy, the House is likely this week to adopt a bill calling for economic
sanctions against the Government of South Africa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
FAREWELL TO THE JEEP

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 725 words

DATELINE: FIERY RUN, Va.


In the confusion over the President's military budget and tax reform plans, it
has scarcely been noticed that the Pentagon decided the other day to get rid of
the Jeep, and replace it with something called a ''High Mobility Multipurpose
Wheeled Vehicle'' (H.M.M.W.V.) at $25,000 a copy.

This is carrying divorce too far. This country has had a love affair with the
Jeep and Cappy Weinberger had better be careful. It was bad enough for the
Secretary of Defense to discover that his minions were paying $640 for an
airplane toilet seat and $659 for a military ashtray. That could be put down as
an accident. But retiring the Jeep, so named for G.P. or general-purpose
vehicle, is almost like retiring the G.I., or general-issue soldier.

Even in this disposable age of throwaway razors, cigarette lighters, diapers and
marriages, the Jeep is not the sort of thing the military can abandon like the
mule or the bow and arrow. It's the best monument the Pentagon has. And if you
don't believe it, tell it to the Marines.

The American people really don't know what the President should do about the B-l
bomber, the MX missile or ''Star Wars'' in outer space. But they do know what to
do when they get stuck in the mud. They get out or borrow some old Jeep or some
other four-legged machine, even if it's older than themselves, and get out of
the ditch. This is a practical and not a philosophical problem.

For almost 50 years, the Jeep has been an unfailing friend in trouble: simple,
economical and durable. If occasionally it coughs and falters, like most old
characters, all you have to do is kick it in the right places, and if it knows
you're in trouble, the chances are it'll revive and help you out.

There's another thing Cappy Weinberger might want to consider before putting the
Jeep out to pasture, especially now when he's trying to prove that the Pentagon
is everybody's best friend.

The military has never produced anything that pleased or helped the civilian
population more than the Jeep. Ask any farmer or any ''back to nature'' city
slicker, and they'll tell you that they'd never have made it without rural
electricity and some little four-wheeled monster.

I speak from experience. More than 30 years ago, my wife and I bought a little
log cabin and 10 acres out here on the banks of Fiery Run at the headwaters of
the Rappahannock. We struggled for years against the growing grass and
honeysuckle until we were partly liberated by electricity and an old battered
World War II Jeep. Not really liberated, but the old Jeep could dig post holes
and make paths through the jungle that let us wander through the swales and
hills.

Sometimes, to the delight and surprise of our grandchildren, we could get the
Jeep going, and get the grass cut all nice and tidy just when we had to go home.

No doubt the Pentagon needs a better, bigger, more expensive ''High Mobility
Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle'' to get over the potholes on the moon. But Mr.
Weinberger's not likely to get rid of the Jeep. It has become too much a part of
American life for too long. Eisenhower used it as a platform during the invasion
of Normandy. MacArthur used it as a pulpit for his sermons in Korea, and
Westmoreland for his sorties into the jungles of Vietnam.

Not to mention the close encounters of the G.I.'s on the side, and the Jeeps
that led the parade into the liberation of Paris.

The Jeep has a long history that's not likely to be forgotten. The idea of an
all-purpose vehicle that could get through the muddy roads of America began,
among other folk, with John North Willys, an auto salesman from Elmira, N.Y.,
early in the century.

By l941, after a stint as U.S. Ambassador to Poland, he produced the
quarter-ton, go-anywhere vehicle that came to be known as the Jeep, and sold
585,000 of them to the Government in the Second World War.

The Jeep could not have lasted without Government support, but now it has been
fancied up and will probably survive, even if phased out by the Pentagon, by
delivering the mail for the Post Office and children and groceries in the
suburbs.

Unlike most Pentagon types, it won't demand retirement benefits, and when it's
scrapped you can be sure old soldiers will snap up the rejects by the hundreds
of thousands, and fix them up in their backyards long after Cappy Weinberger has
retired to California.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT MEN;
AFTER A BURGLARY

BYLINE: By Albert Scardino; Albert Scardino won a Pulitzer Prize in 1984 for
editorial writing in The Georgia Gazette. He is now an editor of The Week in
Review section of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 74, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words


I HEARD GLASS BREAK, but it didn't wake me enough to crawl out from under the
comforter on the coldest night of the winter. I heard voices, but they were too
remote for me to realize they came from our living room. It wasn't until the
telephone receiver hit the floor in the kitchen that I accepted the idea that
someone I didn't know had found his way in.

It was Christmas Eve, in Savannah, Ga. For weeks I had been working myself into
the spirit of the season -open, warm and generous, especially in my feelings
toward my two children. My 4-year-old son was about to receive his first
bicycle. We had bought the only 10-foot tree on the lot to fill the bay window
of our Victorian house and had hung twin wreaths on the double doors facing one
of the busiest streets in the neighborhood.

By the time I forced myself out from under the covers, I could already hear the
footsteps of the intruder in the hallway. His shadow came down the hall in front
of him, then he turned to look through the doorway of our bedroom. He was skinny
and wore a military jacket and running shoes. My throat was frozen. I grunted at
him, more out of desperation than out of any sense that I could defend us, ''Get
out of here.''

It caught him off guard. He loped back toward the front of the house, not
running so much as withdrawing defiantly. He had a partner in the living room
who had helped him gather all of the Christmas presents in a pile. The two of
them slipped out the window empty-handed, and I started down the hall behind
them, feeling very awkward in my underwear. I stopped and yelled for my wife to
call the police, then dodged up to the front of the house. The cold was pouring
in through the open window. The presents, so full of private joys and personal
expressions, were stacked on a dirty blanket the intruders must have brought
with them.

The police came and went. We began to close up our lives. We barricaded the
window and unplugged the Christmas tree, then retreated to our bedroom to
comfort the children. They finally calmed down enough to return to their own
rooms, and my wife and I sat on our bed reconstructing every detail. Why had she
not heard the glass break, she wondered? How did I pull myself out of my sleep
to respond at all, when she heard nothing until my yell? I told her how my voice
had caught in my throat, how angry it made me that there was no panic on the
intruder's face when he heard me grunt at him, how guilty I felt for letting
someone else into our lives. Because we share so many family responsibilities -
I do most of the cooking, she buys most of the presents - it surprised us both
that the job of facing a robber fell automatically to me.

By then it was 5 o'clock in the morning. My wife heard a noise in the front of
the house. I thought it must have been the wind, but I stepped quietly through
the kitchen to be sure. There they were again, the two of them, slowly forcing
their way back through the same window. In a panic, I dialed the police. I was
describing the clothing of one of them when he heard me and looked up from his
work.

''Get out,'' I grunted again from the dark kitchen. He cursed at me, then
casually, insultingly crawled back out of the window. What would I have used to
defend myself if he had attacked? The phone? A chair? The door? The police
arrived in 30 seconds, but the partners had vanished.

My wife and I drank coffee and talked until dawn. That's when I went to my
father's house and took out the shotgun I had not held since 1968. It would have
been unusual for a boy to grow up in the South 20 years ago without becoming
familiar with guns. We hunted almost every weekend in the fall and winter and
practiced on clay pigeons the rest of the year. But the images from Vietnam and
the suicide of a close friend had made me think there was no longer any need for
a gun in my life. Being 22 and invincible had been sport enough.

Suddenly I wasn't 22 anymore. My life seemed so much more vulnerable and my
family made it seem so much more valuable. I wanted to hold a gun again to make
the sides even. If they knew they no longer had the upper hand, maybe they would
respect my boundary. They had left the second time only because they could not
see how naked I was.

I had no desire for revenge, only for privacy. The next night I sat up with my
gun across my knees, sure that they intended to return and determined not to let
them catch me unprepared again.

HEY NEVER came back, but they really never left. I now hear every sound, a
window rattling, a voice on the sidewalk out front, a whimper from a child's
room. At the slightest disturbance I'm out of bed and searching the drawer of
the bedside table for a shell or two. I know all the statistics about the
likelihood that the gun in my closet will accidentally be used against me rather
than against a robber, and I'm almost ashamed to have given in to the impulse to
keep it around because of two brief encounters.

We built a new latticework fence to block entry to the garden alongside the
house. We decided to plant holly and roses to discourage anyone from getting
close to the windows. Last Christmas, a year later, I bought my 7-year-old
daughter a BB gun, a Daisy; ''Ask Dad, he had one,'' the box reminded me. In
January we began the long course of instruction in the safe use of firearms, a
course my father had started with me at that age.

Earlier this year a career change brought us to New York City, a move that,
strangely enough, helped restore my sense of security. Though only the
statisticians can believe it, New York's crime rate in most categories is no
higher than Savannah's. That fact probably does not comfort me, but moving away
from the scene of the crime did. I am no longer overwhelmed by the urgency to
teach my daughter to defend herself with a gun. When we complete the move away
from Savannah at the end of the school year, I plan to return the shotgun to my
father's attic, but I will continue to teach my daughter how to use one. If she
ever loses her invincibility, I want her to be able to make her own decision
about whether to have a gun around.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MAN WHO LOVED MISERY

BYLINE: By Howard Mandel; Howard Mandel, a New York writer, comments frequently
on music for National Public Radio.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 53, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 769 words


DIVIDED SOUL The Life of Marvin Gaye. By David Ritz. Illustrated. 367 pp. New
York: McGraw-Hill Book Company. $16.95. MARVIN GAYE left his indelible mark on
American popular music and those who listened to it, danced to it and romanced
to it during a 26-year career that ended April 1, 1984 - one day before he was
to turn 45 - when his father shot him dead. Marvin Gay Sr. (young Marvin changed
the spelling of his name) was sentenced in November 1984 to five years'
probation. The father was a self-ordained minister to a strict Pentecostal sect.
Rising from the keyboards and choir of his father's storefront church and from a
doo-wop apprenticeship begun in the school halls and on the street corners of
Washington, Gaye came to represent sexuality incarnate, pure charm, pained
vulnerability and spirituality troubled by the secular world.

From his first hit, ''Stubborn Kind of Fellow'' in 1963, through his duets with
the vocalist Tammi Terrell, his classic ''I Heard It Through the Grapevine'' in
1968, his masterful 1971 album ''What's Going On,'' to his final success, the
aurally erotic ''Sexual Healing,'' in 1982, Gaye's fame and commercial fortunes
peaked irregularly. David Ritz collaborated with the singer on the lyrics of
''Sexual Healing'' and planned an as-told-to memoir that became ''Divided
Soul.'' Mr. Ritz, who was the co-author of Ray Charles's autobiography,
''Brother Ray,'' struggles to explain Gaye's life without exploiting its
sensational aspects or betraying his respect for his subject.

Since birth Gaye suffered his father's rage, jealousy and abuse. The singer
responded to this maltreatment by provoking his father and subsequent authority
figures - including Harvey Fuqua, his voice coach, manager and producer, and
Berry Gordy, the president of Motown Records - into administering the discipline
he associated with parental acceptance and approval. Gaye always played to women
- he was devoted to his mother and married Mr. Gordy's sister Anna - and
considered them his most receptive audience. But once he had won women over,
either on stage or in his per-sonal life, he rejected them as demanding and
demeaning, sometimes punishing them and himself with sadomasochism and
withdrawal.

''Marvin loved misery,'' reports his sister, and Mr. Ritz's evidence, gathered
in two years of interviews with Gaye, his parents, siblings, friends and
business associates, suggests that Gaye brought much of that misery on himself.
Chronically insecure, he heightened his paranoia through habitual use of
marijuana and cocaine. Grandly ambitious, dreaming of becoming the ''black
Sinatra'' whose sophisticated balladry would appeal across generation and race,
Gaye had a terribly difficult time focusing his talents. Though Mr. Ritz and
others say Gaye was personable, ''Divided Soul'' never shows us that side of
him. Writing in a serviceable prose, Mr. Ritz avoids the singer's less palatable
escapades, but seldom moves in close enough to let us feel Gaye's magnetism or
enjoy his humor. And the author's attempts to link Gaye with great Western
figures from W. B. Yeats to Louis Armstrong - not excepting Coleridge, Dante,
Donne, Shelley and Sophocles - are neither convincing nor enlightening.

Yet Gaye had undeniable artistic resources. Inspired by the civil rights
movement, ecological concerns, his brother's return from Vietnam, Tammi
Terrell's lingering, fatal illness and competitive pressures asserted by a new
Motown star, the pre-pubescent Michael Jackson, Gaye in 1971 set aside his
self-absorption to create ''What's Going On,'' a quasi-symphonic sermon that
combined advanced studio technology with compelling urban rhythms and that
stands as one of the major popular musical developments of the 1970's.

We often cling to illusions about our idols, but once they're crushed we insist
on knowing the sleazy details. Mr. Ritz does not pander, though he responsibly
chronicles Gaye's tormented last decade when he was in debt to the Internal
Revenue Service, in and out of love with his second wife, secluded and stoned in
Hawaii, staging his ultimate comeback from self-imposed exile in Belgium. There
is little pleasure in knowing that ''Sexual Healing'' sold three million copies
in the four months following its release. It's all too clear that by then Gaye
was fooling around with guns and intoxicating himself into madness. Finally he
physically attacked his father, virtually triggering his own demise. There is
much more to be gained by returning to the moments in his music during which
Marvin Gaye's perspective seemed balanced, and his soul seemed whole.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Marvin Gaye (David Ghar)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 50, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

          Fiction

1         THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch. (Fawcett,
          $4.95.) A wealthy Welsh family haunted by an
          ominous heritage.

 2        THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam,
          $3.95.) A young man from Brittany sets out to
          free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.

 3        ''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven
          Santmyer. (Berkley, $5.95.) Life in an Ohio
          hamlet, 1868-1932.

 4        TENDER IS THE STORM, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon,
          $3.95.) A New York heiress's passionate encounter
          with an Arizona rancher.

 5        MISSISSIPPI! by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam,
          $3.95.) The ''Wagons West'' series reaches the
          post-Civil War South and New Orleans.

 6        POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $4.50.)
          A woman discovers the truth about her husband
          after he disappears.

 7        ROLE OF HONOR, by John Gardner. (Berkley, $3.95.)
          James Bond leaves Government service to become a
          private spy.

 8        THE MODIGLIANI SCANDAL, by Ken Follett.
          (NAL/Signet, $3.50.) A ''lost masterpiece'' and
          dirty dealings in the international art world.

 9        THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum.
          (Bantam, $4.50.) A lawyer finds himself caught in
          a conspiracy to take over the world.

10        HOOLIGANS, by William Diehl. (Ballantine, $3.95.)
          A Federal racket squad ace finds his old hometown
          in the clutches of the Mafia.

11        RAMBO: First Blood Part II, by David Morrell.
          (Jove, $3.50.) Novelization of the film about a
          Vietnam vet who returns to rescue prisoners of
          war.

12        FLING, by Pamela Beck and Patti Massman. (Dell,
          $3.95). What follows a married woman's impulsive
          affair with a handsome stranger.

13 *      SUMMER HARVEST, by Madge Swindells. (NAL/ Signet,
          $3.95.) One family's life in southern Africa.

14 *      THE WISHSONG OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del
          Rey/Ballantine, $8.95.) The battle against evil
          continues; conclusion of a trilogy.

15        FLOODGATE, by Alistair MacLean. (Fawcett Crest,
          $3.95.) Terrorists threaten to flood the
          Netherlands unless Britain leaves Northern
          Ireland.

          NonfictionQ
          General

 1        THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
          (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.) Psychological and
          spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 2        SON, by Jack Olsen. (Dell, $4.50.) The case of a
          young psychotic rapist at large in Spokane, Wash.

 3        PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Berkley,
          $3.95.) The tell-it-all autobiography of the
          actress.

 4        IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and
          Robert H. Waterman Jr. (Warner, $8.95.) Lessons
          from well-run corporations.

 5        FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.
          (Fawcett Gold Medal, $3.95.) Memoirs.

 6        THE KENNEDYS: DYNASTY AND DISASTER, by John H.
          Davis. (McGraw-Hill, $5.95.) The story of a
          leading Irish-American family from 1848 to 1984.

 7        BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.
          (Pocket, $3.95.) The San Diego third baseman
          tells about his life with the New York Yankees.

          Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1        PENGUIN DREAMS AND STRANGER THINGS, by Berke
          Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoons from
          the syndicated ''Bloom County'' strip.

 2        BRIDE OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson. (Andrews,
          McMeel & Parker, $5.95.) Cartoons.

 3        RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada,
          Mexico. (Rand McNally, $5.95.) For 1985.

 4        EAT TO WIN, by Robert Hass. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.)
          A regimen for sports and fitness activities.

 5 *      THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and
          Spencer Johnson. (Berkley, $6.95.) How to
          increase your productivity.

 6        MORE SNIGLET| .S, by Rich Hall and Friends.
          (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) More words that
          should appear in dictionaries, but don't; with
          cartoons.

 7        GARFIELD MAKES IT BIG, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine,
          $5.95.) Cartoon humor.

 8        GROWING UP CATHOLIC, by Mary Jane Frances
          Cavolina Meara, Jeffrey Allen Joseph Stone,
          Maureen Anne Teresa Kelly and Richard Glen
          Michael Davis. (Doubleday/Dolphin, $4.95.) Humor.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMER READING;
BOOKS FOR VACATION READING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 31, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 5225 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the December 1984
Christmas issue. It only suggests high points in the main fields of reader
interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings. Quoted
comments are from The Book Review.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY & BIOGRAPHY

AUGUST STRINDBERG. By Olof Lagercrantz. Translated by Anselm Hollo. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $25.50.) ''A wonderful biography, worthy of a maddeningly
foolish, wrong and presciently wise writer who was one of the prime inventors of
our theater and our time,'' by a Swedish poet, critic and editor.

THE CHIEF: A Memoir of Fathers and Sons. By Lance Morrow. (Random House,
$16.95.) The relationship between Lance Morrow, a successful journalist, and his
father, Hugh, a top aide to Nelson Rockefeller, is explored with ''clear-eyed
candor and writing skill that reveal both passion and confusion.''

A CLOAK OF LIGHT. By Wright Morris. (Harper & Row, $19.95.) In the third volume
of the novelist's memoirs, ''we see the young man in 1934, returned from Europe,
resuming his college education in California and hurling himself once again into
the never-ending romance of American life.''

DUST TRACKS ON A ROAD: An Autobiography. By Zora Neale Hurston. (University of
Illinois, Cloth, $22.95. Paper, $8.95.) Three chapters have been restored to
this edition of the influential black novelist's 1942 autobiography, marked by
its ''verdant language and twin voices.''

IVY: The Life of I. Compton-Burnett. By Hillary Spurling. (Knopf, $22.95.) Ivy
Compton-Burnett, the reclusive British novelist, died in 1969, and this
''voluminous'' biography is ''intelligent, richly detailed, warm and
sympathetic.''

LOUISE BOGAN: A Portrait. By Elizabeth Frank. (Knopf, $24.95.) A ''thoughtful''
examination of the life and work of Louise Bogan (1897-1970), ''a turbulent
woman whom Auden in the 1940's considered 'the best critic in America' and one
of its best poets.''

ONCE UPON A TIME: A True Story. By Gloria Vanderbilt. (Knopf, $16.95.) A
''series of deft verbal snapshots'' add up to Gloria Vanderbilt's ''immensely
sad autobiography.''

THE PERIODIC TABLE. By Primo Levi. Translated by Raymond Rosenthal. (Schocken,
$16.95.) These reflections on life and society by the Italian writer and chemist
constitute a ''work of healing, of tranquil, even buoyant imagination.''

RANDALL JARRELL'S LETTERS: An Autobiographical and Literary Selection. Edited by
Mary Jarrell with Stuart Wright. (Houghton Mifflin, $29.95.) These letters
''give us the man behind the criticism, behind the poems and the novel 'Pictures
From an Institution.' ''

THE SEVEN MOUNTAINS OF THOMAS MERTON. By Michael Mott. (Houghton Mifflin,
$24.95.) An authorized biography of the influential monk and author written ''in
clear and unpretentious and vigorous prose.''

THE TRUE CONFESSIONS OF AN ALBINO TERRORIST. By Breyten Breytenbach. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) The political and literary memoirs of ''the
pre-eminent living Afrikaans poet,'' who spent seven years in a South African
prison.

T. S. ELIOT: A Life. By Peter Ackroyd. (Simon & Schuster, $24.95.) Given the
fact that Peter Ackroyd was not allowed to quote from the poet's unpublished
works and letters and was limited in what he could quote from Eliot's published
works, this is ''as good a biography as we have any right to expect.''

A VIETCONG MEMOIR. By Truong Nhu Tang, with David Chanoff and Doan Van Toai.
(Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.) This memoir by a ''dedicated nationalist
who was never a Communist but was willing to work with the Communists'' is about
''the death of a dream, a dream of an independent, peaceful and democratic
Vietnam.''

CHILDREN'S BOOKS

BEYOND THE CHOCOLATE WAR. By Robert Cormier. (Knopf, $11.95.) ''Very much a
sequel'' to ''The Chocolate War,'' ''a favorite with teen-age readers,'' this
book takes up the story of events at the Trinity School, where terror reigns.
(Ages 12 and up.) CAT & CANARY. Written and illustrated by Michael Foreman.
(Dial Books/Dutton, $11.95.) This story of a cat's kite-borne adventures high
above New York City is filled with ''charm and excitement.'' (Ages 4 to 8.) COME
SING, JIMMY JO. By Katherine Paterson. (Lodestar/Dutton, $12.95.) ''An engaging
fantasy'' about a boy in a family of country singers and what it might be like
to become famous. (Ages 10 and up.) SARAH, PLAIN AND TALL. By Patricia
MacLachlan. (Charlotte Zolotow/Harper & Row, $10.) ''An exquisite, sometimes
painfully touching little tale of a lonely, widowed late 19th-century prairie
dweller, his two children, and the laconic [woman] from Maine who comes to share
their life.'' (Ages 8 to 10.) CRIME BRIARPATCH. By Ross Thomas. (Simon &
Schuster, $16.95.) In his ''typical suave, sophisticated style,'' ''one of the
best storytellers around'' sends a Government agent to a small Southern city
where a car bomb has killed the agent's sister, a policewoman.

CODA. By Tom Topor. (Scribners, $13.95.) An elderly Jewish woman in New York
insists she has seen her husband, thought dead in a concentration camp. Tom
Topor's grim, action-filled story is the work of ''a good reporter and fine
writer.''

THE DUTCH BLUE ERROR. By William G. Tapply. (Scribners, $12.95.) Brady Coyle,
the Boston lawyer for the very rich, enters the world of philately in a ''smooth
and sophisticated'' mystery that is ''a great deal of fun.''

MR. YESTERDAY. By Elliott Chaze. (Scribners, $12.95.) Two believable Alabamians
- a newspaper editor and a washed-up reporter, Mr. Yesterday - investigate a
murder tied to a nuclear waste dump. This often funny book ''achieves a bang-up
ending.''

SWEET JUSTICE. By Jerry Oster. (Harper & Row, $13.95.) A would-be molester in
New York's subways and a beautiful, unscrupulous television anchor are the first
two victims in ''one of the most brilliant procedurals of the last few years.''

CURRENT AFFAIRS & SOCIAL COMMENT

BLACK BOX: KAL 007 and the Superpowers. By Alexander Dallin. (University of
California, $14.95.) ''Through careful, nonideological analysis of the known
facts,'' the author ''reaches the disturbing conclusion that mechanical or human
error alone almost surely did not cause [Korean Air Lines flight 007] to stray''
over Soviet territory before it was shot down.

BREAKING WITH MOSCOW. By Arkady N. Shevchenko. (Knopf, $18.95.) The
''highest-level Soviet official ever to defect to the West'' offers ''some gems
of history'' as he probes the nature of the Soviet Government and its leaders.

THE CANADIANS. By Andrew H. Malcolm. (Times Books, $17.95.) ''For many
Americans,'' this book by The Times's former Toronto correspondent ''will be a
helpful, timely and tightly packed introduction'' to our northern neighbors.

COAT OF MANY COLORS: Pages From Jewish Life. By Israel Shenker. (Doubleday,
$19.95.) The themes of this ''carefully written book about Jewish survival and
the hope of redemption'' move ''from God and the sacred texts through history .
. . to the Promised land.''

DISTANT NEIGHBORS: A Portrait of the Mexicans. By Alan Riding. (Knopf, $18.95.)
Those ''who wish to understand the 'many Mexicos' of wealth and poverty, of
authoritarianism and democratic experimentation . . . might well begin'' with
this book by a New York Times correspondent.

ECONOMICS IN THE REAL WORLD. By Leonard Silk. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The
economics columnist for The Times is ''very good on the interplay between
politics and economics, on the way rational policy gets worn down by rubbing up
against political rocks and hard places.''

THE EUDAEMONIC PIE. By Thomas A. Bass. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The
compelling story of ''a group of young men and women associated with West Coast
universities'' who, during the 1970's, devised a ''scheme to break the bank in
Las Vegas.''

ILLITERATE AMERICA. By Jonathan Kozol. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A passionate yet
''carefully documented'' examination of the plight of ''60 million illiterate
and semiliterate American adults.''

THE JEWS OF HOPE. By Martin Gilbert. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $15.95.) In 1983
Martin Gilbert traveled in the Soviet Union and collected the personal stories
of Jews who have been refused exit visas.

THE PENTAGON AND THE ART OF WAR: The Question of Military Reform. By Edward N.
Luttwak. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) ''The author, a hawkish advocate of
increased defense spending but nonetheless a severe critic of the military
establishment, makes a very persuasive case for radical and fundamental reform''
of America's military.

WAITING: The Whites of South Africa. By Vincent Crapanzano. (Random House,
$19.95.) This account of the anthropologist author's encounters with white South
Africans in a small country town in 1980-81 is ''insightful into the processes
of deception and self-deception.''

WITH ALL DISRESPECT: More Uncivil Liberties. By Calvin Trillin. (Ticknor &
Fields, $14.95.) A collection of 45 of the author's ''very funny'' satirical
pieces from The Nation and one from Vanity Fair.

ESSAYS & CRITICISM

A BOOK OF ONE'S OWN: People and Their Diaries. By Thomas Mallon. (Ticknor &
Fields, $15.95.) A study of diaries and their authors that ''shuttles back and
forth through the centuries, establishing bonds among all of those solitary
figures at their journals.''

CONVERSATIONS WITH AMERICAN WRITERS. By Charles Ruas. (Knopf, $17.95.) In these
14 interviews, Charles Ruas ''displays the essential qualities of any first-rate
interviewer: a thorough knowledge of, an irrepressible curiosity about, a
profound sympathy for,'' writers and their work.

THE FLOWER AND THE LEAF: A Contemporary Record of American Writing Since 1941.
By Malcolm Cowley. (Viking, $25.) A ''splendid'' collection of literary essays
and reminiscences.

THE FORCE OF POETRY. By Christopher Ricks. (Oxford, $29.95.) ''In this gathering
of essays, the eminent English critic . . . looks at poetry over a considerable
range [and] assures us through clarifying analysis of its power and force in our
lives.''

HABITATIONS OF THE WORD: Essays. By William H. Gass. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.)
The philosopher-novelist William H. Gass's ''large reading and . . . intense,
animated philosophical mind'' are on display in his first collection of essays
in seven years.

HITCHCOCK: Revised Edition. By Francois Truffaut with Helen G. Scott. (Simon &
Schuster, $19.95.) ''With Truffaut's own recent death, re-encountering this
superb book,'' an interview originally published in 1967 and revised to cover
the years up to Hitchcock's death in 1980, ''takes on the aspect of a melancholy
privilege.''

MICROWORLDS: Writings on Science Fiction and Fantasy. By Stanislaw Lem. Edited
by Franz Rottensteiner. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.)
These essays by the Polish novelist, essayist and ''vigorous opponent of science
fiction as currently practiced'' reveal ''a brilliant mind with a hearty
appetite for science, philosophy and literature.''

OCCASIONAL PROSE. By Mary McCarthy. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.)
''Everywhere'' in these essays, reviews and reminiscences of writers and
friends, written during the last 15 years, ''appear bracing opinions tartly
expressed.''

PLAUSIBLE PREJUDICES: Essays on American Writing. By Joseph Epstein, (Norton,
$17.95.) Irreverent essays from such periodicals as Commentary and The New
Criterion contend that ''American literary culture is in bad shape.''

RHYTHM-A-NING: Jazz Tradition and Innovation in the '80s. By Gary Giddins.
(Oxford, $17.95.) These essays by a writer for The Village Voice are marked by
the author's ''graceful prose and the breadth and depth of his critical
understanding.''

FICTION

ANNIE JOHN. By Jamaica Kincaid. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $11.95.) Jamaica
Kincaid ''has packed a lot of valuable insight about the complex relationship
between mothers and daughters into this slender novel of interrelated stories.''

THE BEANS OF EGYPT, MAINE. By Carolyn Chute. (Ticknor & Fields, Cloth, $15.95.
Paper, $7.95.) A ''startling and original'' first novel about an incestuous
family in rural Maine.

BETSEY BROWN. By Ntozake Shange. (St. Martin's, $12.95.) ''More straightforward
and less idiosyncratic than [Ntozake] Shange's first novel, 'Sassafrass, Cypress
& Indigo,' 'Betsey Brown' creates a place that is both new and familiar, where
both black and white readers will feel at home.''

BLACK ROBE. By Brian Moore. (William Abrahams/ Dutton, $15.95.) ''Part adventure
story, part the life of a saint, part parable,'' this novel, ''set in the wilds
of North America in the early 17th century,'' chronicles the rugged journey of
two Frenchmen.

THE CALL. By John Hersey. (Knopf, $19.95.) In the story of ''a farm boy from
upstate New York who . . . undergoes a religious conversion [and] dedicates his
life to the task of winning China for Christ,'' John Hersey ''manages to strike
universal notes.''

THE CIDER HOUSE RULES. By John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) ''By turns witty,
tenderhearted, fervent and scarifying,'' this novel, about a New England
abortionist who runs an orphanage, is ''an example, now rare, of the courage of
imaginative ardor.''

CONTINENTAL DRIFT. By Russell Banks. (Harper & Row, $17.95.) A bleak novel that
''charts, in alternating chapters, the eventually intersecting paths of two
people desperately on the move'' - a young man from New Hampshire and a Haitian
woman.

DAVITA'S HARP. By Chaim Potok. (Knopf, $16.95.) In his ''bravest book,'' Chaim
Potok portrays the lives of Communist Party members and religious Jews during
the 1930's.

DO LORD REMEMBER ME. By Julius Lester. (Holt, $13.95.) The Rev. Joshua Smith,
known to his followers ''as the Singing Evangelist and to one white newspaper
reporter . . . as 'The Colored Billy Graham,' '' examines his life in this
''neatly balanced, well modulated'' novel.

THE ELEVEN MILLION MILE HIGH DANCER. By Carol Hill. (William Abrahams/Holt,
$16.95.) A ''vivid'' fantasy involving ''an astronaut and her cat who, sucked
into the alternative dimension ruled by the principles of quantum physics, save
the earth from destruction and come to know the meaning of love.''

EQUAL DISTANCE. By Brad Leithauser. (Knopf, $17.95.) This first novel about
three Americans in Japan ''is like an update of Hemingway's 'Sun Also Rises' - a
revision of the expatriate theme that incorporates what we've learned in a half
century's pursuit of disillusionment.''

THE FIFTH SON. By Elie Wiesel. (Summit, $15.95.) ''The experience of surviving
the Holocaust falls like a curtain between father and son'' in this novel as the
son ''attempts to break through his father's unmerciful emotional veil.''

THE FINISHING SCHOOL. By Gail Godwin. (Viking, $16.95.) In a ''finely nuanced,
compassionte psychological novel'' about the friendship between an adolescent
girl and a middle-aged woman, the author makes ''a wise contribution to the
literature of growing up.''

FISKADORO. By Denis Johnson. (Knopf, $14.95.) This ''startlingly original book
is an examination of the cataclysmic imagination, a parable of apocalypse that
is always present and pre-cedes redemption in a cycle of death and birth,
forgetting and remembering.''

FLAUBERT'S PARROT. By Julian Barnes. (Knopf, $13.95.) A ''splendid hybrid of a
novel, part biography, part fiction, part literary criticism, the whole carried
off with great brio.''

FORTUNE'S DAUGHTER. By Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $15.95.) ''This novel's great
strength lies in its two heroines, who both find themselves drawn, without
plans, hopes or full understanding, into the inevitably mythological process of
pregnancy and childbirth.''

GLITZ. By Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $14.95.) The adventures of a Miami
policeman in Puerto Rico and Atlantic City come ''to a smashing and satisfying
conclusion.''

HER FIRST AMERICAN. By Lore Segal. (Knopf, $15.95.) ''In her mix of history,
memory and invention, and the ruthless honesty which has always characterized
her work,'' Lore Segal ''shows us ourselves, and reveals herself.''

HOME TRUTHS: Sixteen Stories. By Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $17.95.) These
''powerful stories,'' set mostly in the 1930's and 40's, represent some of the
''best work'' by this Canadian writer, who spends much of her time in Paris.

HOTEL DU LAC. By Anita Brookner. (Pantheon, $13.95.) The author's ''most
absorbing novel'' chronicles a single woman's vacation at a hotel on the shore
of a Swiss lake.

THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS. By Isabel Allende. Translated by Magda Bogin. (Knopf,
$17.95.) ''With this spectacular first novel,'' Isabel Allende becomes ''the
first woman to approach on the same scale as [male Latin American writers] the
tormented patriarchal world of traditional Hispanic society.''

IN CUSTODY. By Anita Desai. (Cornelia & Michael Bessie/ Harper & Row, $16.95.)
''Set in contemporary India and . . . the world of Urdu poetry,'' this novel
''is a deft, sometimes savage, comedy of the mutual appropriation of poet and
disciple.''

THE INNER MAN. By Michael Walser. Translated by Leila Vennewitz. (Holt, $15.95.)
''A foreshortened, slightly caricatured but amply persuasive picture of
post-postwar Germany'' by perhaps ''the one major German-language author least
known in America.''

INSIDE, OUTSIDE. By Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) This ''ambitious''
novel, the author's ninth, ''offers some hearty laughs, much valuable
instruction about the Jewish religion and a nostalgic reminiscence of the
1930's.''

LANARK: A Life in 4 Books. By Alasdair Gray. (Braziller, $20.) First published
in England in 1981, this Scottish writer's first novel is ''a quirky
crypto-Calvinist 'Divine Comedy,' often harsh but never mean.''

LATER THE SAME DAY. By Grace Paley. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $13.95.) The
author's third collection of short stories is marked by ''honesty and
guilelessness'' and an ''artfully intricate prose style full of surprises.''

LINDEN HILLS. By Gloria Naylor. (Ticknor & Fields, $16.95.) In her
''provocative, iconoclastic'' second novel, Gloria Naylor has adapted Dante's
''Inferno'' for ''a tale of lost black souls trapped in the American dream.''

LOVE MEDICINE. By Louise Erdrich. (Holt, $13.95.) A Chippewa family and ''the
enduring verities of loving and surviving'' are the subjects of this first
novel, whose ''truths are revealed in a narrative that is an invigorating
mixture of the comic and the tragic.''

MEN AND ANGELS. By Mary Gordon. (Random House, $16.95.) ''With subtlety and
feeling,'' Mary Gordon contrasts ''a moral life, a religious life, an artistic
life, a family life.'' These are ''at times mutually exclusive ways of being and
of seeing.''

MONEY: A Suicide Note. By Martin Amis. (Viking, $16.95.) John Self, ''a
half-American Brit,'' self-destructs in this comic escapade of ''trans-Atlantic
urban show-biz patter and smart literary patterns.''

MUSEUM PIECES. By Elizabeth Tallent. (Knopf, $14.95.) An ''engrossing and
beautifully expressed'' first novel that examines ''the debris of a marriage''
between an archeologist and a painter.

THE OLD FOREST: And Other Stories. By Peter Taylor. (Dial/Doubleday, $16.95.)
These 14 stories, written during the last 40 years, are mostly concerned with
Southern families; they are narrated in a voice that is ''measured, civilized
and oddly affecting.''

THE ONLY DAUGHTER. By Jessica Anderson. (Viking, $15.95.) Set in Australia, this
''densely populated'' novel of manners ponders greed, love (''parental, filial,
sibling, sexual'') and violence.

REASONS TO LIVE. By Amy Hempel. (Knopf, $11.95.) These ''conspicuously
contemporary'' stories, ''more than half of which have never been published
before,'' exhibit ''a kind of minimalism that robs us of nothing, that has room
for the largest themes.''

SELF-HELP: Stories. By Lorrie Moore. (Knopf, $13.95.) A ''funny, cohesive and
moving'' collection in which the author ''examines the idea that lives can be
improved like golf swings and in so doing finds a distinctive, scalpel-sharp
fictional voice that probes . . . the depths of our fears and yearnings.''

THE SICILIAN. By Mario Puzo. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A ''fine, fast-paced
novel about Sicily in the 1940's'' and the bandit-hero Salvatore Giuliano.

SLOW DANCING. By Elizabeth Benedict. (Knopf, $15.95.) A first novel whose
''strength is in its sympathetic portraits of three well-meaning people more
comfortable in their public roles than in their private lives.''

SMALL WORLD: An Academic Romance. By David Lodge. (Macmillan, $15.95.) ''An
exuberant, marvelously funny . . . tale of professors on the make'' that
''suggests that despite the depredations of critics, the capacity of art to give
pleasure still endures.''

SOLSTICE. By Joyce Carol Oates. (Dutton, $15.95.) This story describing the
friendship between two women by a novelist ''never squeamish about looking into
the dark places of the soul'' will ''dispel a lot of comforting ideas about the
nature of women.''

STANLEY ELKIN'S THE MAGIC KINGDOM. By Stanley Elkin. (Dutton, $16.95.) Seven
British children with fatal diseases visit Walt Disney World, and the author
''strips away the sentimentality and replaces it with an honest look at the
grotesque possibilities we all carry around and prefer not to see.''

THINGS INVISIBLE TO SEE. By Nancy Willard. (Knopf, $14.95.) In her first novel,
Nancy Willard ''transforms reality into something endlessly magical'' as she
''creates a world in which there is a constant interplay between the living and
the dead, between things visible and invisible.''

WHITE NOISE. By Don DeLillo. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $16.95.) A small college
town in the Middle West is threatened by an industrial accident in this ''timely
and frightening'' novel, which ''succeeds so brilliantly'' in documenting
modern-day America's ''epidemic evasiveness and apprehension.''

ZUCKERMAN BOUND: A Trilogy and Epilogue. By Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, Cloth $22.50. Paper, $9.95.) ''The Ghost Writer,'' ''Zuckerman
Unbound,'' ''The Anatomy Lesson,'' plus ''a wild short novel, 'The Prague Orgy,'
which is at once the bleakest and the funniest writing Roth has done'' - all add
up to ''the novelist's finest achievement to date.''

HISTORY

THE ABANDONMENT OF THE JEWS: America and the Holocaust, 1941-1945. By David S.
Wyman. (Pantheon, $19.95.) The author's indictment of America's indifference to
the Holocaust is ''exemplary in its clarity and thoroughness.''

BRIBES. By John T. Noonan Jr. (Macmillan, $29.95.) This history of bribery from
ancient times to the present is also concerned with ''morals, religious doctrine
and literary criticism.''

THE BRITISH EMPIRE IN THE MIDDLE EAST 1945-1951: Arab Nationalism, the United
States, and Postwar Imperialism. By Wm. Roger Louis. (Oxford, $55.) ''Based on a
staggering amount of recently released official and private papers,'' this
''magnificent and comprehensive'' book ''unravels with compelling detail the way
in which the British 'official mind' engaged in [an] imperial and strategic
juggling act, as it sought to preserve national interests.''

EAGLE AGAINST THE SUN: The American War With Japan. By Ronald H. Spector. (Free
Press, $24.95.) Demonstrating ''depth, breadth and careful scholarship,'' this
history is the ''most concise and comprehensive account so far of the Pacific
war from the American point of view.''

EXODUS AND REVOLUTION. By Michael Walzer. (Basic Books, $15.95.) With ''care and
clarity,'' a political philosopher ''makes the case for the story of Exodus as a
continuing metaphor for revolution,'' including America's.

THE FALL OF SAIGON: Scenes From the Sudden End of a Long War. By David Butler.
(Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) ''Imitating the format employed . . . in 'Is Paris
Burning?' '' David Butler ''presents some extraordinary vignettes from what he
aptly describes as the Fellini-like atmosphere'' of South Vietnam as the
Communists took over in 1975.

GERMAN BIG BUSINESS AND THE RISE OF HITLER. By Henry Ashby Turner Jr. (Oxford,
$25.) This ''absorbing'' account of ''the personal and financial links'' between
German business and Nazism argues that ''big-business money was of marginal
importance to the rapidly expanding Hitler movement.''

HEART OF EUROPE: A Short History of Poland. By Norman Davies. (Oxford, $35.) The
author of ''God's Playground: A History of Poland'' has written a work with
''sweep, a rare analytical depth and a courageous display of . . . personal
convictions.''

A HISTORY OF ARCHITECTURE: Settings and Rituals. By Spiro Kostof. (Oxford, $45.)
''A magnificent guided tour through mankind's architecture from prehistoric
caves to the extension of Harvard University's Fogg Museum.''

INVENTING THE DREAM: California Through the Progressive Era. By Kevin Starr.
(Oxford, $19.95.) The second volume of a ''monumental history of California''
tells ''the story of how Americans of many kinds of background . . . found
themselves in the ultimate Garden of the World . . . and then were changed by
the myths they themselves had created.''

LAY BARE THE HEART: An Autobiography of the Civil Rights Movement. By James
Farmer. (Arbor House, $16.95.) The civil rights leader presents a ''candid and
lively'' look at himself and the ''front-line aspects'' of the movement.

THE LOST SOUL OF AMERICAN POLITICS: Virtue, Self-Interest, and the Foundations
of Liberalism. By John Patrick Diggins. (Basic Books, $23.95.) An ''often
searing portrait'' that ''aspires to explain in historical terms the peculiar
amalgam of self-interest and religion, of economic privatism and national
patriotism . . . that marks our own ambiguous era.''

PSYCHOTHERAPY IN THE THIRD REICH: The Goring Institute. By Geoffrey Cocks.
(Oxford, $24.95.) A ''valuable study'' of how psychoanalysis, the ''Jewish
science,'' fared under the Nazis and Hermann Goring's cousin.

SON OF THE MORNING STAR. By Evan S. Connell. (North Point, $20.) This narrative
of Custer's last stand is marked by ''elegant'' prose and ''dry wit.''

THE SOONG DYNASTY. By Sterling Seagrave. (Harper & Row, $22.50.) The lives and
times of Charlie Soong's three sons and three daughters, who ''carved out a
permanent niche in the steamy politics of the Chinese republic in the years from
its founding in 1911 to its fall in 1949.''

THE SPOILS OF TIME: A World History From the Dawn of Civilization Through the
Early Renaissance. By C. V. Wedgwood. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A fair-minded,
''scrupulous'' and ''straightforward account of how men and women moved from
primitive savagery to the comparative sophistication of the Renaissance.''

POETRY

COLLECTED POEMS 1947-1980. By Allen Ginsberg. (Harper & Row, $27.50.) A complete
collection of the poetry of the most celebrated Beat, gathered from the many
small-press volumes and magazines in which they have appeared, with sometimes
extraordinary notes by the poet.

THE LAMPLIT ANSWER. By Gjertrud Schnackenberg. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$12.95.) This poet has an ''intelligent, resonant, sometimes ravishing way with
words,'' and her work ''shines throughout with a luminous craft and a wise
reflective sense of culture and its claims on human feeling.''

PRAYING WRONG: New and Selected Poems 1957-1984. By Peter Davison. (Atheneum,
$18.95.) Twenty new poems plus about three-quarters of those published in past
books are here, ''chosen with a connoisseur's detachment. This will
unquestionably be the Davison volume to own for a long time to come.''

STATION ISLAND. By Seamus Heaney. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $11.95.) ''A book of
poems to be read through rather than dipped into. There is bone and sinew and
song here, and an urgency that grabs you by the sleeve - sometimes by the throat
- and makes your blood race.''

WHAT THE LIGHT WAS LIKE. By Amy Clampitt. (Knopf, $14.95.) ''Astute, moving and
beautiful'' poems by a writer who defies mainstream tastes in favor of almost
baroque profusion and a vocabulary that is ''a festival lexicon.''

SCIENCE & SOCIAL SCIENCE

BRAIN AND PSYCHE: The Biology of the Unconscious. By Jonathan Winson.
(Anchor/Doubleday, $16.95.) ''A compelling and well-written book, intriguing
both for its view of the brain in light of the computer revolution, and for its
attempted revision of certain Freudian notions about the mind.''

CHANCING IT: Why We Take Risks. By Ralph Keyes. (Little, Brown, $15.95.) An
''entertaining writer with a light touch'' divides the risks we take into those
involving physical danger and those involving ''commitment, intimacy and
self-knowledge.''

THE CORRESPONDENCE OF CHARLES DARWIN. Volume One: 1821-1836. Edited by Frederick
Burkhardt and Sydney Smith. (Cambridge, $37.50.) This ''landmark'' volume
''covers Darwin's life from his first letters to his brother Erasmus to his
return from the Beagle voyage.''

HABITS OF THE HEART: Individualism and Commitment in American Life. By Robert N.
Bellah, Richard Madsen, William M. Sullivan, Ann Swidler and Steven M. Tipton.
(University of California, $16.95.) In this ''well-written'' book, the authors
conclude that middle-class Americans ''have largely lost the language they need
to make moral sense out of their private and public lives.'' . . . THE HEAVENS
AND THE EARTH: A Political History of the Space Age. By Walter A. McDougall.
(Basic Books, $25.95.) An ''exhaustively researched, brilliantly conceived and
beautifully written'' account of space exploration by the United States and the
Soviet Union.

THE NEW OUR BODIES, OURSELVES: A Book by and for Women. By the Boston Women's
Health Collective. (Touchstone/ Simon & Schuster, Paper, $12.95.) This revised
and expanded edition of a 1973 work ''remains an excellent source for a woman
evaluating medical care.''

REFLECTIONS ON GENDER AND SCIENCE. By Evelyn Fox Keller. (Yale, $17.95.) In nine
''philosophical'' essays, the author ''analyzes the pervasiveness of gender
ideology, investigates how it became established and how it still shapes the
course of scientific theory and experimentation and speculates what science
might be like if it were gender-free.''

REVOLUTION IN SCIENCE. By I. Bernard Cohen. (Harvard, $25.) A history of
physical science from the 17th century to the present day ''carefully documented
and told in a straightforward, comprehensive style.''

A SCIENTIST AT THE SEASHORE. By James Trefil. (Scribners, $16.95.) A physicist
takes readers on ''a marvelous excursion from the beach to the ends of the solar
system.''

SCIENCE FICTION

BROKEN SYMMETRIES. By Paul Preuss. (Pocket Books, Paper, $3.95.) Set in Hawaii,
this ''lively, intelligent'' novel tells the story of ''an insider in the world
of high-energy, highly competitive and highly expensive particle physics.''

FIRE WATCH. By Connie Willis. (Blue Jay, $14.95.) In her first collection of
stories, the author ''deploys the apparatus of science fiction to illuminate
character and relationships, and her writing is fresh, subtle and deeply
moving.''

HELLICONIA WINTER. By Brian W. Aldiss. (Atheneum, $17.95.) The final volume of
the author's ''masterful trilogy whose theme is nothing less than the
interrelationship of all living (and nonliving) things.''

STARS IN MY POCKET LIKE GRAINS OF SAND. By Samuel R. Delany. (Bantam, $16.95.) A
''challenging and satisfying'' novel about ''a universe of the far future, which
contains more than 6,000 inhabited worlds and a marvelously rich blend of
cultures.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEN WITH RIFLES

BYLINE: By Walter Kendrick; Walter Kendrick teaches English at Fordham
University and is a co-editor of ''The Treasury of English Poetry.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1350 words


THE BARRACKS THIEF By Tobias Wolff. 101 pp. New York: Ecco Press. $12.50. ''HE
said that a barracks thief was the lowest thing there was. A barracks thief had
turned his back on his own kind. He went on like that.'' A first sergeant is
about to retire, after 20 years of faithful service, and his final Army days
have been soured by such a tawdry, disgraceful incident. A month or so later,
dressed in garish, ill-fitting civilian clothes, the first sergeant (he has no
other name) drives away from his last post without a word or a wave. ''There
goes a true soldier,'' remarks a pompous second lieutenant whom the enlisted men
usually ignore. This time, however, Philip Bishop listens: ''the lieutenant
meant what he said, and I thought he was right.''

The first sergeant's dismay is a peripheral matter in ''The Bar-racks Thief,''
Tobias Wolff's short, incisive first novel, which last month won the
PEN/Faulkner Award for fiction. Most of our attention is focused on Bishop and
his friends Hubbard and Lewis, airborne trainees at Fort Bragg, N.C., in the
summer of 1967. But it is typical of Mr. Wolff's command of eloquent detail
that, though we are told next to nothing about the first sergeant, a few
sentences serve to delineate his proud past, sad present and uncertain future.
The mood is typical, too: neither the first sergeant nor the lieutenant, nor
even Bishop himself, is a particularly likable character, yet they all are
portrayed with clear-eyed generosity.

Bishop plays a minor role in the events that give ''The Barracks Thief'' its
title, but the novel is principally his story; it begins with a sketch of his
frustrated, empty childhood and ends with his reflections, nearly two decades
later, on what meaning, if any, those events possess. Young Bishop's father has
left home, his mother is near hysteria all the time, and his brother is fast
turning into a stoned dropout; a mortifying encounter with his repentant father
leads Bishop to decide that he has no choice but to join the Marines - which he
cannot manage because the recruiting office is closed when he arrives. So, with
no more forethought than that, he walks up the street and joins the Army
instead. Like Mr. Wolff's other characters, though less disastrously than most,
he lets accident and inadvertence run his life for him.

At Fort Bragg, surrounded by cynical Vietnam returnees who sneer at his
inexperience, Bishop is naturally thrown together with other greenhorns - or
''piglets,'' ''warts'' and ''toads,'' as the first sergeant calls them. The
slow, stumbling process by which Bishop becomes friends with Hubbard and Lewis
is told with remarkable delicacy and convincingness. They are unlovely
creatures, devoid of wit, and Lewis might even be crazy; but they are human, and
Mr. Wolff treats their awkward, vague emotions as fully worthy of respect on
that account. A DECISIVE incident occurs on a sweltering Fourth of July
afternoon, when the three are assigned guard duty at an ammunition dump 30 miles
from the post. A forest fire breaks out nearby, and the local police arrive to
rescue the endangered soldiers. The first sergeant, however, has ordered them to
shoot anyone who comes too near. In the crisis, each reveals himself: ''Back
off,'' Lewis keeps repeating, aiming his rifle at an astonished policeman;
hesitant at first, Hubbard finally sides with Lewis; Bishop, the observer,
remains neutral. Their rescuers flee, and the fire dies out; nothing, after all,
has happened. But bonds have been formed.

Most of ''The Barracks Thief'' is told from Bishop's point of view, but at times
Mr. Wolff's narrative turns more fluid, portraying the thoughts and experiences
of several characters, giving the reader fuller knowledge of the course of
events than any participant possesses. In less skillful hands, this technique
might have been merely tricky, but Mr. Wolff makes it work to his advantage.

The pathos of these people (it is too muted to be called tragedy) resides in the
way they blunder from one mistake to another, ignorant of their own motives and
blind to consequences. Just as Bishop joins the Army because his father has
embarrassed him, so Lewis becomes a despicable barracks thief because he stings
his hand on nettles at the ammunition dump. The intricate chain of events that
leads to Lewis's disgrace proceeds independently of anyone's will, as if some
vengeful god were forging it. The atmosphere recalls Thomas Hardy, but Hardy is
seldom generous, while Mr. Wolff has boundless tolerance for the stupid sorrow
of ordinary human entanglements.

Exposed, Lewis breaks down, is beaten by his former buddies (excluding Bishop
and Hubbard) and disappears from Bishop's life. Not long thereafter, Hubbard
deserts to Canada, and Bishop loses track of him, too. Seventeen years later,
married and a father, Bishop has become ''a careful man, addicted to comfort,
with an eye for the safe course.'' He would never do anything so foolish as he
and his two friends did one Fourth of July long ago.

Yet the memory endures: ''Three men with rifles,'' he keeps thinking, ''three
crazy paratroopers inside the fence.'' The mere absence of a spark from that
forest fire has produced, by inexorable logic, his current placid state; but he
might - just might - have gone out with a bang: ''They'd have heard the blast
clear to Fort Bragg. They'd have seen the sky turn yellow and red and felt the
earth shake. It would have been something.''

Mr. Wolff does not editorialize. We are left to make up our own minds whether it
is better to die spectacularly or to dribble on for decades in safe
conventionality. The world of ''The Barracks Thief'' contains no answers, even
when - and this is rare - its inhabitants gain enough perspective to pose
coherent questions. It is a bleak place, short on joy and very long on
undeserved suffering; when happiness briefly flares up, redoubled misery quickly
quenches it.

Mr. Wolff's grim vision is relieved only by the simple fact that he grants his
characters the dignity of telling their story -without hope, perhaps, but also
without apology or complaint. And there are splendid moments, like the night of
July 4, 1967, when three crazy paratroopers, too elated for sleep, sit on the
steps of the orderly room: ''Hubbard suddenly threw his hands in the air. In a
high voice he said, 'Boys, be reasonable,' and we all started laughing. I was in
the middle. I didn't think about it, I just reached out and put my arms on their
shoulders. We were in a state.'' ONE DAY AT THE AMMO DUMP I hope that Lewis did
all right. Still, he must remember more often than he'd like to that he was
thrown out of the Army for being a thief. It must seem unbelievable that this
happened to him, unbelievable and unfair.

He didn't set out to become a thief. And Hubbard didn't set out to become a
deserter. He may have had good reasons for deserting, perhaps he even had
principles that left him no choice. Then again, maybe he was just too
discouraged to do anything else; discouraged and unhappy and afraid. Whatever
the cause of his desertion, it couldn't have been what he wanted.

I didn't set out to be what I am, either. I'm a conscientious man, a responsible
man, maybe even what you'd call a good man - I hope so. But I'm also a careful
man, addicted to comfort, with an eye for the safe course. My neighbors
appreciate me because they know I will never give my lawn over to the
cultivation of marijuana, or send my wife weeping to their doorstep at three
o'clock in the morning, or expect them to be my friends. I am content with my
life most of the time. When I look ahead I see more of the same, and I'm
grateful. I would never do what we did that day at the ammunition dump,
threatening people with rifles, nearly getting ourselves blown to pieces for the
hell of it.

But I have moments when I remember that day, and how it felt to be a reckless
man with reckless friends. I think of Lewis before he was a thief and Hubbard
before he was a deserter. And myself before I was a good neighbor. Three men
with rifles. - From ''The Barracks Thief.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tobias Wolff (Catherine Wolff)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LONG LOOK BACK BY A LAWYER NAMED FULBRIGHT

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 2


It was 9 A.M., and former Senator J. William Fulbright was roasting.

''The air-conditioning is off and you can't open the windows in these damn
buildings,'' he told a caller who had arranged to meet him at his law office
over the Memorial Day holiday. ''We underestimated how closed down the town
would be. It's like an oven in here.''

So he walked outside into the bright sunshine and found a cool, high-ceilinged
old sitting room a few blocks away. He took off his jacket, sat down in a red
leather armchair, lit a cigarette and got so caught up answering questions about
his life and opinions that the talk was still going strong, hours later, after
the conversation had moved to a suburban golf course.

Mr. Fulbright passed his 80th birthday a few weeks ago. He says he has delivered
his last formal speech. He claims that he is tired and ''flabby'' and that the
cataracts in his eyes make it hard to read the books he used to love to absorb
for five hours at a stretch. He can't even see his own golf balls, he admitted
with a gravelly chuckle after several hours on a practice tee.

He Stayed On in Capital

But the most remarkable thing about Mr. Fulbright is how little he has changed
from when he was chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, a job he
held for 15 years until his electoral defeat in Arkansas in 1974. He has stayed
here since leaving the Senate, lending his legal advice, connections and other
services to a well-known law firm, Hogan & Hartson.

He is still a man of evident charm, intelligence and integrity. He is still an
ironist, not everyone's favorite type. He still views the nation's international
behavior as insufficiently rational, tolerant or astute, as in the days of the
Vietnam War, which he opposed prominently. And he still thinks the United States
too often acts like an international bully in its ''obsession'' with the Soviet
Union.

Notes of regret occasionally bubbled forth in his deep Arkansas drawl. Driving
his battered BMW into the suburbs, he suddenly raised one hand from the steering
wheel and said: ''I sometimes wonder what the country might have been like, what
my own life might have been like, if the Vietnam War had never happened. It was
just such a waste, and I spent so many years at it.''

He sounded as if he regretted having publicly criticized Lyndon B. Johnson in
1965 over the American invasion of the Dominican Republic. Johnson, furious,
never listened again to Senator Fulbright's private counsel on a matter of far
graver importance, Vietnam.

He Voted Against McCarthy

Mr. Fulbright, over the years, picked up other strong public images in addition
to that of Vietnam opponent, and he thinks some of them were unfair. A lone vote
in the 1950's against Senator Joseph R. McCarthy gained him a reputation in some
quarters as ''soft on Communism.'' And he was sometimes described as aloof,
indifferent to the rights of Southern blacks, an intellectual snob, a
complainer.

''One of the things that's always bothered me is that you cannot be critical
without being considered disloyal,'' he said with obvious unhappiness. ''My own
feeling is that if you love your country, if you really love it, you want to
improve it.''

His criticisms of Israel, he says, have also been unfairly attacked. ''We're so
subservient to the wishes of whatever Israeli Government happens to be in power
at the time,'' he said.

But the issues that have bothered him the most lately have been the collapse of
Soviet-American detente and the Reagan Administration's big arms buildup. He
said of the Russians, ''I just don't accept the idea that they're monsters
beyond the pale.''

Psychological Dimensions

He spoke of ''empathy,'' ''paranoia'' and ''irrational'' viewpoints, such as the
portrayal of the Soviet Union as both pathetically backward and extraordinarily
menacing. The psychological dimensions of foreign policy have always impressed
Mr. Fulbright. Twice in the 1960's he held hearings on the subject, but they
were little noticed.

He wondered out loud, his voice no less knifelike for being both downhome and
trained at Oxford, where he spent three years in the 1920's as a Rhodes scholar,
whether space weapons reminded President Reagan of science-fiction movies. It
seemed a plausible enough explanation for Mr. Reagan's enthusiasm, he said.

The arms buildup, in any case, has been constructed on the ''absolutely
anti-rational'' premise, he said, that ''we'll build so many weapons the Rusians
will eventually be forced to cry uncle.''

''To me, it's an utterly fantastic and romantic idea,'' Mr. Fulbright said. Did
Ho Chi Minh cry uncle, he asked?

A moment came when Mr. Fulbright stopped himself in mid-criticism. ''All old men
think things are worse than they were before,'' he said, laughing. ''Isn't that
always true?''

Proud of Scholarship Program

Later he spoke with pleasure, as he often does, of the international educational
effort that bears his name, the famous Fulbright scholars program. Studying
abroad, putting onself into another culture's shoes, has always struck Mr.
Fulbright as a route toward peace and understanding.

The afternoon turned muggy. Perhaps so much self and memory turned muggy as
well. Mr. Fulbright said his wife was very ill. He was sitting in a garden chair
with a beer, and he looked out at an expanse of trees and grass. ''It's been an
interesting life,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of J. William Fulbright (NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WORKING PROFILE: LINDA CHAVEZ;
LOBBYING IN WHITE HOUSE'S BEHALF

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 952 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 2


Linda Chavez, the new chief of the White House liaison office, believes that
lobbying is a two-way street.

''While you want to be helpful and allow people to have access into the White
House and into policy-making,'' she says, ''our interest is taking the
President's message to the people through their various organizations.''

In her first weeks as President Reagan's deputy assistant for public liaison,
Miss Chavez has pushed through an office reorganization to get the President's
message across. With the reorganization, she says, the door to the White House
will remain open to hear the ideas and wishes of ethnic and racial groups, as
under her predecessors. But the office will now concentrate on garnering support
for Mr. Reagan from these groups, a role she believes needs more work.

Although the appointment has made her the highest-ranking woman in the White
House and its most senior Hispanic official, she says getting the message out is
her key objective.

Tax Plan Is First

The most immediate challenge, Miss Chavez says, is lobbying for Mr. Reagan's tax
reorganization plan, which she describes as an ''excellent issue.'' Other major
challenges, she says, include repairing relations with groups at odds with the
Administration, especially Jewish organizations that strongly opposed the
President's visit in May to a German military cemetery at Bitburg, where 49 Nazi
Waffen SS soldiers were buried.

Miss Chavez, whose husband is Jewish and whose three children are being brought
up as Jews, said she did not disagree with Mr. Reagan's decision, although she
seems sensitive to criticism. ''There is obviously a lot of pain over the
Bitburg visit and I understand that,'' she said. ''I think we do have to listen
and hear what's being said. The worse thing to do would be to recoil and be
worried about talking to groups who have been critical.''

Miss Chavez came to the White House from the United States Commission on Civil
Rights, where she served as staff director and where she and others appointed by
Mr. Reagan redirected the independent panel on a variety of controversial civil
rights matters, including taking a position against the use of numerical goals
to remedy the effects of past discrimination. Her new assignment has removed her
from the trenches at the commission and, with a more prestigious title and more
opportunity to influence policy, appears to have provided her with a promotion.

Its Own Potential for Combat

But the switch has also placed Miss Chavez in an arena with its own potential
for combat. She must contend with dissent on the staff and irate public groups
and individuals.

''Having an office of public liaison creates a lot of expectations from
constituency groups,'' Miss Chavez said recently. ''A lot of groups would like
to think that they have representatives in the White House, and that problem
dates as far back as the office goes.

''A lot of people want to think you're an Hispanic or you're a woman and that
you speak for that particular ethnic group or gender. I don't believe that any
individual can do that.

''Basically, I have to be true to myself.''

The staff reorganization was one of the first moves after her appointment. With
the approval of Donald T. Regan, the White House chief of staff, Miss Chavez
established three divisions in public liaison: one for economic issues, a second
for domestic issues and a third for military issues. Ethnic, religious and other
interest groups are ''clustered'' in the three areas on the basis of their
interests.

She Seeks New Staff People

Miss Chavez said this would allow the White House to reach groups better and to
operate more systematically. She said that she was also seeking staff members to
reach groups that were better grounded in the issues and policies.

The new approach and placement of the liaison office under Patrick J. Buchanan,
the White House communications director, have raised suspicions that it was now
more ideological. Miss Chavez dismissed such concerns, saying that the change
would assure that ''at any given time, our priorities will be the same priorites
as the President.''

Miss Chavez, who is 37 years old, became a devotee of Mr. Reagan in 1980. She
was impressed with his conservative positions on foreign and military policies,
finding them consistent with those she developed as a child. She was born in
Albuquerque and attended Roman Catholic schools and she says she became strongly
anti-Communist after hearing from Korean War veterans accounts of psychological
manipulation of prisoners of war.

Opposed the Antiwar Movement

She graduated from the University of Colorado in 1970 and did graduate work at
the University of California at Los Angeles. She was critical in her college
days of the movement that opposed the Vietnam War, she said, And although she
was a Democrat, she feared that the Democratic Presidential candidates would
weaken the military. She said that led her to abstain from voting in 1972 and
1976.

In 1980, she says, she voted for Mr. Reagan, her first vote for a Republican,
and after her appointment to the White House post in April, she formally
switched her registration to Republican.

''I came from a family where my father was a Purple Heart winner in the Second
World War,'' she said, ''and a lot of my views about defense issues and foreign
policy issues were very firmly held before I would have ever throught of myself
as a Republican.''

Since her appointment to the Civil Rights Commission, Miss Chavez has emerged as
a favorite of conservatives, who waged an campaign for her appointment to the
White House that was so intense that Mr. Regan, the chief of staff, was
displeased.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Linda Chavez (NYT)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 4, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. MILITARY IS TERMED PREPARED FOR ANY MOVE AGAINST NICARAGUA

BYLINE: The following article is based on reporting by Bill Keller and Joel
Brinkley and was written by Mr. Keller.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3247 words

DATELINE: PANAMA


In the last two years, the United States Southern Command, from its tropical
hilltop headquarters here, has presided over the establishment of a
sophisticated military apparatus in Central America.

While President Reagan and his top advisers say the use of American military
force in the region is an unlikely and undesirable last resort, the military is
prepared for contingencies, according to military officers and diplomats in
Washington and Central America. Authorities say this has been accomplished with
a vigorous tempo of war games, construction of staging areas and listening
posts, the creation of an elaborate intelligence network and a major effort to
fortify allied armies. .

The United States military presence, once devoted almost exclusively to
defending the Panama Canal, was expanded in the name of protecting stability
throughout Latin America. More recently, the officials say, its focus has
narrowed on Nicaragua, which the Reagan Administration believes is the main
threat to peace in Central America.

Buildup Is Largely Complete

The military officers and diplomats said in interviews that the buildup of the
Southern Command, one of six global subdivisions of the American military, is
now largely complete and that it is adequate to carry out any likely emergency
in the region.

These officials also challenged what they called the apparently popular belief
that if the United States was drawn into direct military involvement in Central
America, it would inevitably lead to a Vietnam-style quagmire.

According to American military and intelligence assessments presented at the
highest levels of the Government, the United States could quickly and easily
rout the Sandinistas who govern Nicaragua.

'Like Falling Off a Log'

An intelligence official whose opinions have been solicited by members of the
National Security Council said that an invasion of Nicaragua was undesirable
''from a propaganda point of view,'' but that if it became necessary it would be
''like falling off a log.''

As Congress begins another round of debate over how to deal with Nicaragua, both
supporters and opponents of Administration policies are examining the military
options embodied in the Southern Command with renewed interest.

One reason is that the Administration has begun talking more openly about the
risk of American military involvement if Congress continues to foreclose less
drastic measures, such as renewed military aid to the United States-backed
Nicaraguan rebels seeking the overthrow of the Sandinista Government.

Moreover, United States and Central American officials say, the unpredictable
behavior of the Nicarguan Government could increase the likelihood of American
involvement at any time.

Prudent, Officials Say

American military officials say the activities at the Southern Command is
prudent preparation for such dangers.

''I can say with some confidence that the exercises have provided us with a
significantly improved capability to operate in the region,'' said Col. Charles
Pearcy, who heads the command's task force in Honduras.

Some critics, on the other hand, have long seen the muscle-flexing at the
Southern Command in a more ominous light.

Eugene J. Carroll Jr., a retired admiral who is director of the Center for
Defense Information, a group often critical of the Pentagon, wrote last year
that ''accelerating U.S. military preparations'' in Central America ''suggest
that the decision has already been made by President Reagan to send U.S. troops
into Nicaragua.''

House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., brushing aside the President's consistent
statements that he is determined to avoid sending combat troops to Central
America, said in April, ''I've said all along that I don't think the President
of the United States will be happy until American troops are down there.''

The Command's Mission

The decision to use military force would be made in Washington, but the
preparation and execution are the responsibility of the Southern Command, known
as Southcom.

The headquarters, a cluster of neat frame buildings under coconut trees, has
changed little in size or appearance since a few years ago when the command, in
the words of its spokesman, Col. William C. Hansen, was ''one of those final
assignments'' on the way to retirement.

But in 1983 the Southern Command's importance began growing in earnest. That
year the Adminstration, fighting one anti-Government insurgency in El Salvador
while underwriting another in Nicaragua, without fanfare rewrote the command's
mission statement.

Once assigned primarily to defending the Panama Canal, the command was
committed, among other responsibilities, to ''counter Soviet and Cuban
militarization and other destabilization undertakings.''

''There would not even be a United States Southern Command today, I am
convinced, had it not been for the propensity of these Marxist-Leninists to
pursue their own goals, ignoring the aspirations and needs of their own
peoples'' in Central America, Gen. Paul F. Gorman, the head of Southern Command,
told the Senate Armed Services Committee in February, a few days before he
retired.

The Changes Are Made

General Gorman is widely considered responsible for changing the command to suit
its new mission.

''When I came to Panama two years ago, I found an Army component very well
designed to defend the Panama Canal against brawlers and rioters, but ill suited
for supporting allies in the region,'' he told the Senate committee. He promptly
disbanded the Army's canal-oriented mechanized infantry unit and sent to
Washington for experts in intelligence, communications, aviation, medicine and
construction.

Within a year of General Gorman's arrival, Southern Command had begun to build
or enlarge eight airfields in Honduras, using engineering battalions brought in
for military exercises. A member of the Senate Intelligence Committee who has
toured the installations recently described them as ''a pretty sophisticated
staging area.''

At Palmerola, in the central highlands west of Tegucigalpa, the largest airstrip
was dedicated last February. The 8,000-foot, lighted, all-weather runway
shimmers like a mirage in the midst of a sprawling military town of wood huts,
camouflaged antiaircraft emplacements and repair shops. It can handle any plane
the United States military owns, including jumbo C-5 and C-141 transports and
high performance fighter planes.

Versatile Plane Sought

Palmerola is home for Joint Task Force Bravo, the American operating arm in
Honduras, established in 1983 to train Hondurans, build and maintain shared
facilities, organize war games and assist American military missions in the
area.

In the last year, the buildup has continued. The fiscal 1986 budget, for
example, calls for moving to Southern Command a detachment of C-7 Caribou
planes, a plane of 1960's vintage that can land on tiny, undeveloped airstrips.
General Gorman told the Senate that, whereas 30 airfields in Central America can
handle C-130 cargo planes, the little Caribou can deliver troops or materiel to
some 900 locations.

Much of the more recent activity at Southern Command is not visible at all,
involving intelligence-gathering.

In his testimony, General Gorman said that he had built ''a very close working
relationship with the entire intelligence community'' and that he met constantly
with Central Intelligence Agency station chiefs in his region.

A Congressional source said that within the last several months the National
Security Agency had installed ''the best technology we've got'' at electronic
eavesdropping posts on Tiger Island, in the Gulf of Fonseca near Nicaragua, and
other locations.

Supplies of Fuel in Place

The military has been thwarted by Congress in some of its more ambitious
proposals, including a plan for storing bombs and rockets at Palmerola and San
Lorenzo, about 40 miles from the Nicaraguan border.

The Southern Command has, however, stored fuel. According to a classified
Pentagon report, the Southern Command on Jan. 1 was the only one of the six
regional commands that divide responsibility for American military commitments
around the globe that had stored 100 percent of its estimated oil requirements.

In manpower, the Southern Command is the smallest of the six commands, with
about 9,600 people stationed at various installations in Panama and an average
of 1,200 troops in Honduras.

But General Gorman noted that this was deceptive. Southern Command is designed
to have a small permanent staff, but to draw troops, in event of conflict, from
the United States Readiness Command, based at MacDill Air Force Base in Florida,
and the United States Atlantic Command, based in Norfolk, Va., which patrols the
Caribbean and the Atlantic.

Behind the War Games

Getting those forces to Central America has been a central point of exercises
conducted over the past two years.

Until 1983, Colonel Hansen, the Southern Command's spokesman, said, the command
staged only one sizable exercise a year, an annual drill called Kindle Liberty
that practiced defense of the Canal.

Since 1983, the Pentagon has added several major war games a year, testing on
the playing field of Honduras virtually every wartime contingency that might
arise in the region.

In an exercise called Big Pine III, completed May 3, the Americans staged
Nicaraguan-style tank attacks near the Choleteca gap on the Honduras-Nicaragua
border, while Honduran troops practiced defensive tactics. Universal Trek, which
ended May 5, practiced landings by Marines and paratroopers - and for the first
time tested how the Pentagon would handle reporters covering an unannounced
military operation.

Troops Will Build Road

This year's third major Honduras exercise, beginning June 7, will send 1,800
American troops to build a 15-mile road to the airfield at San Lorenzo and
practice paratrooper attacks against guerrillas.

Colonel Pearcy, the Joint Task Force commander, said these war games served
multiple purposes, including realistic training of American and allied troops,
and served to remind the Nicaraguans of American resolve.

Most of the lessons could be applied to other regions. But the exercises,
American officials said, have worked extensively on two abilities that would be
essential in a Central American conflict: moving men and equipment to the region
in a hurry and working in tandem with the Honduran Army, which American
officials say would be a likely partner in any American military enterprise.

''What you do on the ground is often less important than the preparation for
going, getting there and existing,'' Colonel Pearcy said.  Military Advice
Provided In addition to being host for exercises and training, Southern Command
has helped run a gradually increasing program of military aid and advice for
Nicaragua's neighbors, El Salvador, Honduras and Costa Rica.

In May, the United States sent 20 Green Berets from the Army Seventh Special
Forces in Panama to train the Costa Rican civil guard in basic military skills
at a new camp near the Nicaraguan border.

The Defense Department said it was the largest American military training team
ever dispatched to Costa Rica, a neutral country that does not maintain an army,
and the move prompted protests from some Costa Ricans that the United States was
pressing their country to militarize.

The Debate on Invasion

Whether these preparations are enough to assure American success in any military
operation that might arise is still a matter of lively debate.

No one in Government is suggesting that an invasion of Nicaragua is imminent or
desirable. Still, in recent weeks senior Reagan Administration officials have
for the first time begun openly discussing this as a possibility.

For example, in a speech to the American Bar Association on May 23, Secretary of
State George P. Shultz warned members of Congress that if they did not approve
renewed aid for the American-backed Nicaraguan rebels, ''they are hastening the
day when the threat will grow, and we will be faced with an agonizing choice
about the use of U.S. combat troops.''

Interviews with numerous American and foreign government officials in Washington
and in Central America indicate that the possibility of United States military
involvement in Nicaragua has become a matter of open discussion.

The Fearful Analogy

One factor that has caused many Americans to recoil from the idea of direct
military involvement in Nicaragua is the Vietnam analogy.

In a conflict with the United States, the argument goes, the Sandinistas would
quickly retreat to the hills like the Vietcong - jungle-wise guerrillas - and
would draw American troops into a bloody quagmire.

''I think most people think it would be a very messy business, and don't want to
do it for that reason,'' said Mark Falcoff, a Latin American scholar at the
American Enterprise Institute who was a consultant to the commission on Central
America headed by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger.

In Nicaragua, where an American invasion is a topic of constant speculation,
Cmdr. Julio Ramos Arguello, the army Chief of Staff, also said ''this would be a
kind of Vietnam war.''

But a contrary view seems to have gained wide acceptance within the
Administration. The view is that an invasion of Nicaragua, however undesirable
for political reasons, would not be such a difficult task in military terms.

Sandinista Deficiencies Noted

In interviews, American military officers and other Government officials
familiar with the region argued that the Sandinistas lacked the military skills,
the popular base and the supply lines to prolong a guerrilla war in the face of
an American invasion.

United States intelligence sources in the region have told their superiors in
Washington that major Nicaraguan installations are lightly defended. In the
Managua area, for example, an intelligence official said the Sandinistas had 13
potential targets that were protected by antiaircraft artillery, primarily 57-
millimeter and 37-millimeter antiaircraft guns.

''If proper tactics and proper ordnance were applied to those sites, they'd
never know what hit them,'' an intelligence officer said.

This officer and others said that with minimal risk, American pilots could
destroy the small Nicaraguan Air Force, radar, artillery, tanks, supply depots
and command centers.

According to a source who has discussed the subject with him, Col. William C.
Comee Jr., the director of operations at Southern Command, has estimated that it
would take the United States two weeks to gain control of 60 percent of the
Nicaraguan population.

How It Might Happen

Colonel Comee, who has overseen war games and other operations in Central
America since 1982, declined through a spokesman to be interviewed. In June he
will replace Colonel Pearcy as commander of the Joint Task Force in Honduras.

Another United States political-military officer in the region said the most
plausible scenario in the event of a full-scale conflict would be this: ''The
U.S. would come in heavily for a month or so, mostly with air strikes against
major facilities. Then a new government would be put into place, and it would
come with its own army.''

It would be up to the new government, presumably organized from the existing
democratic opposition, to pursue the Sandinistas, several military analysts
said.

''The Sandinistas would be up in the hills, but that would be a problem for the
new Nicaraguan government,'' an American officer said. ''It wouldn't be our
problem. We'd probably have a program like El Salvador, advisers and assistance,
but no Americans involved in the fighting.''

One United States military officer who has briefed members of the National
Security Council asserted that the Nicaraguan people would rise up in support of
an American invasion and that neighboring armies would assist the United States
eagerly.

Problems for the Sandinistas

In addition, the officer has told senior officials in Washington that the
Sandinistas would find the hills inhospitable because their presumed sanctuaries
are now inhabited by the rebels and by largely conservative farmers who consider
the Sandinistas a threat to their private property rights.

''They've lost the support of people in the mountains,'' the officer said.
''They'll get their heads chopped off up there.''

Commander Ramos, whose responsibilities include the defense of Managua, said in
an interview that this was a dangerous assumption. The initial American assault,
he said, would kill thousands of Nicaraguans, uniting the citizenry in their
outrage.

Another problem for the Sandinistas, according to several American military
analysts, is that Nicaragua has no counterpart to Vietnam's Ho Chi Minh Trail,
which was used to deliver the Vietcong ammunition and other supplies from the
North. In Nicaragua, land supply routes would be through mountainous jungle,
while air and sea routes would be policed by American forces.

''We could seal that place tighter than a drum,'' an American military officer
said. Other officials, noting that the United States had been unable to cut off
arms traffic between Nicaragua and El Salvador, were not as confident that
blocking arms to Nicaragua would be easy.

More Favorable Than Vietnam

American intelligence reports show no evidence the Sandinistas have prepared
large caches of ammunition or fuel in the hills, according to one knowledgeable
official. Commander Ramos said: ''We do have some things. Not many. Some fuel.''

Colonel Pearcy, commander of the United States task force in Honduras, and other
analysts noted that for the United States, the logistics would be much more
favorable than they were in Vietnam. In addition to shared facilities in
Honduras, the United States has bases in Panama and Puerto Rico, and Nicaragua
is a five-hour transport plane flight from the American mainland.

Colonel Pearcy added a cautionary note, ''I've been in the Army 24 years, and
I've never seen anything neat.''

Other American officials noted that even the 1983 invasion of Grenada, in which
Army, Air Force, Navy and Marine units swarmed onto a tiny island, left 18
American servicemen dead and 116 wounded.

Invading Nicaragua, said Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, who is the senior Democrat
on the Armed Services Committee, ''would be a much tougher military situation
than that.''

The Political Pitfalls

Many experts say the worst difficulties of a United States invasion would be
political rather than military.

One would be assembling a stable government in Managua from the contentious
military and political rebel groups. Another would be a possible torrent of
refugees into neighboring countries.

A senior Costa Rican official said that in the event of an invasion, his
Government would probably issue a statement blaming the Sandinistas for
provoking it. But he added: ''We will suffer the consequences. We will have the
Sandinista leaders in Costa Rica. We will have hundreds upon thousands of
refugees. We will have instability.''

And a third consequence, some experts say, would be a deep and lasting
resentment in Latin America.

''You have to understand the emotional scar tissue left there by our historical
involvement in the region,'' said a former Administration official, who supports
the present White House policy. ''The political, emotional, psychological cost
would be high.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: First of two articles about American military policy for Nicaragua

GRAPHIC: photo of Marine spokesperson briefing the reporters (Reuters) (page
A10)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 4, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A 4TH SPY SUSPECT WITH TIES TO NAVY IS SEIZED ON COAST

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1581 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 3


A retired Navy radioman was arrested today in San Francisco and accused of
joining a spy ring that had smuggled military secrets to the Soviet Union for at
least 20 years, the authorities said.

Documents released in connection with the arrest of the suspect, Jerry A.
Whitworth of Davis, Calif., provide the most detailed picture so far of an
espionage network that officials say operated on both coasts and at American
naval installations throughout the world.

Mr. Whitworth's arrest was the fourth in what Navy officials say may be the most
damaging instance of espionage in the Navy's history. More arrests are expected.


Three Anonymous Letters

Acquaintances and Government documents portrayed Mr. Whitworth as a man who
tried desperately, and unsuccessfully, to better his life and end a career of
espionage. The Federal Bureau of Investigation said that he wrote three
anonymous letters to the bureau last year in which he offered to expose the spy
ring in exchange for immunity from prosecution. [Page A19].

The F.B.I. has already arrested John A. Walker Jr., who has been accused of
leading the espionage operation, and his brother and son. All three served in
the Navy.

Court papers filed by the agency charge that Mr. Walker traveled across Asia and
Europe to pass highly classified Navy documents to Soviet agents.

Attempt to Recruit Daughter

According to court papers, informers have told the F.B.I. that Mr. Walker, also
attempted to involve his daughter in the operation in the late 1970's.

His daughter, Laura S. Walker, was then a communications specialist in the Army.
There was no indication in the documents that she agreed to participate.

Officials said Mr. Whitworth, who had been described in court documents by the
code name ''D,'' joined in the espionage operation. The documents released today
also indicate that a fifth person, with the code name ''F,'' was involved in the
operation. There was no further reference to the identity of ''F.''

William H. Webster, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said
Mr. Whitworth, 45 years old, surrendered to bureau agents this afternoon in San
Francisco. If convicted, he faces a maximum sentence of life in prison.

Held Sensitive Navy Positions

An affidavit signed by an F.B.I. agent, John H. Peterson, said Mr. Whitworth had
sold some of the nation's most sensitive military secrets to Russian agents
through Mr. Walker.

''Throughout Jerry Alfred Whitworth's recent career with the Navy,'' Mr.
Peterson said, ''particularly since he began his association with John Anthony
Walker in the early 1970's, Whitworth has held sensitive positions with the
United States Navy in radio communications and codes and communications
security, and had access to classified information including extremely sensitive
cryptographic materials and 'keylists,' which are codes used with encryption
machines to enable messages or data to be sent in a secure fashion.''

Joseph P. Russoniello, the United States Attorney in San Francisco said:
''Whitworth had access to the most classified communications data that we have.
We consider him to be a very significant player,''

Joined Navy in 1956

According to the affidavit, Mr. Whitworth, who joined the Navy in 1956, also
served as an instructor at the Navy Communications School in San Diego; served
two assignments as a communications technician at the highly secret American
military facility of Diego Garcia Island in the Indian Ocean; underwent training
in ''sensitive satellite communications operations'' at Fort Monmouth, N.J.;
served on the aircraft carriers Constellation, the Enterprise and the Niagara
Falls, and performed ''various duties'' at the Alameda Naval Air Station near
Oakland, Calif.

The bureau said that Mr. Whitworth had once boasted in a letter of ''running the
message center'' at Alameda, which he called ''the heart of naval
communications.'' He underlined those five words.

The affidavit said that the espionage operation had ''been ongoing since at
least 1965 and that Mr. Whitworth's involvement in this conspiracy spans a long
period of time beginning at least by the early 1970's.''

The F.B.I. said Mr. Whitworth was currently unemployed and lived in Davis, a
city near Sacramento. Government sources indicated that he had recently worked
for a military contractor in northern California.

Eugene J. Carroll, a retired admiral who is now an analyst with the Center for
Defense Information, a research group, said that based on the F.B.I. charges, it
appeared that Mr. Whitworth had access to information giving the Soviet Union
''a great deal more insight into our capabilities'' than would have been
provided by Mr. Walker alone.

Admiral Carroll said an individual with Mr. Whitworth's rank and security
clearance could have provided sensitive information on submarine movements in
the Pacific. Most of Mr. Walker's service involved the Atlantic.

Admiral Carroll said the most significant aspect of the allegations against Mr.
Whitworth was his relatively recent duty aboard the aircraft carrier Enterprise.
The assignment, the admiral said, would have put him at the center of the
communications traffic for the Pacific Fleet, including regular reports on
movements of both American and Soviet submarines. #5 Good Conduct Medals Mr.
Whitworth received the Good Conduct Medal five times in his years with the Navy
and he was also honored for duty in Vietnam.

The documents also provide the clearest indication yet that the motivation for
the spying was financial. According to the documents, Mr. Whitworth stopped
passing information to Mr. Walker in 1983.

But the documents indicate that Mr. Walker predicted Mr. Whitworth would renew
his activities as his financial need grew.

Mr. Whitworth, bearded and wearing a tanned suede jacket and blue jeans, was
taken before a United States magistrate in San Francisco, who ordered him held
without bond pending a bail hearing Friday and a preliminary hearing June 18.

Documents previously seized in a search of Mr. Walker's Norfolk home and
released today charge that on several occasions, Mr. Whitworth removed documents
from aircraft carriers, where he worked as a communications specialist with a
top secret clearance.

The court papers say that Mr. Walker flew to the Philippines and to Hong Kong
where he met the ships and then passed classified information to Soviet agents.

In 1977, the F.B.I. documents say, Mr. Walker traveled to Asian ports where the
aircraft carrier Constellation, with Mr. Whitworth aboard, was docked. Material
found in Mr. Walker's home indicated that he had scheduled meetings with Soviet
agents in various foreign cities, including Vienna and Hong Kong.

The F.B.I. also found handwritten notes that suggested Mr. Whitworth was looking
for employment at a variety of sensitive Government installations, including the
Air Force's Strategic Air Command, which handles the nation's airborne nuclear
defenses. He also wrote of considering work at the Central Intelligence Agency.

The court papers also say that Mr. Walker passed secret material to Soviet
agents in the Washington area as often as every three months.

Defense Counsel Appointed

Mr. Walker, his son Michael L. Walker and brother Arthur J. Walker have already
been arrested. All three served in the Navy.

In Federal District Court in Norfolk today, a magistrate appointed two lawyers
to represent Arthur Walker, 50, who has reportedly admitted receiving $12,000
for delivering secret military documents to the Soviet Union.

Shackled and in leg irons, Mr. Walker was led into the courtroom, where he told
the magistrate, Gilbert R. Swink Jr., that he could not afford counsel.

Mr. Walker said he owned a $90,000 house but still owed about $20,000 on the
first mortgage and about $7,000 on a second. He said he also owned two cars
worth about $2,200 together.

Normally, the magistrate said, Mr. Walker's assets would be sufficient to pay
for private lawyers. But the magistrate said he had decided on court-appointed
counsel because the charges against Mr. Walker were so serious that they could
lead to ''rather large'' legal fees.

Plan to Seek Release on Bail

The magistrate appointed two Norfolk lawyers, Samuel W. Meekins Jr. and J. Brian
Donnelly, a former United States Attorney here.

On the courthouse steps, Mr. Meekins told reporters he did not know whether Mr.
Walker would plead not guilty or guilty, or whether he had been cooperating with
the Government. ''We are very much in the dark regarding the circumstances of
the case,'' he said.

Mr. Walker was entitled to two lawyers because espionage is still classified as
a capital crime, even though it is not punishable by death in peacetime.

Mr. Meekins said he would ask that Mr. Walker be released on bail. He said that
Mr. Walker had been visited over the weekend in the Virgina Beach city jail by
his wife, Rita.

Accompanied by two teen-agers, she sat in the back of the courtroom at this
afternoon's five-minute hearing and then slipped away, unwilling to talk to
reporters.

Asked to describe Mr. Walker's mood in jail, Mr. Meekins said it was one of
''concern for his family, because he has been the breadwinner all of their
lives.''

The magistrate ordered Mr. Walker held without bond until a bail hearing on June
12. Mr. Walker, a retired lieutenant commander in the Navy, worked as an
engineer at the VSE Corporation, a Virginia-based military contractor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 4, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Inquiry Leads Vietnam To Leave Labor Agency

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 131 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, June 3


The International Labor Organization said today that Vietnam had left the
organization.

Officials said Vietnam had objected to what it called ''illfounded''
allegations, submitted to the organization by the World Confederation of Labor,
that Vietnam had provided forced labor for a Soviet gas pipeline project.
Vietnam also said it was unable to pay its annual dues of about $5 million.

Vietnam, which joined the I.L.O. in 1980, had given written notice of its
intention to withdraw ''temporarily'' two years ago, and automatically lost its
membership by not altering that position, the organization said.

It is the first nation to leave the 151-member organization since 1977, when the
United States withdrew for three years after charging the ''politicization'' of
the I.L.O.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 4, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

LORD GEORGE-BROWN IS DEAD AT 70; CANDID BRITISH FOREIGN SECRETARY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 3


Lord George-Brown, a former Foreign Secretary and one of Britain's most colorful
political figures in the 1960's, died Sunday. He was 70 years old.

Lord George-Brown was named George Alfred Brown at birth, but never used the
middle name and inserted the hyphen when he was made a baron. He died of
complications from surgery to correct severe internal hemorrhaging, said his
brother, Ronald Brown. The surgery was performed last week at a hospital near
his home in Cornwall.

The harsh-tongued and unpredictable Lord George-Brown, son of a truck driver,
was seen by some as a brilliant statesman and by others as a disaster.

As Labor Party Foreign Secretary from 1966 to 1968, under Prime Minister Harold
Wilson, his blustery, outspoken style often seemed at odds with British
diplomatic tradition.

Vietnam and Mideast Peace

He was involved in British attempts to mediate peace in Vietnam, however, and
was an author of United Nations Security Council Resolution 242, which was
adopted in November 1967 and is still a cornerstone of efforts to negotiate
peace in the Middle East. It calls for Arab recognition of Israel's right to
exist in exchange for Israeli withdrawal from occupied territories.

George Alfred Brown was born Sept. 2, 1914, and raised in a poor tenement in
south London.

He was made a peer after losing his seat in Parliament in 1970. He told an
interviewer at the time: ''It's ridiculous to give me that stupid title. I'm not
a lord and I wish I could drop the damn thing.''

As the 1970's progressed, he grew disillusioned with the labor movement and
alarmed about what he considered the absence of democracy in the trade unions.
He resigned from the Labor Party in 1976.

''This is the saddest night of my life,'' he said. ''After 45 years I've left
for the same bloody reasons I joined.''

He joined the centrist Social Democrats when the party was founded in 1981.

He entered politics after working as a sales clerk and attending night school.
From a trade union job he was elected to Parliament for the Labor Party in 1945.
He rose to deputy leader of the party under Hugh Gaitskell and became acting
leader when Mr. Gaitskell died in 1963.

Defeated by Harold Wilson

He could have been Prime Minister if Harold Wilson had not defeated him for the
party leadership. Many regarded him as the best man in the party, but worried
about his unpredictable conduct and his reputation for drinking, sometimes
heavily.

The public loved George Brown, including his public exploits and his shouting
matches with colleagues and adversaries.

He resigned as Foreign Secretary in 1968, saying Mr. Wilson had failed to
consult him on a gold crisis, and lost his seat in Parliament two years later.

As he left Labor headquarters in 1976 after resigning from the party, he slipped
and fell into a gutter in front of photographers. ''Out and Down!'' said a
newspaper headline. Lord George-Brown blamed the fall on his new bifocals.

''I'm no saint, and there were hard drinkers in my family,'' he said in a
newspaper interview in 1977. ''Of course, I've sometimes woken up next morning
and thought, Damn! Of course I've sometimes wished I'd kept my mouth shut at
dinner.''

His public image continued to be dogged by controversy. He had two convictions
for drunken driving, and left his wife Sophie in 1982 after a 45-year marriage.
The couple had two daughters.

The Labor Party's foreign affairs spokesman, Denis Healey, discussing Lord
George-Brown in a television interview today, said: ''He lacked a degree of
self-discipline that would have taken him straight to the top. At his best
George was a markedly successful parliamentarian. His off moments saddened his
colleagues and Conservative opponents alike.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lord George-Brown (AP, 1971)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 4, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PRESTIGIOUS FORUM SLIDES INTO TROUBLING DECLINE

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1647 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 3


The once-proud titan of American scientific forums - the annual meeting of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science - is in sharp, troubling
decline.

Over the past decade and a half, attendance at what was once routinely described
as ''the world series of science'' has dropped 70 percent, and much of the
passion and fervor has ebbed as well.

The latest meeting, held in Los Angeles last week, attracted only about 2,300
registrants, far below the peak attendance of about 8,000 in 1969, ''The facts
are, no matter how you want to twist them or turn them, that attendance has just
gone down terribly,'' said Arthur Herschman, head of the A.A.A.S. meetings
office. ''This year's meeting is as bad as we've had in 30 years.''

The action has shifted elsewhere, in the association and in all of American
science, leaving the big general scientific convention, one of the most
venerable forums of communication in the long history of science, in
increasingly difficult straits.

No one is quite sure what factors are at work, but there is a sense that the
increasing specialization of science is eroding the popularity of big general
meetings that consider scientific and public policy issues of interest to a
broad range of scientists, not just those from a narrow specialty.

The American Physical Society has experienced an even more drastic decline in
attendance at its big general meetings, which are designed to appeal to a broad
range of physicists. Attendance last January fell to a low of 800, partly
because of bad weather, from a high of about 7,000 registrants in 1967.

''The general meetings are just disappearing,'' says William W. Havens Jr.,
executive secretary of the physical society. ''We've concluded that the only way
to have a successful meeting is to have specialized topics.''

The physical society's two dozen small topical conferences, typically attended
by 150 to 300 physicists from a single discipline, are thriving, for example,
but they deal with such highly specialized topics as ''basic properties of
optical materials'' or ''radio-frequency plasma heating.''

The great danger in the decline of the general meetings, many scientists say, is
that future generations of researchers will lose the cross-fertilizing benefits
of learning what scientists in other fields are doing. They may also lose the
opportunity to engage in important policy debates about the impact of their work
on society.

Last week's A.A.A.S. meeting was a typical smorgasbord of important topics pre
sented at some 160 different symposiums spread over two large convention hotels.
The weeklong sessions on arms control, including the Reagan Administration's
Strategic Defense Initiative, commonly called ''Star Wars,'' were more popular
than most sessions, often drawing 200 or more scientists. The latest advances in
neurosciences, including work not yet published, were discussed at some of the
most exciting scientific sessions. And other symposiums delved into the
psychology of early adolescence, day-care quality, supercomputers, alcoholism,
genetic disease, evolution, urban ecology, Halley's Comet, and the sign language
of apes, to name a few from among hundreds.

''It's been a remarkable meeting, one of the best, in terms of content,'' said
William D. Carey, executive officer of the A.A.A.S. ''The quality control has
been very good.''

But much of the material also had a stale quality, some A.A.A.S. officials
lamented. No major new scientific discoveries were announced. Those are now
presented at the more specialized meetings, where there is a ''critical mass''
of other experts who can understand and applaud them. And the public policy
discussions largely rehashed debates that have already long been aired in the
scientific and general media.

Perhaps the most dramatic change in A.A.A.S. meetings over the past two decades
has been a sense of ebbing vitality. In the 1960's, and into the 1970's, the
sense of ferment and excitement, of being at the heart of important national
debates was palpable. Corridors in the convention hotels were jammed with
scientists and students of all ages. Network television bathed the participants
in stark lights with reporters grabbing eminent scientists for quick interviews.
Spirited arguments lasted late into the night on such issues as military
technology, the Vietnam War, environmental pollution and toxic hazards.

There was a sense of history being made on the scene: Edward Teller, a principal
developer of the hydrogen bomb, facing down a roomful of hostile students in a
vain effort to explain his view of the Soviet menace; former Vice President
Hubert H. Humphrey addressing the convention; Matthew Meselson, the Harvard
biologist, almost single-handedly stopping the American military campaign to
defoliate the trees of Vietnam with herbicidal chemicals simply by issuing a
report on the environmental and health damage the chemicals were causing.

By contrast, the meeting last week was so serene it conveyed a sense of being on
the sidelines. Although discussion at the formal sessions was often of high
quality, the corridors were typically barren. Network television was nowhere to
be seen, no high-level Government officials appeared to lecture the scientific
community on its responsibilities, reporters had difficulty finding stories they
felt were important and many sessions drew only sparse audiences.

A session on fetal viability, one of the hottest topics in the nationwide debate
over abortion, drew fewer people than a news conference on the same subject. A
session on the ethics of animal research, an emotional issue that is splitting
many campuses, drew not a hint of attention from animal rights groups. The
closest thing to dissension came when a young woman was asked to leave the room
when her pet bird chirped.

''In the 60's and 70's, A.A.A.S. meetings were magnets of controversy - you
could get an argument in every corridor,'' said Mr. Carey. But in Los Angeles,
he added, ''you can hardly detect it if you get down on the floor and put your
ear to the ground. You can't hear any noise.''

Nobody in the A.A.A.S. wants a return of the petty disruptions that disturbed
some meetings in the past, but virtually all lament the loss of vitality in
recent conventions.

Another troubling trend, Dr. Herschman said, is that a large percentage of those
people who attended or gave papers last week were white-haired veterans of the
scientific community, long past the stage of active scientific work. ''The young
scientist who is doing the exciting experiment isn't at this meeting,'' he said.
''His boss is. Or his boss's boss.''

Press coverage is also down, though not as sharply as overall attendance. About
400 people registered at the press room last week, half of them journalists and
half public relations officials, journalism teachers and students. Almost 700
registered in New York the year before. ''It bothers me more that there are
fewer reporters here than that the attendance is down,'' Dr. Herschman said,
noting that one of the prime purposes of the meeting is to improve the public's
understanding of science.

Nobody is sure what factors are behind the decline. Some may be easily fixed.
The strike against United Airlines, the ''official'' carrier for the convention,
undoubtedly discouraged some who suddenly found their low-cost, advance purchase
tickets invalidated. The timing of the meeting, starting on the Memorial Day
holiday, undoubtedly dissuaded others. And the tightening economic conditions in
science made it difficult for many to obtain travel money.

Some even question if the decline is real. The absence of guards at the doors in
recent years has allowed an untold number to sneak in without registering and
paying a fee. They are there but are not counted in the attendance totals.

But many A.A.A.S. officials wonder, uneasily, whether more fundamental factors
are at work. They fear that young scientists, reflecting broader trends in
society, are becoming more career-oriented than ever, and are thus putting prime
attention on their specialties while ignoring broader scientific or societal
issues.

The A.A.A.S. itself has gradually been directing its energies away from the
annual meeting toward other activities. Its distinguished scientific journal,
Science, is surging in new directions under a new editor. Its publication for a
general audience, Science 85, has become the best of the new science magazines
for laymen. Its annual analysis of the Federal research budget has become an
indispensable tool for analysts of government policy. New programs have been
started to improve the quality of precollege science and mathematics education
and to examine issues involving population, resources and the environment. And a
small galaxy of A.A.A.S. committees have been turning out solid reports on
scientific freedom and national security, human rights and arms control.

''I've watched the center of gravity shifting away from the annual meeting
itself as the flagship activity of the A.A.A.S.,'' says Mr. Carey, who has been
executive officer for the past decade. ''There's a whole new frontier of things
emerging in A.A.A.S. at the same time that the annual meeting itself is hanging
on and wondering what's happened to it.''

Mr. Carey has appointed a committee to investigate the causes of declining
attendance and to propose changes to reinvigorate the meeting.

But for the time being, few expect drastic change. David A. Hamburg, chairmaan
of the A.A.A.S. board, said he would ''very much like to preserve the essence of
the annual meeting,'' its breadth, its scope, its coverage of science and the
social uses of science.

''It's a window on the whole world of science,'' he said. ''It's the one place I
know of where you can get a glance at all that science does, in intelligible and
comprehensive form.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 5, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREST REGENERATION BY FIRE FIZZLES IN ITS COLORADO TEST

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 819 words

DATELINE: GUNNISON, Colo., June 3


The Forest Service dropped napalm on its woods near here today in the first
attempt in a growing effort to regenerate aging forests through manmade forest
fires.

As it turned out, the woods were too wet and the winds too contrary to develop a
strong fire in the Taylor River District today. But officials said the practice
of dropping the jellied gasoline from a helicopter would continue until several
thousand acres of aging and parasite-ridden lodge-pole pine and Douglas fir were
burned.

The officials said that would open up grazing ground for a herd of mountain
bighorn sheep that are being squeezed between the congested forests and low-land
development.

'Burning Standing Timber'

''What we're doing is something that for a lot of old foresters is heresy,
because we're burning standing timber, and they say you're supposed to cut
timber and plant new trees,'' said Jim Paxon, the ranger for the Taylor River
District. ''But we're sacrificing one resource for another.''

Mr. Paxon and other forestry experts expect to see fires deliberately set in
standing timber to increase in coming years in response to the advancing age of
the West's millions of acres of forest land. The Forest Service already burns
about a million acres of scrub land and felled trees annually and the number is
increasing. However, such fires had never been started in standing forests.

Much of the conifer timber in today's Western forests began growing after the
last great series of fires spread across the Rockies more than a hundred years
ago. They were started by miners' camp fires, by spark-spewing steam locomotives
and by Indians who used fires to drive game into traps.

Fires Shaped the Forests

Since those days, however, a policy of suppressing fires has altered this
natural process of burn and regeneration. Man's interference with these natural
processes may be paving the way for far more damaging fires later on, experts
now believe.

''Most of the forests in the West have had fires as a kind of ecological
phenomenon, occurring literally for millennia, that acted to shape the structure
and function of these forests,'' said Richard D. Laven, associate professor of
fire ecology at Colorado State University.

''There is a suspicion that, through fire suppression, we have removed this
phenomenon, and that in places where decomposition rate does not keep up with
buildup of litter on the forest floor you get a buildup of fuel that could lead
to fires that are much more intense than normal.''

Or, as Matt Mathes, a Forest Service spokesman put it at the site of the
burning, ''It's better for us to start a fire here today than lightning to start
one next August.''

To start today's fires the Forest Service ferried drums of gasoline thickened to
a jelly-like consistency underneath a helicopter. The pilot used a remote
control triggering system to drop globs of the ignited fuel on a 1,000-acre
stretch of forest along Spring Creek Road just northwest of the crossroads town
of Almont.

Fuel Used in Napalm

The thickened gasoline is the same as the fuel used in napalm incendiary bombs
in Vietnam, except that it lacked the sticking agent added to the fuel in the
napalm bombs.

While Forest Service officials and curiousity seekers watched from an elevated
vantage point three miles south of the designated burn zone, the helicopter
delivered 600 gallons of flaming gasoline on the hillside forest, igniting a
handful of fires. They failed, however, to spread as the foresters had hoped
they would. Only 20 acres were thoroughly burned.

''Obviously we're still learning about this,'' Mr. Mathes commented, adding that
additional attempts at starting a proper forest fire would be made later.

The trees to be burned are heavily infested with dwarf-leaf mistletoe, which is
smaller than kissing mistletoe, found in oak trees. The spiky little parasite
grows into the bark of the trees and feeds on their sap, leaving limbs stunted
and swollen, and eventually contributes to the death of the trees.

Infestations Pose Danger

Foresters suspected that the absence of the periodic fires that cleansed the
forests before the West was settled had contributed to the rise of the
dwarf-leaf mistletoe and other parasites, including the pine beetle.

Both infestations pose the danger, as Professor Laven pointed out, of
contributing to the fuel for unplanned forest fires by creating large stands of
dead timber.

The 100 bighorn sheep that the fire was supposed to help comprise one of the
last migratory bighorn herds left in the Rockies, Mr. Paxon said.

Their usual 14-mile trail along the Taylor River, from their wintering grounds
near Almont to their summer pasture at Taylor Lake, is being increasingly
developed by resorts and summer homes, he explained, while passage away from
river has been blocked by the thick and aging woods that were the target of the
aerial attack.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of a smoke from manmade forest fire (NYT); photo of U.S. Forest
Service Helicopter dropping napalm in woods (NYT/Brian Payne)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LIGHT INFANTRY DIVISIONS GETTING MIXED REVIEWS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words

DATELINE: FORT ORD, Calif.


When Lieut. Col. Gerald R. Hawkins took his battalion of light infantry to South
Korea on maneuvers in March, he had the soldiers dig ill-disguised foxholes,
then led them on a visible retreat as a mock enemy advanced.

As the South Korean troops playing the role of aggressors were drawn to pursue
them, however, the 575 soldiers in Colonel Hawkins's battalion circled around
the enemy and hid for 24 hours. They were so well-concealed that the Koreans
passed within 50 yards of one company and never saw them.

After that, the battalion, from the Seventh Infantry Division in Fort Ord, spent
five days rampaging through the enemy's rear area, hiding by day but simulating
attacks on headquarters, communication lines and ammunition dumps by night.

In one strike, a band of soldiers slipped into a helicopter pad and pasted
Seventh Division bumper stickers on the helicopters to signify their
destruction. In 90 seconds the soldiers had stolen away in the dark.

Revival of Light Infantry

That exercise in Korea was the first overseas test for the Army's four new light
infantry divisions, smaller and faster-moving that regular divisions. They are
being formed on orders from the Army Chief of Staff, Gen. John A. Wickham Jr. He
said light divisions, which the United States has not had in the 20th century,
were intended ''to make the Army more relevant to the times.''

After the United States withdrew from Vietnam 12 years ago, the Army started to
build heavily armored divisions designed to fight a war against the Soviet Union
in Europe. But the previous Chief of Staff, Gen. Edward C. Meyer, thought it
more likely that Army forces would be needed in the third world and slowed the
trend toward heavy forces.

General Wickham, who became Chief of Staff in 1983, agreed with General Meyer.
He began work on plans for light divisions that could be flown quickly to
troubled areas as a show of force, or, like the Marines or the 82d Airborne, a
parachute division, could be used for quick strikes or as reinforcements for
American forces already deployed abroad.

Using Speed to Discourage Fights

Maj. Gen. John W. Foss, the chief of infantry at the Infantry Center in Fort
Benning, Georgia, said, ''If we deploy in a hurry, maybe we won't have to
fight.''

A light division of 10,500 soldiers would carry lean artillery, engineer,
signal, helicopter, transport and other support units, as compared with an
armored or mechanized division of 16,500 soldiers, which carries tanks, armored
personnel carriers and heavy artillery.

The new divisions, General Wickham said, will also help to alleviate another
problem. The Air Force and the Navy do not have enough planes and ships to move
heavy Army divisions to most places in time to be effective. Smaller divisions
are easier to transport.

Light divisions could be moved in 500 flights of Air Force C-141 transports.
Heavy divisions require 2,900 flights. The light divisions will be available for
missions in Central America or around the Persian Gulf and as reinforcements to
the European and Pacific Commands.

Ready to Move Within 18 Hours

The Seventh Division will become operational Oct. 1. By then battalions on alert
must be ready to move within 18 hours, the time it would take to get Air Force
transportation ready. The rest of the division must be ready within 72 hours.

The light divisions have not been universally applauded. Some military officials
have asserted they are diverting attention from preparations to fight a
conventional war in Europe with heavy divisions. Col. Dale K. Brudvig, a
Pentagon staff officer, agreed that a light division could be moved quickly.
But, in an article in The Army Times, a weekly newspaper for the Army, he wrote,
''The question is: What can the light division fight?''

Using a boxing analogy, Colonel Brudvig said, ''If a lightweight goes up against
a heavyweight who isquick, agile and possesses a very good punch, the
lightweight will be knocked out.''

General Wickham and battalion commanders here acknowledged that light infantry
faces such risks. They say the key is to deploy the infantry on terrain where
tanks cannot manuever, like jungle, mountains and forests. General Foss said,
''If you have to fight, you'd better pick your ground very well.''

'Never Attack From the Front'

Col. Richard S. Siegfried, a staff officer at Fort Benning who has worked out
tactical concepts for the light division, said that a principle would be,
''Never attack from the front.'' He said light divisions, with their lack of
firepower, would be trained to fight in bad weather, at night, in fog and around
the sides and rear of an enemy.

Further, he said, a light division will not have the firepower for forced entry
or fighting its way into a hostile area. If that was necessary, the 82d Airborne
or a Marine Corps amphibious force would be required.

In addition to the Seventh Infantry Division, the 25th Infantry Division in
Hawaii is scheduled to be converted to light infantry in 1986. The Sixth
Infantry Division is to be formed from the present 172d Brigade of 3,000
soldiers in Alaska in 1987. Finally, the 10th Mountain Division at Fort Drum, in
upstate New York, is to be converted by 1988.

Here at Fort Ord, training emphasizes the individual skills, small unit tactics
and the sort of stealth employed by the battalion led by Colonel Hawkins in
South Korea.

Difficulty of Packing

Lieut. Col. Joseph C. Windle, whose battalion was the first in the Seventh
Division to be converted to light infantry, said he had found that getting his
unit ready to move ''requires very detailed planning'' in deciding what to take
and what to leave behind.

''The battalion commander has got to take some risks and not make the soldier
into a pack mule,'' he said. ''He can't carry all that and still do what we ask
him to do on the battlefield.''

A group of soldiers, however, hooted when they were asked whether being in a
light division had made any difference to them. ''The light division,'' said a
young sergeant, ''only means they have taken away our vehicles and now we have
to hump that stuff.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of members climbing mountain (NYT/Terrence McCarthy)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MONEY SAID TO HAVE REPLACED IDEOLOGY AS MAIN SPY MOTIVE

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 5


''Money is the dominant reason'' Americans now choose to spy for the Soviet
Union, according to Stansfield Turner, a former Director of Central
Intelligence.

Admiral Turner, who served in the Carter Administration, and other former
officials concerned with national security agreed in separate interviews today
that ideology was no longer the main reason Americans commit espionage, as it
was in the 1940's and 1950's.

They suggested it was much more difficult to capture a spy acting for financial
gain than those who do it for reasons of ideology. The current spy case
involving three members of the Walker family was broken only after the former
wife of one took her story to the authorities.

Ideology in Rosenberg Case

Perhaps the most famous case involving ideology in the United States was the one
that led to the execution of Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, a case that still stirs
sharp argument over their guilt today, 32 years after their execution. They were
the only Americans ever executed in the United States after a civilian trial for
espionage, having been convicted of transmitting nuclear weapons secrets to the
Soviet Union.

Another was the perjury conviction of Alger Hiss, a former State Department
official imprisoned when he denied charges brought against him by Whittaker
Chambers. Mr. Hiss has long denied guilt.

William E. Colby, who headed the Central Intelligence Agency from 1973 to 1976,
said the Hiss case and the Philby-Burgess-Maclean spy ring case in Britain
involved activities that occurred ''when the Soviet Union represented
antifascism and there were a lot of ideological recruits.''

Ideology as an espionage motive fell off with the Hitler-Stalin nonaggression
pact and later with the information provided by Nikita Khrushchev when he
denounced the horrors of Stalin's regime, Mr. Colby said.

More Potential Recruits

The current investigation, involving John A. Walker and others, presents
problems typical of those that the United States must deal with these days, the
intelligence experts said.

''John Walker is a money case,'' Admiral Turner said.

Gene R. LaRocque, a retired admiral who is director of the Center for Defense
Information, a group often critical of the Reagan Administration, said the
development of spying-for-money was dangerous because the field of potential
recruits is so much larger.

''The ideologues are few in number,'' he said. ''The people who want a little
more cash are legion.''

Griffin B. Bell, the Attorney General in the Carter Administration, said
changing values were also having an effect in a number of recent spy cases.

''With the breakdown in values, partly because of Vietnam and partly Watergate,
and a looseness in general discipline, both social and organizational, secrets
are held in much more contempt,'' Mr. Bell said. ''The 'me' generation and 'I'll
make it on my own' have led to recent circumstances that have been financially
based.''

Asked to review the spy cases he knew about as the nation's chief prosecutor,
Mr. Bell said, ''I don't know of any ideological recruits.''

Few Leads With Money Cases

A knowledgeable intelligence source, who would not permit use of his name, had
this appraisal:

''In counterespionage, if you can identify ideological groups, that's wonderful.
But when it's pure cash for sale, you don't have any leads. It makes searching
for the agents much more difficult, if not impossible.''

Morton Halperin, a Pentagon and National Security Council official from 1966 to
1969, agreed that ideology was no longer the main motive for espionage and said
this undercut the notion that the Government should investigate the ideological
past of Americans.

''The people convicted in the past seemed to have acted out of political
reasons,'' Mr. Halperin said. Now, he said, it would seem to matter less that a
person was once a member of the Communist or Socialist Party, or the Americans
for Democratic Action.

Prosecution Policy Change

Mr. Halperin is now director of the Center for National Security Affairs, which
deals with security and civil liberties matters and has been critical of Reagan
Administration policies.

Another change noted by Mr. Halperin was that the Government was now prosecuting
people who spy for money.

''In the past,'' he said, ''the Government would make them double agents or feed
them false information. That would cast doubt on the information they had sent
previously. Also, if you prosecute, you blow your double agent.''

Mr. Halperin noted that it was Mr. Bell who, as Attorney General, had changed
that policy.

Mr. Bell said he had decided to prosecute such cases because ''I always thought
we were going to have to have more sentences to do something about it.''

''We do need to have more trials, more examples, more long prison terms,'' he
said, ''if we are going to bring it under control.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
DEMOCRATIC VICTOR IN JERSEY PREPARES: PETER SHAPIRO TO BATTLE A POPULAR
INCUMBENT: POLITICAL SUCCESS FROM EARLY AGE

BYLINE: By Jane Perlez, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1135 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, June 5


When Peter Shapiro graduated from Harvard, with honors, in 1974, he shunned the
career paths pursued by many of his friends and headed home to New Jersey.

His aim, his friends said, was to pursue a driving political ambition he did
little to hide, to someday become a national political leader. And so, at the
age of 23, he successfully ran for the State Assembly from a working-class
district.

On Tuesday, the 33-year-old Mr. Shapiro, who has held a political office ever
since, went some distance in achieving his long-term goal when he defeated more
seasoned politicians to win the Democratic gubernatorial nomination and the
right to challenge Governor Kean in November.

''People with his kind of background tend not to go back to suburban New
Jersey,'' said John Marks, the executive director of a Washington public-policy
group, Search for a Common Ground, and a longtime friend of Mr. Shapiro. ''At
22, he had a very clear idea of what he wanted to do with his life. You can call
it precocious. I think it's a clear vision.''

If successful in November, Mr. Shapiro would be the youngest governor in New
Jersey and would be the youngest sitting governor in the country. But youthful
success is hardly new to him.

Worked Full Time as Legislator

At 23, he was the youngest person ever elected to the Assembly, a place more
accustomed to middle-aged members content with doing their elective jobs part
time. Mr. Shapiro took the position seriously, working at it full time, and to
the surprise of voters who were used to being neglected, opened a constituents'
office.

Three years later, with the next step in his career in mind, he helped push
through a new Essex County charter creating the position of county executive.
Then, with his usual diligence of purpose, Mr. Shapiro ran for the new office,
defeating the candidate of the entrenched Democratic forces and becoming
executive of the most populous county in the state.

As county executive, Mr. Shapiro has presided over a work force of 6,500 and an
annual budget of $295 million. He reorganized welfare services, decentralized
other services and recently refinanced the county pension system. He was thus
able to afford, according to his supporters, to lower the county tax rate.

While minding the county, Mr. Shapiro was also paying attention to the larger
political field. In 1980, he supported the Presidential effort of Senator Edward
M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, whose nephew, Robert Jr., was a year
ahead at Harvard College.

In 1982, he seriously considered running for a United States Senate seat against
Representative Millicent H. Fenwick, the New Jersey Republican. He sought the
support of Senator Kennedy, but Mr. Shapiro's polls showed that Mrs. Fenwick was
probably unbeatable, and Mr. Shapiro shelved the idea. Mrs. Fenwick lost the
election to Frank R. Lautenberg.

Supported Mondale in Primaries

''I think he regretted it,'' his father, Dr. Myron Shapiro, an ear, nose and
throat specialist, said of the decision the other night.

Last year, Mr. Shapiro supported Walter F. Mondale during the Democratic
Presidential primaries, and this year, his own primary race was largely
fashioned after the ''new ideas'' theme of Gary Hart, Mr. Mondale's chief
opponent in the primaries.

In many ways, Mr. Shapiro's style seems tailor-made for politics in the 80's. He
has an engaging presence on television, something he sharpened at a television
workshop he attended recently to practice answering questions.

In fact, he favors television over any other approach to the voters. Today, the
morning after his victory, he shunned the usual politician's public appearances,
including thanking commuters for their support, and he turned down newspaper
interviews in favor of preparing for a televised news conference in Trenton.

Similarity to Movie

''Any campaign that is not sensitive to television is outdated,'' he said today,
as he sat in a makeshift television studio here waiting to be interviewed by a
New York station. ''People want a high sense of contact with their leaders. They
are not content to vote by proxy.''

Even the logo of his campaign, ''There is a way,'' turned out to be an
adaptation from the movie ''The Candidate,'' which featured Robert Redford as a
Presidential aspirant.

In the movie, the candidate Bill McKay, played by Mr. Redford, had a slogan,
''McKay: the better way.'' Mr. Shapiro's campaign manager, Paul Bograd,
acknowledged the similarity, which he maintained was accidental, but added,
''Remember, McKay succeeded.''

In a direct attempt to attract baby boomers, Mr. Shapiro's gubernatorial
campaign produced a political video, with Bruce Springsteen-style music and
clips of President Kennedy, to carry his message on the popular cable video
channels.

'Lucky Tie' Shelved

And on primary night, his political advisers forbade him from wearing what he
calls his lucky tie, a 1970's edition sprinkled with sheepdogs that he wore on
his first election night, on the grounds that it was unfashionably wide.

Peter Shapiro was born in Newark on April 18, 1952, the second child of Dr. and
Mrs. Shapiro. He grew up in Orange and then South Orange, attending the Millburn
Grammar School. He was bright enough to be allowed to skip a class, a move, his
father said, that resulted in the boy never formally learning handwriting. To
this day, Mr. Shapiro's penmanship is described as poor.

His first political memory dates to 1956 squabbles in the back of his parent's
station wagon when he was taken to elementary school with a neighbor. Mr.
Shapiro was for Adlai F. Stevenson; his friend for President Eisenhower.

At Columbia High School in Maplewood, he led a protest against the Vietnam War
and was promptly expelled. The New Jersey chapter of the American Civil
Liberties Union came to his rescue, and he was eventually reinstated.

Traveled Around World

Before entering Harvard, Mr. Shapiro, according to his father, ''somehow got a
merchant seaman's certificate'' and took a year to travel around the world,
spending long stretches in India, Nepal and Afghanistan, where he contracted
malaria.

In 1982, he married Byrna Linett, a teacher, who has accompanied Mr. Shapiro on
most of his campaign stops and spoken in his behalf on many occasions.

The couple, who live in a converted carriage house in South Orange, have a son,
Samuel, born three months premature.

Mr. Shapiro considered withdrawing from the race in March when the baby, still
in the neo-natal center of Beth Israel Hospital here, was born but was persuaded
to keep going by his wife.

They visited the baby each night during the campaign.

And Tuesday night, the hospital was their final stop after the music of
''Chariots of Fire'' heralded them into his victory-night celebration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Peter Shapiro (NYT/William E. Sauro)

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'INTERCOM' ASKS QUESTION: CAN PEOPLE TRUST THE MEDIA

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 528 words


THE most equivocal thing about ''Can the People Trust the Media?'' is the title.
Robert MacNeil does not tell us whether the people can or not. Forgive him for
that. Mr. MacNeil, the co-anchor of the ''MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour,'' has
something to say about journalism, and none of it is self-serving. He will be
seen on Channel 13 at 10:30 tonight.

Mr. MacNeil made his remarks in a speech at the opening of the Gannett Center
for Media Studies at Columbia University last March. The speech, shown now as
part of Channel 13's ''Intercom'' series, is thoughtful, without the mock
humility and self-aggrandizement that flavor so much of journalism's
self-criticism. Mr. MacNeil asks only that journalism have a respect for facts
and that it be fair.

''I think there is, frankly, scorn for fairness in some quarters,'' he says.
''In some quarters, it is clearly a yearning for straight advocacy journalism,
which regards fairness as effete and unmanly, and thinks telling both sides of a
story and letting the public decide the merits is wimpy and even irresponsible.
I get that feeling sometimes reading the Columbia Journalism Review.''

Mr. MacNeil is onto something here. Partisanship is not journalism, although
mediocre practicioners confuse them. In the end, no one's interests are served.
When journalism becomes associated with sanctimoniousness, the public grows wary
of even legitimate reporters. At the same time, as Mr. MacNeil notes, some
reporters, particularly in Washington, ''act out a ritual hostility.'' This
serves no good purpose, either.  ''It may be the influence of television
exposure, which feeds on adversarial confrontation,'' Mr. MacNeil says. ''Never
ignore how the values fashionable in entertainment programs inform the
journalistic end of the medium. All television gravitates toward drama, and what
passes for drama is often belligerence, people barking at each other.''

Then Mr. MacNeil gets to the interesting part.

''So we have the media sounding vehement, belligerent, barking at President
Reagan, who responds by what? Grinning ruefully. Who is going to win that kind
of a contest?''

Once again, Mr. MacNeil is onto something. If Sam Donaldson, the acerbic ABC
White House correspondent, did not exist, for example, a Republican media
consultant might have to invent him. Mr. Reagan, friendly, disarming, is at his
best when reporters bark at him. Television viewers instinctively take his side.
It is one way he avoids being hurt by hard questions.

Mr. MacNeil also has doubts about ''the macho arm of American journalism - the
commandos of the Fourth Estate, the investigative journalists.'' He singles out
the CBS documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' Its
conclusions about Gen. William C. Westmoreland may have been correct, he says,
but its reporting techniques were flawed.

''Why is it necessary in a piece of journalism,'' he asks, ''however right it
thought it was, to treat a distinguished American, or anybody else, less fairly
than he would be treated in a court of law?''

It is not necessary, of course, but it is good that Mr. MacNeil has asked. He is
speaking in a responsible voice.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STALLONE ON PATRIOTISM AND 'RAMBO'

BYLINE: By RICHARD GRENIER

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 810 words


''The strongest feelings a man has,'' said Sylvester Stallone, whose new film,
''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' is breaking box-office records across the
country, ''are his religion, his feelings for his loved ones and his love for
his country. And if you don't have men willing to die for their country, you
don't have a country.''

Such sentiments seem to be a paying proposition these days, with ''Rambo''
earning a colossal $32.5 million in its first six days, making it the
third-largest-grossing opening of all time (surpassed by ''Indiana Jones and the
Temple of Doom'' and ''Return of the Jedi,'' but passing up even such popular
films as ''Beverly Hills Cop'').

Still greater things may be expected from ''Rambo'' in the future, however. It
its first two weeks, Mr. Stallone's movie has earned $57 million - more than
double the box-office take of its closest competitor among the new releases, the
James Bond film ''A View to a Kill,'' which itself is setting records for a Bond
movie.

Shifting Perceptions

But Mr. Stallone laughed at the suggestion that his patriotism might be the
result of shrewd opportunism, because the original ''First Blood'' was made when
such patriotic sentiments were not popular. ''I'd like to have seen the guys who
say that,'' he said, ''in the cutting room with us in November 1982, when we
started shooting 'First Blood.' ''

''First Blood'' was about the mistreatment of a returned Vietnam veteran who is
an ex-Green Beret, his retreat into the woods and his lethal, warlike
self-defense. The film was shot before the inauguration of the Vietnam Memorial
in Washington, the recent Vietnam veterans' parades and the shift in national
perceptions of the Vietnam War - particularly among the young, the heart of the
movie audience, whom studies now show to be the most conservative age group in
the population.

''There's been a big change in the country's mood,'' said Mr. Stallone, fresh
off the set of ''Rocky IV,'' in which Rocky fights a Soviet boxer, ''but we
didn't know that then. When we looked at the footage we got back from the labs
we were scared to death. This Rambo character looked nihilistic, almost
psychopathic. The random violence. But we worked it over in the editing room
until it felt right.''

'I'm Not Political'

''Anyway, I don't work these things out intellectually,'' he continued in an
interview. ''I go by intuition, my emotions. I'm not political. I'm not well
versed in politics. As Sylvester Stallone I don't stand out in a crowd, believe
me. But I love my family, and I love my country. I've always been the same.
There was a bad time a few years ago when some people stopped waving the flag
and acted as if America was second rate, as if they were ashamed of it. It was a
big mistake. America may have its flaws but it's the freest country in the
world. We don't have to keep our people in with walls and guns.

''You say am I the Jane Fonda of the right?'' Mr. Stallone laughed again.
''Listen. I'm not right wing. I'm not left wing. I love my country. I stand for
ordinary Americans, losers a lot of them. They don't understand big,
international politics. Their country tells them to fight in Vietnam? They
fight.''

''I'll tell you something else,'' the 38-year-old Mr. Stallone continued. ''The
men who fought for us in Vietnam got a raw deal. Their country told them to
fight. They did their best! They come home and they're scorned. People spit at
them. Men who fight for their country deserve respect. And if you don't give it
to them you're in a bad situation, because they're going to demand it. It left
scars, that period, and I'm glad we've come out of it.

''You can't squelch patriotism,'' he reflected. ''The more you try to squeeze it
down, the more it becomes enflamed. Look at Afghanistan.''

Receptive Audience

Mr. Stallone would be the first to admit that ''Rambo'' - which tells the story
of the same ex-Green Beret parachuted alone into present-day Vietnam to
reconnoiter with Americans missing in action - is not realistic.

''Rambo has the skills of a thousand men crammed into one,'' he said. ''Nobody
could do all the things he does. He's far bigger than life. But he's a
megaphone. He's telling you that men who fought for their country, and a lot of
them lost their lives, deserve to be honored.''

Meanwhile, at a Saturday night showing in Manhattan of ''A View to a Kill,'' the
trailer was shown for ''Rocky IV,'' due to open in mid-November. After towering
shots of the two fighters, Rocky and the Soviet champion, a dramatic voice was
heard: ''Get ready for the next world war!'' The house exploded with glee,
cheering, and cries of ''U.S.A.! U.S.A.!'' Told of the reception, Mr. Stallone
said soberly, ''That's just a 60-second trailer. We've got to finish the
picture. I've got to go. I've got eight people waiting for me here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sylvester Stallone

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TO DIVEST IN SOUTH AFRICA, OR NOT?;
GO SLOW, AND USE CIVILITY IN DEBATING

BYLINE: By Donald M. Blinken; Donald M. Blinken is chairman of the board of
trustees of the State University of New York.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 699 words


For Americans, apartheid is not -cannot - be an issue for debate. No one speaks
in favor of it; no one enjoys a monopoly of virtue in opposing it. What, then,
can - should - universities and local governments do to protest apartheid and
help end it?

The trustees of the State University of New York, a body of well-mannered,
nonviolent citizens, were unprepared to be called ''murderers'' and ''fascists''
by students attending our May board meeting. The outburst followed the trustees'
refusal to agree that SUNY immediately divest all endowment investments in
American companies present in South Africa.

In April, the trustees voted to sell the securities of firms not meeting the
high standards of compliance with principles set forth by the Rev. Leon H.
Sullivan of Philadelphia, calling for business actively to work for change in
South Africa. By our May meeting, we had sold four securities and had placed the
rest under review while monitoring developments in Albany, Washington and
Pretoria. While the trustees, in reiterating our April decision, were not cowed
by those seeking instant gratification, we were dismayed by the renewed threat
to the role that calm analysis and democratic processes must play in
universities - institutions dedicated to free discussion.

Opposition to apartheid poses complex tactical problems. Much can be said for or
against a variety of proposals. Many would agree with the trustees that only
Government-to-Government negotiations can achieve significant reform. Similarly,
Governor Cuomo recommended that Congress adopt strict sanctions if apartheid has
not been dismantled within five years.

Failing such action, the arguments for and against divestiture are evenly
balanced. Those favoring immediate, total divestiture believe the public should
send firms a clear message that their presence in South Africa is unwelcome -
the sooner they get out, the better. The virtue of this message is its lack of
ambiguity, and simplicity. To eliminate all South African-related investments
washes one's hands of the problem. Nationwide, students ardently advocate this
position.

Those arguing against blanket divestiture oppose lumping the well-intentioned
companies that observe the Sullivan principles with those that don't care. They
believe total withdrawal from South Africa would only harm the black employes of
rigorous practitioners of the principles like I.B.M. and Eastman Kodak. They
give weight to the argument that if a university divests itself of shares, it
can no longer influence company conduct.

While both points of view are compelling, no one can prove that either is
absolutely right - or even relatively effective. Another approach, advanced by
New York State Controller Edward V. Regan, focuses entirely on trustees' legal
fiduciary role: their primary obligation to maximize return - to focus on the
bottom line. Those disagreeing emphasize the need to take into account moral as
well as financial factors. Some critics suggest portfolios can prosper as well
in the long run without inclusion of companies with South African interests. It
would take three to five years to validate the varying return-on-investment
theses.

Viewing these disparate anti-apartheid proposals, governors, legislators,
controllers, even university trustees, can agree or disagree. But failing
agreement, it is unlikely any would label the others ''fascists'' and
''murderers.''

Of course, many commentators place student hyperbole squarely in the tradition
of springtime rites, coupled with a virtuous cause. Isn't it wonderful, they
say, that students have again found a worthwhile issue. But unlike the 1960's,
when some students reflected concern that imminent departure for Vietnam placed
them in personal danger, today's debate places no students' rights or life in
jeopardy.

What is at risk is the danger that the university again will become a place
where complex issues cannot be discussed with tolerance for others' point of
view. It would be a pity, even an ironic tragedy, if the quintessence of
apartheid - intolerance, intimidation, incivility - were reintroduced to
campuses by those determined to stamp it out in South Africa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Khmer Rouge Said to Kill 28

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 61 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 6


Khmer Rouge guerrillas said today that they had killed 28 Vietnamese soldiers
and wounded 34 in an attack on a Vietnamese base in southwestern Cambodia. The
Khmer Rouge radio, monitored in Bangkok, said the battle took place Monday near
Koh Konglue in Koh Kong province. Khmer Rouge claims cannot be independently
verified, and are often regarded as exaggerated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Still No Policy in Nicaragua

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 595 words


President Reagan's yearlong haggling with Congress over how to parse aid to the
rebels attacking Nicaragua continues. The Senate has again voted for
''humanitarian'' subsidy; the balkier House votes again Tuesday. And how, asks
the President, pounding the table for emphasis, can this passel of politicians
ever agree on the tricky details of foreign policy? Good question.

But what policy? Even Henry Kissinger, whose commission tried to guide the
Administration, has become baffled: ''It is absolutely unclear to me how a vital
interest can be served by a $14 million project. If that were all there is to
it, you could go to a foundation and get the money.''

That $14 million was the aid the Administration deemed essential to preserving a
15,000-man army operating in and against Nicaragua. If Congress refuses the
money, warned Secretary of State Shultz, it may hasten the day when it has to
consider direct military action against the Sandinistas. What drama for
Band-Aids.

What needs to be asked, calmly, is whether the Administration has feasible means
to a plausible end. The Administration's objectives have so far been defined
only by a vague and negative slogan: no more Cubas, no more Vietnams.
Presumably, that means no acquiescence in the creation of a second Soviet
dependency and base for subversion in the Americas, but also no frontal attack
by American troops that would would degenerate into a long guerrilla war.

Hence the attractiveness of attacking Nicaragua with a C.I.A.-run army of
Nicaraguan dissidents. Yet that army is politically compromised by many of its
members' past associations and it lacks the power to unseat the Sandinistas. The
contra warriors have probably inflicted costly damage, but their attacks have
also been used to justify denials of freedom that the United States deplores.
Congress's clear desire has been to disband this army, or at least to retire it,
to give diplomacy a chance.

The trouble is that the choice of tactics presupposes a set of clear objectives.
But as Mr. Kissinger complained in an interview carried by The Los Angeles
Times, the Administration has failed both in its military and diplomatic
exertions to specify what it aims to achieve. Is it guarantees against Soviet
and Cuban bases and the withdrawal of Cuban advisers from Nicaragua? Or is it a
more profound transformation of the regime? If that, is it enough for the
Sandinistas to permit some democracy and opposition or are they to be
overthrown?

From a well-wishing insider, Mr. Kissinger's puzzlement is devastating: ''I
think there is no precise relationship between the rhetoric we put forward and
the steps we are taking. . . . I do not fully understand which of the many
possible objectives I've laid out the rhetoric is supposed to accomplish.
Secondly, it is not clear how the measures that have been put forward will
achieve even the minimum objectives.''

Another former national security adviser, McGeorge Bundy, has told the House
that C.I.A. support for the ''contras'' might have been useful in preventing the
export of revolution or pressing the Sandinistas for an accommodation. But he
now believes that the operation will only shed blood on all sides and ''simply
will not work.''

Congress, indeed, should not second-guess a President as he administers an
agreed and delicate policy. But there is nothing irresponsible about withholding
support for an impulse to violence without purpose. Let the Administration state
its aims and their likely cost, then let Congress choose among them and get out
of the way.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AFFIRMS BASIS FOR HANOI TIES

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: BIRMINGHAM, Ala., June 6


President Reagan said today that Washington would not normalize relations with
Hanoi until the Vietnamese accounted for all missing American servicemen and
ended the occupation of Cambodia.

Larry Speakes, a White House spokesman, said the conditions listed by Mr. Reagan
were consistent with previous policy and represented the ''threshhold'' for the
establishment of diplomatic relations.

Mr. Reagan's remarks on Vietnam had apparently been prompted by the fact that he
was appearing here at a fund-raising event for Senator Jeremiah Denton, an
Alabama Republican. Mr. Denton had been a prisoner of war in Vietnam for eight
years.

Mr. Reagan, who hailed the Senator as a ''hero in the cause of freedom,'' said
Vietnam was seeking to improve relations with the United States 10 years after
the withdrawal of American forces from South Vietnam.

Fullest Possible Accounting

''But we have made it clear that there is only one way this can take place,''
the President said, alluding to the prisoner-of-war and missing-in-action
issues.

''The American people demand the fullest possible accounting for our P.O.W.'s
and M.I.A.'s. This and a peaceful resolution of their brutal occupation of
Cambodia would help bring Vietnam out of international isolation.''

Mr. Reagan spoke during a tour of the South aimed mainly at promoting his tax
plan. But that message had to compete with a number of others in his remarks.

At the luncheon for Senator Denton, a Reagan ally, the President called on the
House of Representatives to show Nicaragua it was ''not fooling anybody'' and to
vote aid for the Nicaraguan insurgents. The President expects the Senate to
approve such aid.

Mr. Reagan attempted to clarify his policy on military intervention in Nicaragua
and on what the Administration now calls humanitarian aid for the Nicaraguan
rebels, whose demands for negotiations have been rebuffed by the Nicaraguan
Government.

''In spite of what some keep saying, we remain committed to a peaceful
solution,'' the President said. ''And so do the democratic opposition. But while
they are waiting for their own Government to talk to them, they must survive.
That is what our assistance is designed to do - to give peace a chance and keep
alive the goal of freedom in Nicaragua.''

On domestic issues, in addition to promoting his tax plan, Mr. Reagan renewed
his call for an amendment to the Constitution that would permit prayers in
public schools.

His remarks took on added significance after a United States Supreme Court
ruling Monday struck down an Alabama law that had permitted a daily one-minute
period of silent mediation for the purpose of encouraging prayer in public
schools.

Commenting on the decison of the high court, Mr. Reagan said it showed ''we
still have an uphill battle before us.'' He urged Alabama's members of Congress
to help adopt the amendment.

Mr. Reagan also tried to reach out to registered Democrats, asserting that their
party ''has been pulled out from under their feet by a kind of left-wing
leadership.''

Two Parties Contrasted

Attempting to contrast the two parties, he said the Republican Party favored
states' rights, free trade and a reduction of Federal government.

''The leadership of the Democratic Party does not represent those things, but
millions of rank-and-file patriotic Democrats throughout the nation represent
those things and I believe that we are trying to represent them in the
leadership of the Republican Party,'' he said.

On Vietnam, Mr. Reagan said that conditions in that country 10 years after the
defeat of South Vietnam demonstrated the importance of freedom.

''Today the Vietnamese Communists can celebrate the transformation of their
nation into one of the poorest countries on earth,'' he said. ''They can
celebrate the creation of new Vietnamese gulags, 10 years of torture and forced
relocations and the flight of nearly a million refugees and boat people.''

''After a prolonged season in hell, the memory of freedom still survives,'' Mr.
Reagan said of Vietnam. ''The young children may have known only the darkness of
Communist tyranny, but even they have parents and older relatives who tell them
of South Vietnam before the fall and bring a ray of hope into their lives. And
10 years later, the people for whom our brave American soldiers fought and died
and sacrificed are still profoundly grateful.''

Tax Plan Publicized in a School

Earlier today, in Atlanta, Mr. Reagan took his tax proposals to the Northside
High School, a school of performing arts that provided the President with an
array of songs, dances and instrumentals.

Mr. Reagan, who removed his coat in the gymnasium where temperatures reflected a
lingering heat wave, was applauded when he said that his tax plan would provide
more money to students and their parents.

Tailoring his appeal to the youthful audience, he said the current system was
''totally unfair.''

''If our current tax structure were a TV show, it would either be 'Foul-Up,
Bleeps and Blunders' or 'Gimme a Break,' '' he said. ''If it were a record
album, it would be 'Gimme Shelter' and if it were a movie, it would be 'Revenge
of the Nerds' or maybe 'Take the Money and Run.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW TRIAL ORDERED FOR A MAN FEIGNING VIETNAM SYNDROME

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 377 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, June 6


The state's highest court today ordered a trial for a robbery suspect who tried
to avoid prison by falsely contending that he was suffering from Vietnam stress
syndrome. In fact, he had never served in Vietnam.

The State Court of Appeals, in a 6 to 0 ruling, said that the suspect, Samuel
Lockett, could be tried for a series of robberies committed in Brooklyn during a
30-day period in late 1980 and early 1981.

The ruling by the state's top court overturned a lower appeals court decision
that said Mr. Lockett could not be prosecuted again.

The appeal began when State Supreme Court Justice Michael Juviler accepted a
plea on April 13, 1983, from Mr. Lockett, now 34 years old, that he was ''not
responsible by reason of a mental disease or defect.''

Brooklyn District Attorney Elizabeth Holtzman and several psychiatrists accepted
the contention by Mr. Lockett that he was suffering from ''post-traumatic stress
disorder'' caused by service in Vietnam.

Commitment Proceedings

The entering of the plea led to civil proceedings seeking to have Mr. Lockett
placed in a mental hospital.

Before those proceedings were completed, however, Miss Holtzman's staff members
learned from Federal officials that although Mr. Lockett had served in the Air
Force, he never left Randolph Air Force Base in Texas, where he was an
accounting clerk.

With that information, the trial judge vacated Mr. Lockett's plea and ordered
him to stand trial on the charges. Mr. Lockett appealed the ruling, claiming
such a move would subject him to double jeopardy. The Appellate Division of
State Supreme Court agreed.

Appellate Court Overturned

In overturning the lower appeals court ruling, the Court of Appeals said that
Mr. Lockett could be forced to stand trial again.

In a reference to the United States Supreme Court, Chief Judge Sol Wachtler
wrote in the decision, ''As the Supreme Court has noted: 'an accused must first
suffer jeopardy before he can suffer double jeopardy.' ''

Judge Wachtler stated that because Mr. Lockett had never ''been subjected to the
risk of conviction,'' he could not avoid trial by claiming double jeopardy.

Aides to Miss Holtzman said Mr. Lockett has remained in jail on unrelated
charges throughout the appeals process.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: NIXON TALE, 'SECRET HNOR'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1168 words


A dapperly dressed, fictional character named Richard M. Nixon, played by Philip
Baker Hall, who sort of resembles the former President of the United States but
certainly isn't a lookalike, comes into his wood-paneled study carrying a small
wooden box, later revealed to contain a gun. He pours himself a brandy and, for
about 10 seconds, remains settled comfortably in a chair in front of the fire.

He abruptly gets up, changes into a natty maroon velvet smoking jacket, gets out
a bottle of Chivas Regal, pours himself a serious drink and starts fiddling with
his tape recorder. ''Testing, testing . . . one, two, three . . . and . . . and
. . . oh . . . four,'' he says into the microphone, but when he plays it back,
zilch. He tries again. Still nothing. He finds the instruction booklet. It turns
out he's forgotten to insert the cassette.

This is more or less the beginning of one of the funniest, most unsettling, most
imaginative and most surprisingly affecting movies of its very odd kind I've
ever seen. It's titled ''Secret Honor'' and has been adapted by Donald Freed and
Arnold M. Stone from their monodrama that ran at the Provincetown Playhouse here
two years ago. The director is none other than Robert Altman, the sometimes
great film maker (''M*A*S*H,'' ''Nashville'') who has recently been dabbling in
theater and in film adaptations of theater work.

Mr. Altman's screen version of ''Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean,
Jimmy Dean'' was quite as foolish as it had been on the stage, while his screen
version of ''Streamers'' successfully defused the explosive mechanism of David
Rabe's play. Mr. Altman recoups his reputation with ''Secret Honor,'' a most
unlikely work - a one-character movie, set entirely within a single set,
unrelieved by flashbacks, fantasies or cutaways of any sort.

The result is something of a cinematic tour de force, both for Mr. Altman and
for the previously unknown to me Philip Baker Hall, whose contribution is a
legitimate, bravura performance, not a ''Saturday Night Live'' impersonation.

''Secret Honor,'' titled ''Secret Honor: The Last Testament of Richard M.
Nixon'' when it was done on the stage, opens a two-day engagement today at the
Thalia Theater. If this sort of thing interests you, you'll have to move
quickly.

The film begins with a disclaimer that is utterly serious. ''Secret Honor,''
says an opening credit, ''is not a work of history but of fiction.'' By calling
itself ''a political myth,'' the film may not forestall all criticism but, at
least, it doesn't play the Costa-Gavras game - announcing that everything we're
about to see is true and then going on to insert fiction at unidentified points.

It is, instead, a series of riffs - admittedly fictitious variations on recorded
history - that have the unexpected effect of making Mr. Nixon, the only
President ever to resign from office, a far more complicated, interesting and
almost likeable figure than his severest critics are inclined to acknowledge.
This film's Richard M. Nixon is not exactly a Lear or even a Richard II. He's
not tragic. But he has some of the appeal of - and is as American as - the Duke
in ''Huckleberry Finn,'' attempting to convince the members of a lynch party
that they should elect him mayor.

Surrounded by the kind of mini-television cameras that banks use to photograph
thieves, plus monitors so that he can watch his performance -and oil portraits
of Washington, Lincoln, Wilson and Kennedy, and one large photograph of Henry
Kissinger, acting as witnesses - Mr. Hall delivers a 90-minute monologue that
mixes fact with fancy, and self-serving explanations with genuine insight into
the American way.

Talking into his microphone, he begins by referring to himself in the third
person, acting as his own defense attorney before an unseen judge, railing at
the idea of ''the pardon,'' and pointing out that there cannot be a pardon
without a conviction for a crime. As the drinks and the memories accumulate, he
often forgets the mike, speaks with increasing frequency in the first person and
seldom finishes sentences. He twists names, fumes about issues, large and small.
His mind goes so much faster than his mouth that he seems to be approaching
complete mental breakdown.

He's especially caustic about President Eisenhower (''He once introduced me as
Nick Dixon!'') and says that he never did see all the rooms in the White House
''until Johnson was President.'' He's vicious about Dr. Kissinger: ''They gave
him a Nobel Peace Prize and accused me of stealing silver from the White
House.'' Simultaneously, he is saddened when thinking of Helen Gahagan Douglas -
''I really liked her. I liked her looks,'' but ''the committee'' put him up to
the things he said about her when he was running for office.

He recalls his heritage as ''a loser'' and manages to be moving as he recalls
the death of his two brothers and other family members from tuberculosis.
''Goddamn TB!'' he says. ''That's the reason we moved to California and they all
died anyway.'' A little further on: ''My old man sold the lemon grove, and then
they discovered oil!'' Hysteria mounts, but so do moments of self-awareness.

Finally he gets to ''the reason behind the reasons,'' meaning Watergate, which
involves that vague ''committee,'' to which he sold his soul, he says, to win
its backing. The ultimate revelation: ''I orchestrated Watergate!'' The reason:
to divert attention from an even greater treason that, somehow, involved the
committee, which wanted him to continue the Vietnam War for its private gain,
which he absolutely refused to do.

There is more - much more - all far better analyzed by a political expert than a
film critic. What is important here is that ''Secret Honor'' is a fascinating,
funny, offbeat movie. The screenplay, whose co-author, Mr. Freed, wrote the
clumsily paranoid ''Executive Action'' and collaborated on the film adaptation,
is an extremely skillful, witty, dramatic work with an extraordinary character
at its center.

Mr. Altman serves it beautifully. He never undercuts the material nor Mr. Hall's
immense performance, which is as astonishing and risky -for the chances the
actor takes and survives - as that of the Oscar-winning F. Murray Abraham in
''Amadeus.''

Of special interest, Mr. Altman produced the film independently, shooting in Ann
Arbor in cooperation with the University of Michigan Department of Communication
and the Los Angeles Actors' Theater.

Also on the Thalia bill is the tired old kinescope of the Checkers speech,
which, I think, is a mistake. It's become an easy laugh. ''Secret Honor'' is
something of a different order. That is, good fiction. The Cast SECRET HONOR,
directed and produced by Robert Altman; screenplay by Donald Freed and Arnold M.
Stone; director of photography, Pierre Mignot; edited by Juliet Weber; released
by Cinecom International. At the Thalia, Broadway at 95th Street. Running time:
90 minutes. This film is not rated. Richard M. NixonPhilip Baker Hall

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Philip Baker Hall

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 8, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GRADUATES OF L.I.U. URGED TO OPPOSE THE ARMS RACE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


Justice Francis T. Murphy Jr. of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme
Court yesterday urged 900 graduates of Long Island University's Brooklyn campus
to oppose the arms race and to fight poverty.

''Shout 'yes' to peace and 'yes' to the poor,'' Justice Murphy, who is presiding
justice of the division's First Department, said.

It was the university's 55th commencement, and was held at the Brooklyn Academy
of Music, at 30 Lafayette Avenue near Flatbush Avenue.

''As your conscience was the overwhelming presence at Bitburg,'' he said,
referring to President Reagan's recent visit to a German cemetery where Waffen
SS troops are buried, ''as the Vietnam War was decided on the college campuses
and streets of the United States, so the barbaric arms race can be stopped in
this country - if you but will it.''

On poverty, Justice Murphy told the graduates to help ''insure that no one among
us is hungry, homeless, unemployed or in any way deprived of what is necessary
to live with dignity.''

These were the recipients of honorary degrees: JUSTICE MURPHY, Doctor of Laws,
for a ''distinguished career as a judge and as a true servant of the public.''
DONALD H. ELLIOTT, a former chairman of the university's board of trustees and
former chairman of the City Planning Commission; Doctor of Laws, for
''distinguished and long-standing commitment to the City of New York and your
outstanding service to Long Island University.'' THOMAS SOWELL, senior fellow at
the Hoover Insitution on War, Revolution and Peace at Stanford University;
Doctor of Letters, ''for your accomplishments as an economist, for your skills
as a courageous spokesman for ethnic minorities and especially for your
dedication to scholarship in education.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Justice Francis T. Murphy Jr. receiving honorary degree from
Albert Bush-Brown (NYT/Dith Pran)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Warns U.S. Over Issue of Missing

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 114 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 8


Vietnam's official radio said today that United States hostility ''would only do
harm to efforts seeking Americans missing in action'' in the Vietnam War.

The Hanoi radio broadcast said allegations that Vietnam had tortured American
captives and forced them to work in labor camps were groundless.

The United States authorities say 2,441 servicemen and 42 civilians are listed
as missing in Indochina. Hanoi has repeatedly said that it holds no more
American prisoners of war.

President Reagan said Thursday that Vietnam must give the ''fullest possible
accounting'' of American missing in action before normalization of United
States-Vietnamese relations can be considered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSIAN POETS, BETWEEN THE LINES

BYLINE: By RICHARD GRENIER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 995 words


The Soviet Union is apparently on a cultural offensive. For the first time since
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's assumption of power, major Soviet culture heroes have
arrived in the United States: the poets Yevgeny Yevtushenko and Andrei
Voznesensky. Mr. Yevtushenko is possibly the world's most famous living poet;
Mr. Voznesensky is widely considered to be the greatest living poet of the
Russian language. In the Soviet Union, both recite their verse to audiences of
thousands.

Last week the two took part in a performance at the United Nations in honor of
World Environment Day, interspersing dramatic recitals of their verse with
recorded chirpings of beluga whales in a program of composer Paul Winter's
''ecological jazz.'' They will perform together again in Carnegie Hall next
Sunday.

In interviews here, both poets have plainly set out to give the impression of
hope for a new artistic liberalism in their homeland.

Moscow could hardly have sent abroad two more different cultural spokesmen, who
so clearly illustrate the widely divergent paths an artist can take to exercise
a critical political function within the Soviet system.

Yevgeny Yevtushenko, 52 years old, has been celebrated in the United States for
more than two decades. He is tall, athletic, with ice-blue eyes.

Highly theatrical in his platform recitals, he is a public person, who has
written of great world events, beginning with the liberalizing post-Stalin
''thaw'' in his own country and moving on to such matters as the Vietnam War, an
Apollo launching at Cape Canaveral, the Pinochet coup in Chile.

Regarding all of these, he has been a zealous advocate of official Soviet
policy. He has also written vast amounts of official verse, not only patriotic
war poems and hymns to the Soviet Motherland but some things he would apparently
just as soon forget.

When he was shown a copy of his 1965 ''The Bratsk Hydroelectric Station,'' which
has been criticized for having ''prettified'' the use of slave labor in the
building of the plant, Mr. Yevtushenko grimaced and cried, ''Bad poem!''

At the signing of the 1973 Vietnam peace accord, he wrote:

With victory, the world of friends - Both the West and the East. With victory,
Picasso.  With victory, Jane Fonda.

With victory, my Petka. With victory, Doctor Spock. Mr. Yevtushenko has maligned
Soviet critics of Soviet society less well connected with the authorities than
himself.

But he has also been a strong opponent of Soviet anti-Semitism (although he has
read different versions abroad and at home of his famous ''Babi Yar,'' a poem
that commemorates the mass execution of Ukrainian Jews by the Nazis during World
War II; in the Soviet version he includes non-Jews also massacred at Babi Yar,
as Moscow has always denied the specifically anti-Semitic nature of the event).

He also seems to have protested the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968
(although he later refused to confirm this) and the imprisonment of Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn before his expulsion from the Soviet Union in 1974. Despite what a
Moscow correspondent for this newspaper described as a talent for ''ingratiating
himself with the political leaders of the Soviet Union,'' Mr. Yevtushenko still
enjoys in the West a reputation as something of a free spirit.

A Contrast in Poets

Mr. Voznesensky offers a sharp physical contrast to Mr. Yevtushenko. Also 52, he
is shorter and more conventionally dressed; he does not cut quite so dashing a
figure.

Despite his brilliant dramatic recitals of his own poetry, he is an essentially
private person and presents an altogether different image of the role of the
critic within the Soviet Union.

To be sure, Mr. Voznesensky is no more allowed than Mr. Yevtushenko to criticize
the basic structure of the Soviet state or such highly charged actions as the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. But his stand against anti-Semitism in the
Soviet Union is even more striking than Mr. Yevtushenko's, and he has less often
succumbed to pressure to balance such positions by placing his poetic gifts at
the service of Soviet policy in other areas.

Mr. Voznesensky is also refreshingly candid, capable of saying, as he did this
week in New York, ''For you, travel is travel. For us, when we have our passport
and a ticket to the West in our hands, it is a miracle.''

Encounter With Solzhenitsyn

He seems fascinated by everything in America, but especially by the fact that in
Vermont, austere, virtually unapproachable, lives his former compatriot
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. Mr. Voznesensky met him twice in Moscow; he wrote a poem
about the second meeting that Mr. Solzhenitsyn has probably not read and, Mr.
Voznesensky says, might not like if he did.

It tells of a dreamlike encounter. On an automobile trip to Moscow, their car
gets stuck in the mud and both climb out and push with their shoulders to get
the vehicle moving. ''It is a metaphor,'' said Mr. Voznesensky. ''We get all
spattered with mud for our pains! When we reach Moscow, we both get out. He goes
to the right. . .I to the left.''

The poet said, smiling, ''That's the end of the poem. I don't think he'd like
it. He probably thinks of Holy Russia with himself alone, like God. Who am I to
help in the pushing, this little modernist clown? But I, too, wonder. What is
the mission of Holy Russia?''

So Moscow has sent to America two very different personalities. Any criticism of
their country that either makes must be within the tradition of ''Communist
reformism'' - acceptance of the basic tenets and actions of their society,
combined with suggestions intended to correct flaws.

But the ''public'' voice that was so exhilarating for Yevgeny Yevtushenko in the
de-Stalinizing late '50s and early '60s ultimately became a burden, impelling
him to blare out in verse the Government position on any number of public
issues. By contrast, Andrei Voznesensky's ''private'' voice, if this is the
style that prevails, might prove more effective.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Yevgeny Yevtushenko and Andrei Voznesensky (NYT/Lawrence
Frank)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

$38 MILLION IN REBEL AID BUYS A LOT OF ANXIETY

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


ON Capitol Hill and in the traveling White House, the issue of Central America
generated strong emotions and conflicting opinions last week as Congress and the
President struggled for control of United States policy. ''We really do stand at
a rather critical juncture in Central American policy today,'' said
Representative Lee H. Hamilton, the Indiana Democrat who heads the House
Intelligence Committee. ''The question is whether we want to fund a war in
Central America.''

Thus, the Senate voted to renew aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, but barred direct
military assistance. President Reagan assailed Daniel Ortega Saavedra,
Nicaragua's President, as ''a little dictator'' in green fatigues, while the
White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, addressed himself to fears that the United
States might not only finance a war but participate in it. He insisted that
''the President has no plans to use U.S. forces in Central America, period.''
Mr. Reagan repeated the denial of any military plan in his weekly radio address
yesterday.

Critics such as Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said they
didn't believe it. ''This Administration is preparing for war in Nicaragua,''
Senator Kennedy said. He cited reports by The New York Times that Administration
officials were openly discussing the possibility of sending combat troops.

Mr. Speakes dismissed the stories as ''foolish,'' but that did not reassure Dan
Evans of Washington, one of nine Senate Republicans who opposed aiding the
insurgents known as contras. ''What are our long-term objectives and policies
for Central America?'' Senator Evans asked. ''This question should be answered
before we proceed with the dangerous investment of $38 million.''

The tense and fearful tone of the debate reflected history and geography. ''This
hemisphere has historically created a different reaction than any other part of
the world,'' said Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut, a Democrat who
once was a Peace Corps volunteer in the Dominican Republic. ''We have a lot less
room to make a mistake and so when things go wrong, we have a tendency to react
very sharply.''

President Reagan has been trying for more than a year to persuade Congress to
renew military aid to the anti-Sandinista rebels. A proposal to finance arms
shipments was withdrawn without a vote last week. The Senate agreed to send $38
million in nonmilitary aid, to be delivered to the rebels by the Central
Intelligence Agency over the next 16 months.

But the distinction between military and nonmilitary aid could be a dubious one.
Under the proposal adopted Thursday, guns and ammunition would be excluded, but
helicopters delivering rations to the troops might well qualify. When the House
takes up the issue this week, Democrats will try to place tighter restrictions
on the type of aid and who dispenses it.

One controversy centers on the role of the Central Intelligence Agency, which
damaged its reputation when it was implicated in mining a Nicaraguan harbor last
year. The Administration argues that C.I.A. participation is essential to rebel
success. Opponents will try to keep the agency out or at least tie its hands. A
second critical point is the nature of the aid. The Administration would like to
include trucks, radar, anything short of actual weapons. Opponents want to draw
the line at food and medicine.

A third issue concerns the law that bars military assistance, direct or
indirect, to the rebels. The Administration complains that this clause prohibits
the sharing of intelligence information with the rebels; critics see the law as
a bulwark against deepening American involvement.

To compound the confusion, the

Senate passed an amendment that barred the use of Federal money for activities
against Nicaragua that violated international law or the Charter of the
Organization of American States. Then it added a proviso permitting such
activities if specifically authorized under American law.

Discussion of such matters obscured considerable political maneuvering last
week. President Reagan intensified his attack on the Sandinistas during a
fund-raising foray through Southern and border states where freshman Republican
Senators face tight races next year (Reagan on the road, page 4.) Republican
strategists believe the President benefits from fear that Communist subversion
in Central America could swamp the South with a tidal wave of refugees.
Congressional Democrats countered with a poll they commissioned showing a
majority of Southerners opposed to using American troops to ''prevent Communism
from spreading in Central America.'' Democrats contended that Mr. Reagan risks a
revival of old fears that he has ''trigger-happy'' instincts.

For the moment, however, he seems to have Democrats intimidated. Senator Dodd
said the package approved by the Senate gave many lawmakers a ''convenient
cover'' to answer anyone who accuses them of abetting Communism in the region.
But Senator Evans's question about long-term objectives and policies in Central
America remained. Senator Richard P. Lugar, Republican of Indiana and chairman
of the Foreign Relations Committee, said Mr. Reagan's goal was to ''make a
change in the Government of Nicaragua.''

Mr. Lugar insists that the Administration favors negotiations, but he adds that
armed insurrection is necessary to force the Sandinistas to bargain seriously.
''In the real world,'' he said, ''particularly with Marxists, negotiations only
take place between elements with real resources behind them.''

Administration critics respond that the rebels are making negotiations harder by
providing the Sandinistas with a rallying point and alienating the United States
from its allies. ''Our policy has failed, economically and politically as well
as militarily,'' Senator Dodd said.

Two memories seemed to haunt many members of Congress last week as the debate
moved to the House. One was of Cuba, where, many lawmakers believe, America did
not act effectively to thwart Communism; the other was of Vietnam, where, many
of the same legislators feel, America got too deeply involved. In Nicaragua,
Congress seemed to be seeking a middle-ground solution: stopping Communism but
not getting directly involved in the process.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of recruits at anti-Sandinista rebel camp in Honduras (Sipa
Press/Richard Haesler); chart of poll results of American attitudes on Nicaragua

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CHOICE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 122, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 61 words


The article on women officers shows that the military learned nothing from
Vietnam, and the same ticket-punching careerists run the armed forces.

The woman who can run a destroyer tender and is an expert on surface warfare
leaves the service. They keep the one who was encouraged to spend six months
designing a postage stamp. FREDERIC M. STINER JR. Newark, Del.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 756 words

          FICTION

 1         ''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen
          Hooven Santmyer. (Berkley, $5.95.) Life in an
          Ohio hamlet, 1868-1932.

 2        FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $4.50.)
          The relationship of a mother and daughter is
          altered by the changing values of the past 40
          years.

 3        THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch. (Fawcett,
          $4.95.) A wealthy Welsh family haunted by an
          ominous heritage.

 4        THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam,
          $3.95.) A young man from Brittany sets out to
          free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.

 5        MISSISSIPPI! by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam,
          $3.95.) The ''Wagons West'' series reaches the
          post-Civil War South and New Orleans.

 6        LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Ballantine, $4.95.) A
          fictionalized account of the Civil War
          Presidency.

 7        TENDER IS THE STORM, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon,
          $3.95.) A New York heiress's passionate encounter
          with an Arizona rancher in the late 19th century.

 8        POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $4.50.)
          A woman discovers the truth about her husband
          after he disappears.

 9        THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Bantam, $4.95.) An Arab's
          experience in the bloody wars of the Holy Land.

10        DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $4.50.) One
          man copes with a sinister Asian shipping family
          and an even more threatening Soviet plot.

11        RAMBO: First Blood Part II, by David Morrell.
          (Jove, $3.50.) Novelization of the film about a
          Vietnam vet who returns to rescue prisoners of
          war.

12 *      THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum.
          (Bantam, $4.50.) A lawyer finds himself caught in
          a conspiracy to take over the world.

13        THE MODIGLIANI SCANDAL, by Ken Follett.
          (NAL/Signet, $3.50.) A ''lost masterpiece'' and
          dirty dealings in the international art world.

14        ROLE OF HONOR, by John Gardner. (Berkley, $3.95.)
          James Bond leaves Government service to become a
          private spy.

15 *      SUMMER HARVEST, by Madge Swindells. (NAL/ Signet,
          $3.95.) Thirty years of one family's life in
          southern Africa.

          Nonfiction

          General

 1        THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
          (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.) Psychological and
          spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 2        IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and
          Robert H. Waterman Jr. (Warner, $8.95.) Lessons
          from well-run corporations.

 3        SON, by Jack Olsen. (Dell, $4.50.) The case of a
          young psychotic rapist at large in Spokane, Wash.

 4        THE KENNEDYS: DYNASTY AND DISASTER, by John H.
          Davis. (McGraw-Hill, $5.95.) The story of a
          leading Irish-American family from 1848 to 1984.

 5        FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.
          (Fawcett Gold Medal, $3.95.) Memoirs.

 6        PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Berkley,
          $3.95.) The tell-it-all autobiography of the
          actress.

          Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1        PENGUIN DREAMS AND STRANGER THINGS, by Berke
          Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoons from
          the syndicated ''Bloom County'' strip.

 2        BRIDE OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson. (Andrews,
          McMeel & Parker, $5.95.) Cartoons.

 3        RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada,
          Mexico. (Rand McNally, $5.95.) For 1985.

 4        EAT TO WIN, by Robert Hass. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.)
          A regimen for sports and fitness activities.

5 *       THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and
          Spencer Johnson. (Berkley, $6.95.) How to
          increase your productivity.

 6        GARFIELD MAKES IT BIG, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine,
          $5.95.) Cartoon humor.

 7        GROWING UP CATHOLIC, by Mary Jane Frances
          Cavolina Meara, Jeffrey Allen Joseph Stone,
          Maureen Anne Teresa Kelly and Richard Glen
          Michael Davis (Doubleday/Dolphin, $4.95.) Humor.

 8        MORE SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and Friends.
          (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) More words that
          should appear in dictionaries, but don't.
          Illustrated.

 9        AAA NORTH AMERICAN ROAD ATLAS 1985. (American
          Automobile Association/Random, $5.95.) Maps and
          traveling advice.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying. *An
asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the
bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the
book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLANDERS;
CASTING HISTORY IN BRONZE

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 2, Column 4; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 685 words


ON a raw November day last year, after 200,000 veterans had massed in Washington
and after President Reagan had addressed an assemblage of dignitaries and after
a bronze sculpture in tribute to those who had served in Vietnam had been
unveiled at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, one of those veterans approached Joel
M. Meisner of Huntington.

He said, ''Thank you,'' Mr. Meisner recalled.

''I said, 'Why are you thanking me?' He said, 'I'm thanking you for making me
free.' ''

''Why do you say that?'' Mr. Meisner asked.

'' 'Because for 15 years I couldn't hold my head up,' the veteran said. 'But now
that the statute is here, I feel that I have been accepted by the American
people.' ''

That day, joined by the sculptor, Frederick E. Hart, the 47-year-old Mr. Meisner
had unveiled the statue that stands not far from the Lincoln Memorial. Mr.
Meisner is the president of Joel Meisner & Company of Plainview, the foundry
that cast the 3,000-pound bronze depicting three fighting men, each 7 feet tall.

Last summer, after a winning bid by the foundry, work began on transforming the
clay original into bronze. Normally, Mr. Meisner said, such a casting - a
process that involves rubber molds, molten wax, a ceramic coating, replacement
of the wax inside the mold with molten metal and finishing of the metal,
including its patina - would take six to eight months. Faced with the Veterans
Day deadline, the foundry finished it in about four months.

''While we were doing it,'' Mr. Meisner said, ''we were working to all hours of
the night, and we starting getting knocks at the door when the lights were on in
the evening.''

Many of the callers, who wanted to see the statue, were veterans of Vietnam or
relatives of those who had died there. Using the language of his trade, Mr.
Meisner said: ''We could have patinaed the piece with tears.''

''We make thousands of pieces a year,'' he went on. ''We make mostly beautiful
things, which people can look at and appreciate and have esthetic feelings over.
This was really one of the first pieces which had immeasurable clout. It's
another power of sculpture - not just to make one feel peaceful and comfortable,
but this is one to arouse deep emotional feelings.''

Since its establishment in 1973, Mr. Meisner said, the foundry has cast works
for such artists as Jacques Lipchitz, Louise Nevelson, Salvador Dali, Erte,
Chaim Gross, Bruno Lucchesi and Lucas Samaras. But, he said, it also casts for
many amateur artists and is beginning to produce objets d'art, such as mirrors
and vases with sculptural images.

As far back as he can remember, Mr. Meisner said, he has loved to work with his
hands and to work with clay. He was born in Manhattan and grew up in the Astoria
section of Queens. His father ran an auto body shop, and his parents were united
in not wanting Mr. Meisner to enter his father's business.

Mr. Meisner was enrolled as a premedical student at Queens College when a
serious auto accident forced him to re-evaluate his life. ''I said if I ever get
out of this thing, I'm going to do what I want to do,'' he recalled. ''I want to
be an artist.''

He earned degrees in art from Queens College and Columbia University, worked as
an assistant to Mr. Lipchitz and taught sculpture. One of his students told him
about a casting process acquired by the Avnet Corporation of Plainview, and Mr.
Meisner's interest in developing it led over an extended period to his current
occupation. His wife, Renee, serves as chief executive officer of their company.
They have three children.

Mr. Meisner said he had not sculptured any of his own work in 23 years. ''When I
started working with other sculptors and helping them with their casting,'' he
said, ''I saw there was a tremendous amount of talent around that couldn't
really fulfill itself because the facilities to make the sculpture in those days
really didn't exist.

''So I made a decision at that point: Let me do my creativity through them and
help them do what they're really good at and extend their possibilities. That
was my contribution, and I've felt creative by doing that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Joel M. Meisner (NYT/Rameshwar Das)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COUNTY CONTEST CITES 3 PLAYS

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 13, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 831 words


IF anyone is wondering, ''Where are the new plays coming from?'' - and everyone
concerned or connected with the theater is - the answer is not restricted to the
young playwrights' festivals that seem to be popping up nationwide.

Recently, the results of a Westchester County Playwriting Contest, initiated by
County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, were announced, and the three winning plays
are by grown-ups.

The winning works were scheduled for staged readings Friday night at the Preston
Theater on the White Plains campus of Pace University, under the direction of
the Speech and Theater Department's Prof. Ruis Woertendyke, himself a
playwright.

When Mr. Woertendyke heard of the contest - the deadline for entries was Dec. 30
- he said, ''I invited myself to be one of the jurors.'' The other jurors were
Rosemary Foley, a playwright and actress, and William Stutler, the owner and
producer of An Evening Dinner Theater in Elmsford.

The plays were independently evaluated - each judge alone. A ''stipend'' of
$100, coming out of the university's theater-production budget, was awarded to
each of the prize-winning playwrights. ''That's more motivation than nothing,''
Mr. Woertendyke said.

Perhaps the reward of seeing one's work on stage would have been motivation
enough. Certainly, it was for the 76 playwrights who submitted one-act plays
without knowing financial renumeration was part of the prize, along with the
readings.

The first winning play selected was ''Bears,'' a two-character work about a
young newsboy, 15, and a runaway girl, 14, who meet at a bus station newsstand.
Containing a poem by Carson McCullers in its introduction, the play has ''an
early Tennessee Williams feeling,'' Mr. Woertendyke said.

Of the three winners, ''Bears'' was picked for a professional staging by East
Coast Arts Inc., a nonprofit organization that is having a 135-seat theater
built at Wildcliff in New Rochelle. The completion of the playhouse - and the
play's production -is expected to take place in the fall. ''Bears'' was written
by Roderick Nash, an Ardsley resident, who is a professor of drama at Iona
College in New Rochelle. He has already written nine full-length plays and a
dozen one-act works.

Another winning work, ''Nobody's Babe,'' is a first play by Joseph A. Gallick of
Verplanck. Mr. Gallick is the director of communications for the New York
Vietnam Veterans Leadership Program and has written newspaper and magazine
articles in addition to making a documentary film.

In this four-character play, Mr. Gallick is confronting the male chauvinism
within an umpire school in Florida, when a secretary, who has completed an
assertiveness-training course, decides to become the first female umpire. In the
introduction to Mr. Gallick's play, it is written that ''evaluation'' of umpires
''makes Marine boot camp look like the Boy Scouts.''

''Disdain for Lydia Jenks'' by Vincent Fulgenzi of Bronxville was another
winner. It takes place during an outdoor antiques show in the parking lot of a
suburban shopping center. The play involves the concerns of two couples - one
heterosexual and one homosexual.

Three other plays received honorable mention: ''Drivers'' by Neil Hawlk of
Mohegan Lake; ''The Bookworm'' by Steve Otfinoski of Hastings-on-Hudson and
''The Squaw With Blue Eyes'' by Marybeth Weston of Armonk.

According to Judy Matson, the coordinator of ''Special Projects'' in the County
Executive's office, the six plays will be distributed to county
community-theater groups for consideration - ''They're all available to pick
up,'' she said, adding: ''Talent is here, and it has to be given the opportunity
to show its creativity.'' The scripts will also be published by the County
Executive's office, she added.

Commenting that ''a play isn't a play until it's alive,'' Mr. Woertendyke, who
has had his work produced at La Mama Experimental Theater Club, a forerunner of
the Off Off Broadway movement, gave the three winning plays their initial
exposure with student-volunteer casts.

Mr. O'Rourke emphasized the importance of inspiring ''aspiring, unpublished,
unproduced playwrights'' and ''giving them the visibility and space to show what
they could do.''

Commenting that he had nothing to do with the selection process - ''A heavy
burden off my shoulders,'' he said - and that the state of the arts in the
county is stronger in music than in theater, Mr. O'Rourke couldn't help
recalling his own show-business roots.

Once he was ''an aspiring but talentless'' child in the chorus of ''Song of
Norway'' on Brodway - and a ''quiz kid'' on television. ''We were the photogenic
ones; the smart ones were on the radio,'' he said. Supporting new plays, then,
is a vicarious experience for Mr. O'Rourke, who hopes the contest will become an
''annual affair.'' ''We might find a real star out there,'' he declared.

We said to our playwrights, we ''can't promise you a Broadway production,'' Mrs.
Matson said, adding: ''It is our first try.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAMPS;
NEW AMERICAN ISSUES

BYLINE: By John F. Dunn

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2251 words


The United States Postal Service will issue over 70 stamps in 1985 with a total
face value in excess of $24.50. A quick check of the records reveals no single
year in which a higher total face value was issued.

This year's face value is made disproportionately high by the recently-released
$10.75 Express Mail issue. The count has been swelled by additions to the
Transportation Coils and Great Americans series. For whatever reason, collectors
have accepted the deluge with unusual aplomb even as the Postal Service steps up
the pace with three new issues this month in the span of five days.

First to appear was the June 7 release of a 9 cent Sylvanus Thayer single,
another issue in the Great Americans series. Mr. Thayer is described as the
father of technical education in America because of his success in converting
the United States Military Academy at West Point into the nation's first
technological school.

Appointed superintendent of the academy in 1817, Sylvanus Thayer succeeded Alden
Partridge in a change that precipitated a year-long dispute between the two men.
Mr. Partridge, honored with an 11 cent Great Americans stamp earlier this year,
was described by the Postal Service as the ''spiritual father'' of the Reserve
Officers' Training Corps. Both stamps were designed by the same designer, Robert
Alexander Anderson of Lexington, Mass.

Deadline for Sylvanus Thayer first day covers is July 7. The stamps are now on
sale at local post offices and priority is given to covers with Thayer stamps
already affixed. Collectors are reminded that 22 cents postage per cover is
required and no stamps issued after June 7 may be used. Ready-to-cancel covers
should be sent to Customer-Affixed Envelopes, Postmaster, Braintree, Mass.
02184-9991.

For Postal-Service affixing, self-addressed covers should be sent to Sylvanus
Thayer Stamp, Postmaster, Braintree, Mass. 02184-9992. Payment by check or money
order at the rate of 22 cents per cover to a maximum of 50 covers should
accompany all orders.

The 3.4 cents School Bus and 11 cents Stutz Bearcat stamps are both part of the
Transportation Coils series. The School Bus stamp was issued yesterday at the
annual NAPEX stamp show in Arlington, Va. and depicts a Model-T Ford bus built
by the Bluebird Body Company of Fort Valley, Ga. in 1927. The bus has been
restored by the company and is on display in Fort Valley.

Although the controversy over forced busing of students has overshadowed other
considerations, the fact is that school buses are used to transport
approximately 50 percent of the nation's students. Millions of students have
been bused for educational purposes since a school district first hired a farmer
to carry children to school in his wagon in 1859.

The 3.4 cent denomination meets the minimum per piece rate for carrier route
third class bulk mailings by nonprofit organizations. The stamp is sold in coils
of 500 and 3,000, with a plate number appearing on every 24th stamp.

Collectors are encouraged to obtain stamps at their post offices, although this
may be difficult given the odd rate and the large coil roll sizes. At least 22
cents per cover must be affixed and no stamp issued after June 8 may be used.
Deadline for orders is July 8 and the address is Customer-Affixed Envelopes,
Postmaster, Arlington, Va. 22210-9991.

For Postal-Service affixing, self-addressed covers should be sent to School Bus
Stamp, Postmaster, Arlington, Va. 22210-9992. Payment by check or money order at
the rate of 22 cents per cover to a maximum of 50 covers should accompany all
orders.

Issue date for the Stutz Bearcat stamp is June 11, with the first day site being
Baton Rouge, La. The 11 cent stamp features an illustration of the stylish Stutz
Super Bearcat, a vehicle that reached the zenith of its popularity in the
1920's. The car depicted is a 1933 model.

The forerunner of the Stutz Bearcat was an automobile built by Harry C. Stutz in
1911 and later driven by him in the Indianapolis 500. Based on the vehicle's
performance in that race, the Stutz Motorcar Company was formed and turned out
Bearcats and Super Bearcats between 1914 and 1935 when the effects of the
Depression forced the closing of the company.

Although not all post offices will stock this issue, collectors are encouraged
to try to obtain Bearcat stamps at local post offices beginning June 12 for
affixing to envelopes for first day cover requests. Total postage of 22 cents is
required and no stamps issued after June 11 will be accepted. Order deadline is
July 11 and the address is Customer-Affixed Envelopes, Postmaster, Baton Rouge,
La. 70821-9991.

Collectors desiring Postal Service affixing of stamps should send self-addressed
envelopes to Stutz Bearcat Stamp, Postmaster, Baton Rouge, La. 70821-9991.
Collectors desiring Postal Service affixing of stamps should send self-addressed
envelopes to Stutz Bearcat Stamp, Postmaster, Baton Rouge, La. 70821-9992. Check
or money order at the rate of 22 cents per cover to a maximum of 50 covers
should accompany all orders.

Design Ideas

The flood of new United States stamps could be a lot worse. Although the 19
commemorative ideas accepted by the Postal Service for 1985 exceeds the stated
goal of 15, each year over 1,500 suggestions are submitted.

Most suggestions are serious and all are reviewed by the Citizens' Stamp
Advisory Committee. But, some ideas have been quite humorous. The Postal Service
has received requests for stamps depicting the world's champion hog caller, a
cat that regularly visited a class requesting such a stamp, the first daylight
robbery, the rural outhouse and a nudist group.

Because of the large number of suggestions, the Postal Service has set
restrictions to screen out otherwise-deserving ideas. In 1985, for example,
while many nations are celebrating the 40th anniversary of the conclusion of
World War II as well as that of the United Nations, the United States will not
be participating since this country's commemoratives are issued on 50th
anniversaries.

Other restrictions that apply include prohibitions on stamps for living persons
or persons who have been dead less than 10 years (other than deceased
presidents); stamps for cities or towns, charitable organizations, political,
fraternal, sectarian or commercial organizations; stamps for specific products
and stamps for events of limited national appeal.

All of these restrictions are subject to change and the Postal Service has been
known to make exceptions or bend the rules to qualify issues. A recent example
is the much-deserved Winter Special Olympics stamp that was issued March 25
despite the restriction against stamps for charitable organizations.

It is interesting to note there is no prohibition against stamps for
governmental agencies. In 1985, despite the flood of new issues and deserving
themes that had to be rejected, a stamp was issued for an agency - the Rural
Electrification Administration - that had been designated for extinction in the
budget-cutting process.

Semi-Postals

Semi-postal issues are among requests received by the Postal Service each year.
Such issues are accompanied by a surcharge in excess of the usual postage. The
extra revenue is designated for a charity or government program.

The first semi-postal was issued by Britain - a one penny postcard with a five
penny surcharge to aid postal workers. In 1975 Britain issued its first
semi-postal stamp, a four and one-half penny plus five and one half penny stamp
to aid health and handicap charities. Poor response led to abandonment of the
program.

In recent testimony before the Subcommittee on Fisheries, Wildlife Conservation
and the Environment, Assistant Postmaster General Gordon C. Morison explained
the Postal Service's stance in opposition to a semi-postal stamp for funding of
fish and wildlife conservation programs. After discussing the issue of wildlife
stamps and citing the numerous postal issues that publicize the conservation
movement, Mr. Morison widened his remarks to the general subject of
semi-postals.

Mr. Morison stated, ''The Postal Service has long felt that semi-postal stamps
are unlikely to prove an effective means of raising substantial revenues for
charitable or public purposes in this country.''

Responding to a Fish and Wildlife Service estimate that, based on sales in
Switzerland and West Germany, 226 million semi-postal stamps could be sold
annually in the United States, Mr. Morison added, ''. . . we doubt that
semi-postals could expect to attract anywhere near the same level of acceptance
in the United States as in these two European countries which have accumulated
years of experience . . . Private philanthropic activity is much less pervasive
in these countries . . . A more reliable point of comparison for the United
States may be the recent experience of Canada and Great Britain, both of which
abandoned their programs as failures and regretted issuing semi-postals in light
of poor sales performance and collector unhappiness.''

Charity Issue

Scheduled for release tomorrow by the principality of Liechtenstein is a set of
three stamps honoring the 40th anniversary of the Liechtenstein Red Cross and
the involvement of Princess Gina as president of that charity.

The Princess was at the border on April 30, 1945 as thousands of refugees fled
the misery of war-torn Europe, a scene that is re-enacted on the new 20 rappen
stamp. The 50 rappen value depicts the rescue service in action while the 1.20
franc issue shows the Princess with Indochinese refugees from the Vietnam War.

June Auction

Harmers of New York will conduct an 886-lot public auction of United States and
foreign stamps and covers on June 18 and 19 at the firm's galleries, 14 East
33rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.

An important offering of rare and valuable early Switzerland stamps and covers
from an original find not previously offered publicly will be featured. Also
offered are numerous collections and large lots. Copies of the catalogue of sale
are available for $2 from the firm at the address above.

Starting Wrong

''Spend time before you spend money'' is a maxim that applies as much to stamp
collecting as it does to the securities markets. Without a knowledge of value
and alternate sources of supply, the new collector or philatelic investor is
bound for costly errors, disillusionment and eventual abandonment of what could
otherwise be a lifetime hobby.

What brings this to mind is the latest in a series of cautions to collectors and
investors from The Philatelic Traders' Society (P.T.S.). The London-based
international dealers' group has issued a pronouncement that ''deplores the
decision of . . . Tuvalu and other territories to sell so-called 'progressive
proofs' . . . that usually are for the technical use of the printer and not
specifically produced for public sale.''

Although plate proofs and trial color proofs are an established specialty within
the hobby, the P.T.S.'s problem with the Tuvalu and like issues seems to be the
apparent intent of a money making scheme that capitalizes on the gullibility of
collectors and investors.

This same issue of intent separates extremely valuable legitimate errors, such
as the United States 1918 airmail inverts that have sold for upwards of
$200,000, from those imperforate or missing-color varieties deliberately
produced by nations that place short-term gain over long-term philatelic
standing.

A careful reading of the Scott Standard Postage Stamp Catalogues, available in
many libraries, will assist collectors in identifying legitimate varieties and
errors. What's In A Name? One of the great appeals of stamps always has been the
lesson in geography that is offered by a world wide collection. Sometimes, those
''strange sounding names'' get a bit too confusing.

Old-timers are well-versed in geography. Orange River Colony is a former British
colony in South Africa. Djibouti in East Africa was once the French Territory of
Afars and Issas. Thurn and Taxis was a princely house that enjoyed postal
privileges prior to the formation of the German Empire. Who ever heard of
''Z.E.S?'' A review of the 1985 Scott Catalogue indexes shows no Z.E.S. and yet
it is found in the stamp periodicals including the Scott Stamp Monthly. It is no
surprise that collectors have inquired as to the geographic and philatelic
whereabouts of Z.E.S.

As it turns out, Z.E.S. is Zil Elwagne Sesel, a number of small islands in the
Indian Ocean. Until 1980, Z.E.S. was known as the British Indian Ocean Territory
(also known to collectors as B.I.O.T.).

With the geography easily explained, the philately comes a bit harder. To find
Z.E.S. in the Scott Catalogues collectors must be familiar with the ''For the
Record'' listings. It is there they will find Zil Elwagne Sesel. ''For the
Record'' contains information on stamp issues of questionable legitimacy.
Usually they are issues of legitimate postal issuing entities that are deemed to
be unnecessary by the cataloguers or issues of entities that are not postally
independent.

As part of the Seychelles postal administration, Z.E.S. fits into the latter's
category. As if to emphasize the point, the Seychelles Philatelic Bureau
recently issued an announcement (including order form) for three new sets of
stamps from Z.E.S.

The new issues were prompted by a name change. Just when collectors were
beginning to catch up with Zil Elwagne Sesel, the island group has become Zil
Elwannyen Sesel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Model-T Ford on Transportation Coil; Photo of Leichtenstein 20
rappen issue showing Princess Gina aiding refugees in 1945

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Thanks for the Memorial

BYLINE: By Deirdre Carmody and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 227 words


With sentiments as simple -sometimes as moving - as those etched on the
monument, people have been thanking New York in the month since the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial was dedicated. Some excerpts from their letters:

* Oakland, Ore.: ''As a G.I. of W.W. II, I applaud your city's ticker-tape
parade. 'Political wars' are something new but the bullets and bombs are just as
devastating.''

* Philadelphia: ''When I attempted to pay my fare for the cab ride from my hotel
to the wall-lighting ceremony, he said, 'No charge for Vietnam veterans. It is
my way of saying thank you.' ''

* Boston: ''We Vietnam Vets had a great time & thanks again. The Manhattan
police were very helpful as I was mugged at 3 A.M. at 44th & Broadway.''

* Mother of a veteran, Fort Myers Beach, Fla.: ''Here is a very small amount of
money to help clean up the streets from the ticker tape. It cannot possibly
express my appreciation.'' (Enclosed was a check for $25.)

* Gold Star mother, Weehawken, N.J.: ''I was so touched when one of the vets
stopped and saluted me. I'll never know who he was but I'll remember him
always.''

* Avenel, N.J.: ''I was not able to go to the memorial or the parade but I
watched it on TV. I cried all through it and kissed my M.I.A. bracelet and
wished David could have been there. I have been wearing my bracelet for almost
fourteen years.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
NOT SO NEAT A WAR

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


For United States military forces, an invasion of Nicaragua would be ''like
falling off a log,'' says an intelligence officer. And an official of the Army's
Southern Command estimates that it would take only two weeks to gain control of
60 percent of the Nicaraguan population.

So there's light at the end of the tunnel even before the United States strides
into a new quagmire. No sweat, a ''U.S. political-military officer in the
region'' told Joel Brinkley and Bill Keller of The New York Times:

''The U.S. would come in heavily for a month or so, mostly with air strikes
against major facilities. Then a new government would be put into place, and it
would come with its own army'' to clean up whatever resistance might remain.

If that sounds familiar, it is. Sanitary air power with its ''surgical strikes''
was supposed to make short work of the primitive Vietcong and the North
Vietnamese, too, with few American casualties from a dirty ground war. For a
long decade of death and destruction, the United States searched for a popular
and effective government to ''put into place'' in Saigon - never grasping that a
government hand-picked in Washington could have little legitimacy in Vietnamese
eyes. And the South Vietnamese army the United States organized, supplied and
trained in the American military image proved to be mostly a supplier of
abandoned American weapons to an enemy it hardly tried to defeat.

Does that reflect the much-derided ''Vietnam syndrome'' or ''fear of the use of
power''? No, it reflects the hard but essential lessons - taught not just in
Vietnam but in Afghanistan - that political problems don't necessarily have
military solutions, and that military and technological might can't always
overcome a politically or patriotically motivated populace.

But Nicaragua would be different, Mr. Brinkley and Mr. Keller were told, while
compiling two articles about the possibility of a United States invasion. For
one thing, the population would ''rise up'' to support the invaders - a
proposition that ignores the history of gringo military intervention in Central
America and assumes that Nicaraguans so hate the Sandinista Government that
they'd welcome another intervention and a new United States occcupation.

If that's the case, would the Sandinistas have armed Nicaraguans so extensively
and given military training to so many? Why doesn't this armed people rise now
and join the ''contras'' the Reagan Administration organized and supports? Isn't
it as likely that a United States invasion would generate patriotic support for
the Sandinistas that they couldn't win for themselves? And if the government the
United States would ''put into place'' were derived, as is probable, from the
same contras, elements of the Somoza regime that Nicaraguans really did rise
against would be restored to power. Would such a government, tainted with
Somocistas and United States backing, or the army the United States would train
and equip, be likely to gain sufficient popular support to win a quick war over
the Marxist but nationalist guerrillas the Sandinistas would send to the
jungles? American experience in Vietnam and Soviet experience in Afghanistan
argue against it.

The Times reporters were assured that the Sandinistas would have no Ho Chi Minh
Trail, and that Nicaragua could be sealed off ''tighter than a drum'' by air and
sea power -technology again. But guerrillas aren't totally dependent on outside
supplies; they can live off the population, and - as in El Salvador and Vietnam
- can arm themselves with captured United States weapons from the half-hearted
armies that pursue them. Suppose it didn't turn out to be a ''splendid little
war''? As one cautious colonel warned: ''I've been in the army 24 years and I've
never seen anything neat.'' The Army says it should not be asked to fight again
without public support; but in a television age, with American families watching
body bags again coming home from a frustrating war in which firepower and
technology can't find an enemy to pulverize, how long could public support be
maintained?

Even without a war, polls show no majority backing for overthrowing the
Sandinistas. Even the Administration concedes that a United States invasion
would be a political disaster in the rest of the hemisphere. And it's not
necessarily true that the United States soon may have no other choice but to
send in its troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: First of two articles

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Army's Critic Shifting

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Francis X. Clines

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 107 words


One of the most prominent uniformed critics of how the Army fought the Vietnam
War is retiring from the Army after 38 years, to become a writer for U.S. News &
World Report. He is Col. Harry Summers Jr., an infantry officer whose book, ''On
Strategy'' critized the military and politcal decisions in Washington and Saigon
that led to the fall of South Vietnam. He is now holder of the Gen. Douglas
MacArthur chair of military research at the Army War College at Carlisle
Barracks, Penn. The magazine's editor, Shelby Coffey 3d, said that Colonel
Summers's title would be senior military correspondent and that he would start
in September.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SIHANOUK URGES THE U.S. TO HELP SET UP COALITION

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1286 words

DATELINE: PYONGYANG, North Korea, June 10


Prince Norodom Sihanouk appealed to the United States today to use its ''great
influence and prestige'' to help Cambodia establish a coalition government of
Communists and non-Communists under international guarantees.

He spoke in an interview at his residence outside the North Korean capital,
where he has made his home for several months each year since the 1970 coup in
Cambodia that overthrew him and installed a pro-United States Government under
Gen. Lon Nol.

The Prince, ruler of Cambodia for nearly 30 years before the coup, suggested
that creation of such a coalition government could grow out of a new Geneva
conference on the six-year-old conflict in Cambodia, which is between Vietnam
and the rebel forces opposing Hanoi's occupation.

'More Important Than Dollars'

''For our people, there is something more important than dollars and weapons,
and it is diplomacy,'' the Prince said. ''The United States should use its very
great influence and prestige and put them at the disposal of the Cambodian
people.

''I think we should go back to Geneva,'' he said, referring to the 1954 Geneva
conference that which tried to bring peace to Indochina after the French
withdrawal from Vietnam.

The Prince said the Reagan Administration should shift its emphasis from the $5
million in military aid it has pledged to the non-Communist guerrilla forces
fighting the Vietnamese in Cambodia. One of the two forces that would benefit
from the American aid is loyal to Prince Sihanouk.

The Prince is now titular head of state of the coalition front forged by the two
non-Communist guerrilla groups and the Communist Khmer Rouge.

Mansion on a Hill

The interview today took place in a 40-room mansion built for the Prince in 1974
by the North Korean leader, Kim Il Sung. The mansion sits on a wooded hillside
15 miles from the center of Pyongyang, a modern city of 800,000 people that,
with its wide boulevards, heroic monuments and grandiose public buildings, is
strongly reminiscent of Moscow, though considerably tidier and greener.

Prince Sihanouk, 63 years old, was interviewed in a reception room the size of a
tennis court, with chandeliers, that sits on the ground floor of his two-story
mansion - ''My palace,'' as he referred to it.

The Prince appeared fit, but said that he had been troubled by the onset of what
he described as diabetes and by problems with his liver and circulation in a
leg. He said his health was his concern two months ago when he offered his
resignation as head of the guerrilla coalition.

Working and Writing

At the time, he said China and his coalition partners, the Khmer Rouge and a
group headed by Son Sann, a former Sihanouk loyalist who joined the 1970 coup,
had prevailed on him to remain in the post. In the interview, the Prince said he
had worked out a ''new arrangement'' under which he will spend six months each
year working for the coalition and six months writing his memoirs.

Although Princess Monique, the Prince's wife, was waiting with his aunt and
mother-in-law for a lunch prepared by his 100-member Korean staff, the Prince
was in an expansive mood. He talked well into the afternoon about the United
States, which he had blamed for the turmoil in Cambodia after his overthrow; the
Khmer Rouge, the zealot guerrilla group whose rule brought death to large
numbers of his countrymen, and China.

The Prince spoke warmly of President Reagan, whom he has met several times since
taking up the leadership of the guerrilla coalition in 1982.

At one point, he spoke of Mr. Reagan and Mr. Kim, the 72-year-old North Korean
leader, who is the center of an extensive personality cult here, as ''my good
friends.'' It is an unusual combination, given the hostility between the United
states and North Korea.

The Prince acknowledged that his feelings toward the United States had come a
long way since the 1970 coup. Although he has often blamed President Nixon and
his Secretary of State, Henry A. Kissinger, for ''communizing'' Cambodia by
their policies, including their support for the coup, the Prince said he felt it
was better ''to let bygones be bygones.''

He said he and Mr. Kissinger had become ''friends'' in meetings in Peking and
New York in recent years, although they disagree about the events of 1970. Sees
Key Role for U.S.  The Prince said that although the United States was still in
a ''trauma'' over its role in Indochina, it was well placed to play a key role
in advancing a resolution of the Cambodian problem. He said that this was first
of all a matter of power, but that changes in the world situation since 1970
also meant that the United States was better placed to engage in such diplomacy.

''Now, it is the Soviet Union which is condemned,'' he said. ''It is the United
States which is liked.''

Although the Prince spoke warmly of China's continuing backing for the
anti-Vietnamese guerrillas, his appeal for an American diplomatic initiative
apparently reflected his conviction that the flexibility needed to bring about a
Cambodian compromise is not likely to come from Peking.

Although he puncuated his remarks with laughter, the Prince said he was ''very,
very pessimistic'' about any breakthrough, military or diplomatic, that would
end what he called the ''colonization'' of Cambodia.

'Hit-and-Run Tactics'

The Prince described the guerrillas' strategy as one of ''hit-and-run'' tactics
aganst a far superior Vietnamese force, and he said the fact that the guerrillas
had failed in several years' fighting to take a single town or district meant
that the coalition's recognition by the United Nations as the legitimate
Government of Cambodia could eventually be withdrawn.

The Prince said the only prospect of a military ouster of the Vietnamese was if
China used its forces to ''punish'' Hanoi with an assault across the two
countries' common frontier, as it sought to do in a brief war in 1979. But the
Prince said it was clear from his contacts with Chinese leaders that Peking had
decided that the ''second lesson'' for Vietnam, of which senior Chinese
officials spoke earlier this year, had been set aside as too costly at a time
when China is engaged on a program of economic modernization.

''China will not invade Vietnam,'' he said. ''They have their own interests. If
China cannot afford to go to war with Vietnam, I cannot compel them to on the
grounds that we are in difficulties on the battlefield.''

Help From the Chinese

Apart from going to war, the Prince said China had given the guerrillas
everything they could ask for.

The Prince was at his most philosophic in discussing the Khmer Rouge, whose
policies of mass execution and forced resettlement of urban dwellers in the
countryside led to the deaths a large proportion of the Cambodian population
from 1975 until 1979. He said he believed about 2 million people had died, among
them 5 of his children and 14 of his grandchildren.

The Prince said he originally regarded the Vietnamese invasion as the lesser of
two evils. But later, he said, when it became clear that the Vietnamese intended
to remain, he concluded that they were a greater danger than Pol Pot, the Khmer
Rouge leader. He said there was no prospect of Pol Pot's ever becoming the
dominant figure in Cambodia again.

''I love my people and I love my country,'' the Prince said. ''But I have to be
realistic, I cannot be blind to facts. As a Buddhist, I must get rid of hatred
and vengeance.

''By staying with the Khmers Rouges, I try to persuade them not to create more
sufferings for my people. If I decide to fight them or denounce them, I can have
no influence, no opportunity to persuade them to deal reasonably with the
Cambodian people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PANEL ON PBS DEBATES PRESS ROLE DURING WAR

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 633 words


''THE MILITARY AND THE MEDIA: The Correspondent Under Fire'' gives us
distinguished journalists, former Government officials and military men in a
debate: How should the press cover a war? It is a rich, ripe question, never
satisfactorily answered on the program tonight. The debate, which will continue
next Tuesday and on June 25, will be seen on Channel 13 at 9 o'clock.

The format is similar to that of other programs produced by the media and
society seminars of the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism. A
moderator - in this case, Arthur Miller of the Harvard Law School - poses
hypothetical situations and then asks questions. The technique has worked better
in previous programs than it does here.

Consider, for example, Mr. Miller's opening hypothesis. It is fanciful. The
right-wing Central American Government of El Dorado has requested United States
aid to fight a leftist insurgency. American public opinion, shaped by ''an
exceedingly popular President just elected to a second term,'' favors military
intervention. Consequently, American troops are committed to El Dorado.

In fact, the hypothesis strains belief. In 1985, one cannot imagine American
public opinion favoring military intervention on behalf of a right-wing
government, no matter how popular the President. Mr. Miller's hypothesis just
doesn't work, and even if it did, he would still be making the problem too easy.
He is talking about a popular war, and in popular wars the relationship between
the military and the press is relatively benign.

Much of the opening discussion is also benign. James R. Schlesinger, a former
Secretary of Defense, says that reporters must be properly accredited. Alexander
M. Haig, a former Secretary of State, says the Government and the military must
follow a ''coordinated approach.'' Then Morley Safer of CBS dramatically bursts
out.

''How long are we going to allow this gang around this table to continue to
attempt to rewrite history,'' he says. ''Vietnam, Vietnam, Vietnam. Vietnam was
lost by a gang of subversive reporters.''

Mr. Safer seems to be throwing in a red herring. No one on television has
mentioned Vietnam. Later in the discussion Mr. Safer advises correspondents to
ignore official briefings during wartime. He is self-consciously adversarial.
Tension between the press and the military? Mr. Safer dramatizes the problem.

Subsequently, Theodore H. White, the author, says sensibly that reporters must
follow some rules in wartime, and that there is a difference between intelligent
military censorship and arbitrary political censorship. Then there is a
thoughtful exchange between John Laurence of ABC and Col. George Connell of the
Marines.

Colonel Connell says that the military is an ''honorable profession,'' and that
he worries about the ''decency'' of some television images. Mr. Laurence doesn't
quiet his fears, but he does make the case for a free press.

''An uninformed American public,'' he says, ''even to the horrors of war, is not
one that's going to continue to make responsible decisions through its elected
leadership.''

Mr. Laurence is correct, although it's still possible to feel sympathetic to
Colonel Connell. The discussion may be called ''The Military and the Media,''
but the dispute is really between the military and television, not between the
military and newspapers and magazines.

''The technology of television is making it very hard to go to war,'' John
Chancellor of NBC says thoughtfully at the conclusion. One wishes the discussion
had begun there. The television program - introduced by Fred W. Friendly of the
Columbia Journalism School and produced by the media and society seminars in
association with public television stations and 10 news-gathering organizations
- has wasted too much time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Fred Friendly

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

INDUSTRY FEARS A SUMMER FILM GLUT

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, June 10


For Hollywood, summer begins during the last week of May, when the first summer
movies trickle into theaters. This year, summer will bring a flood - 45 films,
up 25 percent from last year -and the movie industry is afraid that for many
movies, the chance of box-office success will be washed away in the deluge.

There are other reasons to worry. At the end of May, box-office revenues were 7
percent below 1984. Last year was a glorious year for the movie industry, with
ticket sales in the United States and Canada exceeding $4 billion for the first
time. But with admissions so far this year down 14 percent, more movies are
fighting for a share of a smaller box office pie.

More movies - and more expensive movies - are the order of the day. ''The
average cost of a movie now is $14.5 million, which is getting to be
unbelievable,'' says Steven Randall, marketing vice president at Tri-Star.

MGM/UA's ''View to a Kill,'' the James Bond movie that opened 17 days ago, cost
more than $30 million. Tri-Star's ''Rambo: First Blood Part II'' cost almost $30
million. Disney's ''Return to Oz'' reached $28 million. An average price of $75
million each was cited for Universal's Richard Pryor comedy ''Brewster's
Millions''; Paramount's ''Explorers'' -a science-fiction adventure about three
boys who build a space ship in their back yard - and Columbia's attempt to
resurrect the Western, ''Silverado.'' Such movies will have to sell around $75
million worth of tickets before they start making money for their studios.

A Hit Is Always a Bargain

If a movie becomes a box-office blockbuster, it earns so much that the amount of
money spent to make it doesn't matter in the least. ''There's nothing so cheap
as a hit,'' Frank Price, the chairman of Universal Pictures, once said. Speaking
of a decision he made when he was chairman of Columbia, he added, ''If
'Ghostbusters' had failed, people would have thought I was out of my mind to
spend $30 million on a comedy.''

''Ghostbusters'' earned $190 million last year. ''Rambo,'' a hymm to patriotism
starring Sylvester Stallone as a warrior determined to bring-'em-back-alive from
Vietnam, will probably not equal that figure, but, in less than three weeks, it
has already earned $70 million. By comparison, ''View to a Kill,'' which is
doing well, has sold $30.1 million worth of tickets in an equivalent time.

'' 'Rambo' is a juggernaut,'' says Jeffrey Katzenberg, chairman of movies and
television at Walt Disney studios. ''It's a breakout smash hit, and it's
obviously going to be one of the top two or three movies of the summer.''

'Rambo' Fights Off Challenge

The ability of ''Rambo'' to strongarm its competitors was obvious last weekend
when the film stayed at the top of the box office pile despite the challenge of
''The Goonies,'' a teen-age adventure story from Warner Brothers that resembles
the Disneyland amusement park ride ''Pirates of the Caribbean.'' With the magic
name of Steven Spielberg attached to it as executive producer when it opened in
1,705 theaters last Friday, expectations for ''The Goonies'' were very high, and
the $9.1 million the movie has earned is considered disappointing by Hollywood.

The eventual profitability of a movie is not easy to determine, but it is
interesting to look at the two Universal movies currently in the marketplace.
''Fletch,'' a comedy starring Chevy Chase that is based on a series of books by
Gregory McDonald about a manic reporter who uses disguises to get his stories,
cost approximately $12 million, a modest budget in terms of today's prices. In
10 days, ''Fletch'' has earned $16.5 million. ''Brewster's Millions'' cost more
than $25 million. Although it has sold almost $25 million worth of tickets in
its first 19 days, it will be much less profitable to Universal.

Universal's Mr. Price argues, however, that paying a lot of money for a movie is
often justified. ''Paying for the right star cast,'' he says, ''can protect your
downside. It's a way of getting people to the theater, and it's better than
making a $10 million picture to which nobody comes. I once looked at the movies
I had made that cost over $20 million, and six out of the seven had been
profitable. That wasn't true for the moderate-budget movies I had made.''

Of course when a movie really falls on its face, the higher the budget, the more
painful the fall. The first failure of this summer is ''Perfect,'' Columbia's
$17 million expose of California health clubs starring John Travolta as an
investigative reporter. ''Perfect'' earned a bare $4.2 million last weekend in
1,320 theaters. The movie got scathing reviews and took in less money on Sunday
than on Friday, an always ominous sign that early audiences are telling their
friends not to see the film.

Blockbusters Unpredictable

One thing almost everyone in Hollywood agrees on is that blockbusters are
unpredictable. Universal's president of marketing, Marvin Antonowsky, says,
''With 'Rambo,' you're dealing with the emotional climate in this country.
Audiences cheer when Stallone says that this time he hopes we'll win the Vietnam
War. If the picture had come out two years ago, nothing like this would have
happened.''

Which of the 40 movies that haven't yet reached movie screens will be the
summer's other blockbusters? Movie audiences will make the ultimate decision.
Fox is hopeful for ''Cocoon,'' its science fantasy about a group of aliens who
meet a group of earthling senior citizens. Paramount is betting on
''Explorers.'' Universal is convinced the winner will be another Spielberg
presentation, ''Back to the Future,'' about a boy who is transported backward in
time and meets the young couple who are going to become his parents. And Disney
thinks the laurels will go to its $25 million animated adventure fantasy, ''The
Black Cauldron.''

Meanwhile, Warner Brothers and Columbia are counting on two Westerns that are
galloping out of the past: Clint Eastwood's ''Pale Rider'' and Lawrence Kasdan's
''Silverado.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION;
MAGAZINES FOR CHILDREN ADDRESS SERIOUS TOPICS

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 943 words


SIX years ago a group of history buffs created Cobblestone: The History Magazine
for Young People, published monthly for 8- to 14-year-olds. One year later,
Cobblestone Publishing Inc., in Peterborough, N.H., started a quarterly called
Classical Calliope: The Muses' Magazine for Youth. Last month it added a teacher
manual, Cobblestone Companion. With history and the classics well served,
anthropologists recently became envious and persuaded the publishers to create a
new magazine, Faces: The Magazine About People.

Published 10 times a year, Faces is edited in cooperation with New York's Museum
of Natural History. Its founder is Margaret Cooper, the museum's coordinator of
exhibits and an author of children's books.

The idea for a history magazine for children first came to Hope H. Pettegrew in
1978. Mrs. Pettegrew, a former elementary school teacher who is now the
magazines' business manager, felt Vietnam had undermined interest in American
history. The first issue of Cobblestone appeared in January 1980. Now, with a
circulation of more than 40,000, the magazine has been profitable for the past
two years.

Faces has only 6,500 subscribers, but it has not yet begun a circulation drive.
None of the magazines carry advertising, but Mrs. Pettegrew is confident that
Faces will also support itself. ''It will have a very real place in the
schools,'' she says.

All three magazines try to humanize their disciplines without making them
vulgar. ''We want to combine sound anthropology with entertainment,'' Mrs.
Cooper says. Carolyn P. Yoder, the editor, agrees.

A recent Cobblestone cover announced the issue's theme: ''Read All About It! The
History of the Newspaper.'' A chronology begins in 449 B.C. with newsletters
handwritten by educated Roman slaves. It ends with the first electronic
newspaper published in 1980 by The Columbus (Ohio) Dispatch. Articles include
''Ben Franklin's First Career'' as a printer and as publisher of The New England
Courant; a roundup story, ''From Smoke Signals to Satellites;'' the embattled
history of freedom of the press, and a host of other articles.

Calliope, circulation 3,500, is more esoteric, dealing with ancient temples and
myths but also with such topics as ''Money and Coinage in Greece and Rome.''

This successful publishing pattern paved the way for Faces. An example of a
typical theme issue was: Why people dance, from square dancing to Asian dancing
as a way of story-telling. The approach of Faces is international but, Miss
Yoder points out, the magazine always tries to tie it into American themes. A
recent issue featured ''Hello and Goodbye'' - how people in different nations
greet and part from each other. A future issue will deal with the kinds of hats
worn in different times and cultures.

''We never talk about anthropology; we talk about people,'' says Mrs. Cooper.

In its first issue last October, Faces dealt with a wide variety of ways shells
can be used, from heraldry to making a mobile out of shells. It looked at the
origin of ''shelling out'' money, from past cultures that used shells as
currency. Combining English and anthropology, Faces looked at ''Words from the
Sea.'' For example, the word shell can be traced to an old Danish word meaning a
hard container. Skull, the young readers learn, has a similar origin, as does
the Viking toast, ''Skoal.'' An eerie aside: Vikings sometimes used their dead
enemies' skulls as drinking vessels.

The current issue takes up a familiar and rather universal myth: ''Our
Fascination with Dragons,'' featuring on its cover a stone dragon from the
garden of Yu Yuan in Shanghai, built around 1559 for a member of the Ming
dynasty. The issue includes two folktales from Taiwan; some do-it-yourself
cutouts of dragons, and a recipe of how to make a Loch Ness Monster out of
vegetables, by Caroline Bates, a writer for Gourmet magazine. It concludes:
''The Loch Ness salad is now ready to feed two monster eaters.''

On a more serious note, illustrated articles compare Western and Eastern
dragons, the history of dragon slayers and the relationship between mythological
dragons and actual species that may have inspired the myths, such as crocodiles,
pythons and lizards. The latter account is by Ruth Q. Leibowitz, editor of
Rotunda, a publication of the Museum of Natural History.

The March issue featured movable houses through history, and their impact on
people and cultures. For example, it describes tepees used by North American
Indians; wagon homes of the Gypsies, and tentlike aqaals used by Somalis and
carried, disassembled, by camels. A variety of modern movable trailers remind
children, after they have learned all about what must appear to them as odd and
primitive movable homes in other cultures, that the phenomenon also exists
closer to home: Millions of Americans live or vacation in mobile homes.

The magazines' readers are vocal in both praise and suggestions. ''Your magazine
looks interesting,'' a young subscriber in California wrote to Faces, adding
that it could be improved ''by adding some puzzles and games.''

The attraction of these publications as education tools is that they combine fun
and serious information. The tone is neither precocious nor patronizing. The
writers are serious historians, classicists and anthropologists. The aim is to
whet children's appetites for more formal learning, often encouraged by lists of
books, films and places to visit and explore. The message from Peterborough is
that children can be introduced to serious topics without boredom or
condescension. (For information about the magazines, write to 20 Grove Street,
Peterborough, N.H. 03458.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 12, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Lord George-Brown They Remember

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 387 words


To the Editor:

Lord George-Brown should not pass into the historical memory of Americans with
only the account of his life that appeared June 4 in his obituary. In
emphasizing his unhappy last years and personal problems, it did less than
justice to the total life of a man with great qualities, whose service to
Britain and to causes shared by the United States was very considerable.

Many Americans in and out of government came to know George Brown first in the
mid-1950's, when he stood up to attempted bullying by Nikita S. Khrushchev in
London in a memorable encounter. Already a rising star in the Labor Party, he
went on to become shadow Defense Minister in the early 1960's and, on the
untimely death of Hugh Gaitskell in 1963, barely missed being elected leader of
his party.

When Labor returned to power in 1964, he was successively Economics Minister at
a difficult time, and then for two years Foreign Secretary. In the end, he fell
out with Prime Minister Harold Wilson. In the mid-1970's, he resigned from his
party in despair over its dominance by the left and joined the Social Democratic
Party.

If George Brown - a warm, deeply caring, ebullient man, in many ways reminiscent
of Hubert H. Humphrey - had been granted a longer apprenticeship under Gaitskell
and then succeeded him, the political history of Britain in the last two decades
might have been different. In addition to keeping Labor on a moderate course, he
stood for Britain joining the European Community in the fullest spirit, while
keeping close ties with the United States.

He was a courageous and innovative economics minister, a solid and often
prescient Foreign Secretary. Throughout, he was a devoted supporter of the
Western alliance and the best kind of friend to America -bluntly critical in
private (over Vietnam), but never playing to the gallery, always probing for the
root of the matter in the larger framework of alliance and world needs.

Like Humphrey, he combined realism with humanity; you could count on his word
through thick and thin. The same was true of his friendship; in that we were
proud to share. Above all, he was a political figure of the first rank,
deserving the esteem and gratitude of Britons and Americans as well. GEORGE W.
BALL WILLIAM P. BUNDY ROBERT S. MCNAMARA Princeton, N.J., June 6, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 12, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Apparent Drop in U.S. Catholic Population May Well Be Growth

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 457 words


To the Editor:

According to ''New Directory Finds Decline in Number of U.S. Catholics'' (news
article, May 23), the recently published figures of the Official Catholic
Directory appear to represent a decline in numbers of Roman Catholics. If
anything, however, Catholic population has increased. The following may help to
explain this.

Two kinds of components can be included in looking at population change in
general: natural increase, i.e., the number of births over deaths, and net
civilian migration. We might do the same for looking at change in Catholic
population.

A total of 1,039,418 Catholic baptisms took place in 1984, and 438,031 Catholic
deaths. They provide what might be termed a Catholic natural increase of over
half a million -601,387 Catholics. In the Archdiocese of New York last year,
33,107 baptisms and 16,977 funerals are recorded, resulting in a net natural
increase of 16,130 Catholics.

Also, among recent arrivals in the United States, new immigrant groups represent
sizable numbers of Catholics, from Latin America, the Caribbean and Vietnam. The
Catholic birthrate is still slightly higher than the non-Catholic birthrate. And
even though some baptized Catholics might not be buried from the church, these
factors indicate the Catholic population is growing. The figures in the Official
Catholic Directory come from each diocese. In a majority of dioceses these
represent the figures solicited from and provided by pastors. A few dioceses,
including New York, estimate their Catholic population. We are in the process of
modifying our Catholic population estimation procedures, based on knowledge from
our recently completed Hispanic study. Thus, the way that Catholics are counted
varies from diocese to diocese and pastor to pastor, depending on how one might
define Catholic.

Last year at its annual meeting, the National Pastoral Planning Conference, an
organization of diocesan offices of pastoral planning and research, addressed
the question of counting Catholics in a resolution to the Bishop's Committee on
Pastoral Practices and Research. The conference's research task force is working
with the pastoral practices committee to propose a standard method for counting
Catholics. About 15 dioceses are involved in the project, including our own
office.

Various definitions of ''Catholic'' have been gathered and examined. These can
be broken down into as many as nine ''levels'' of being Catholic. Definitions
and estimation procedures are being examined and field tested. The project will
continue through mid-1986. I hope this helps explain why the apparent decline
may be a growth. RUTH T. DOYLE New York, May 30, 1985 The writer is director of
pastoral research, Archdiocese of New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 12, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VERSES CARRY 'SOUND OF SOBBING' FROM VIETNAM

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words


As a young man he wrote love poems. His friends used to borrow them to impress
their sweethearts.

But later he fell into what he calls a ''swampland'' of prisons and re-education
camps in Vietnam. And as other prisoners might practice yoga to survive, or
scratch off the years on filthy walls, Nguyen Chi Thien practiced poetry and
scratched his verses in his mind.

According to Amnesty International, International PEN and other rights groups
and intellectuals who have taken an interest in his case, the 52-year-old poet,
who has spent 23 years in jails and re-education camps since 1958, now lives in
old Hoa Lo Prison in Hanoi, the place once known to captured American airmen as
the Hanoi Hilton.

Nearly 400 of Mr. Thien's poems, gathered in one volume titled ''Flowers From
Hell,'' were brought out of Vietnam in 1979 in manuscript form. The poems,
translated into French and English, have since been published in the West; some
have been put to music.

Ha Huyen Chi, a Vietnamese poet now living in Washington State, says he believes
that Mr. Thien may rank among the leading Vietnamese poets of the century.

Harsh Words About Marx

A typical quatrain, translated by an editor at Yale University named Huynh Sanh
Thong, describes the poems themselves:

Flowers from hell - real blood has watered them, blood mixed with animal sweat,
with parting tears.

Blooming in prison, sickly, starved and cold, they reek of damp and mold, look
gray as mud.

Mr. Thien, a longtime opponent of the Communist Government in Vietnam, is said
to have become totally opposed to Communism while being ''re-educated.'' In
several poems he assails Marx and Ho Chi Minh - who is regarded in Vietnam as
the father of the country - and cries out against what he sees as the hypocrisy
of the Government. He shouts against suffering and almost urges revolt.

Six years ago, Mr. Thien managed to get inside the British Embassy in Hanoi with
a sheaf of poems like this one, also translated by Mr. Thong:

My poetry's not mere poetry, no, but it's the sound of sobbing from a life, the
din of doors in a dark jail, the wheeze of two poor wasted lungs, the thud of
earth tossed down to bury dreams, the clank of hoes that dig up memories, the
clash of teeth all chattering from cold, the cry of hunger from a stomach
wrenching wild, the throb-throb of a heart that grieves, forlorn, the helpless
voice before so many wrecks.

All sounds of life half lived, of death half died - no poetry, no.

A Memory for Verse

Tran Nhu, a friend and former fellow prisoner of Mr. Thien, said from his home
in Kansas that Mr. Thien was born in Hanoi in June 1933, the youngest of five
children. Mr. Thien's father had been an engineer for the French before the
victory of the Vietminh in 1954. The family thought of moving south. They got
only as far as the port city of Haiphong.

Mr. Thien's friends knew him in the 1940's and 50's as bright, witty, shy with
girls and loyal to his friends. He had, they said, an extraordinary memory for
verse.

In 1958 Mr. Thien and other young writers in Haiphong decided to start a
literary magazine. North Vietmam's leaders had recently inaugurated a
Chinese-style ''100 flowers'' campaign and more free expression than usual was
in the air. One day Mr. Thien approached Haiphong's cultural officials and asked
permission to publish a journal that would be called Vi Dan, or ''For the
People.''

But the party's mood had quietly shifted since the campaign had begun. He was
told to go home and await a decision. The next day, the police arrived, searched
his house and seized his romantic poems. They were used as evidence that Mr.
Thien and his friends nurtured ideas that discredited Communism.

He was sentenced to two years' hard labor in Yen Bay Province, north of Hanoi.
His camp there - and the camps that followed in the wilder regions of northern
Vietnam - became the hell of Mr. Thien's poems.

An 'Underdeveloped Citizen'

Released in early 1961, he joined an amateurish anti-Government group known as
Doan Ket, or Union and Solidarity, according to Mr. Nhu, who was also a member.
That November, Amnesty reports, Mr. Thien was declared an ''underdeveloped
citizen.'' He was sent to re-education camp, released again in September 1964,
and sentenced again the following month. He lived in ''the swampland'' for the
next 13 years.

On April 2, 1979, during a brief period of freedom, he made a desperate attempt
to find a wider audience for his poems. He was living in Haiphong. Having made
his mind to send his poems abroad, he went to the British Embassy in Hanoi and
handed copies of them to a British diplomat. An accompanying letter, in French,
asked ''on behalf of the millions of innocent victims of dictatorship, already
fallen or dying a slow and painful death in Communist prisons'' that the poems
be published.

The Vietnamese guards arrested Mr. Thien immediately and he has been in prison
ever since.

The British diplomat later gave the manuscript of ''Flowers From Hell'' to
Patrick J. Honey, a scholar of Vietnamese at London University's School of
Oriental and African Studies. Mr. Honey read the poems and decided that although
a few seemed coarsely anti-Communist, others were superb and, for Vietnamese
verse, unprecedented in their passion.

Photocopies of the poems began circulating in Europe and the United States. They
were eventually printed in Vietnamese, and a Vietnamese folksinger in
California, Pham Duy, set 20 to music. Two years ago Huynh Sanh Thong at Yale
printed ''Flowers From Hell'' with his English translations.

Pierre Emmanuel, a member of the French Academy, and other prominent literary
figures have lavished praise on Mr. Thien's verses. Leopold S. Senghor, the
former President of Senegal who is also a member of the Academy and a
distinguished poet, wrote to Vietnam's Prime Minister, Pham Van Dong, last
November asking that Mr. Thien be granted amnesty.

Mr. Senghor has not yet received an answer, according to PEN officials. But
several weeks after Mr. Senghor's letter went out, Mr. Thien was reportedly
transferred from a jailhouse in Haiphong to Hanoi's Hoa Lo Prison.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Nguyen Chi Thien

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 12, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Presidency;
Rethinking a Tax-Plan Strategy

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 11


As President Reagan departed on a two-day swing through the Sun Belt last
Wednesday, he faced the challenge of a rush of issues all vying for Presidential
attention and comments. Mr. Reagan met the challenge by firing what amounted to
a verbal shotgun that scattered the Presidential emphasis in a number of
directions.

In one day alone while in Birmingham, Ala., Mr. Reagan blasted the Sandinistas
in Nicaragua, defended the insurgents attempting to topple them, spoke up for
prayers in public schools, assailed the Democratic Party leadership as
''left-wing'' and reaffirmed the Administration's policy for restoring
diplomatic ties with Vietnam.

Mr. Reagan also made comments aimed at garnering support for the sweeping tax
plan that he unveiled in a nationally televised address two weeks ago. But those
remarks, which had been a primary purpose for the trip through the South, all
but went unreported except by local and regional journalists on hand to observe
the President.

'Put in a Box'

In the view of some Reagan aides, the President and his White House staff were
''put in a box'' by a host of competing issues. As one said: ''You can't go to
Alabama and not mention the school prayer decision, and if you go to Alabama and
mention the school prayer decision, don't think that you are going to get
covered on tax reform.'' In short, that is what occurred. Larry Speakes, the
White House spokesman, said the President had to touch on school prayer because
he was speaking in Birmingham the week that the Supreme Court had struck down an
Alabama law that had permitted a daily one-minute period of silent mediation for
the purpose of encouraging prayer in public schools.

Similarly, he said the President had had no choice but to comment on Nicaragua
because the Senate was preparing to vote that day on a new funding request for
the Nicaraguan rebels. That measure has been a top Administration priority.

And, Mr. Speakes said, because the Alabama event where the President spoke was a
fund event for the Republican Senator Jeremiah Denton, who spent eight years in
a prisoner-of-war camp, Mr. Reagan had no choice but to mention Vietnam.

But despite such explanations, some White House officials are concerned about
how Mr. Reagan can avoid a repetition of last week as he continues to promote
his tax plan. In fact, some senior aides say efforts are under way to make sure
that the limited press reception does not happen again.

''We are going to have to find a slightly different strategy to sustain the
emphasis on taxes, and some of us are giving it thought,'' a high-ranking White
House official said.

Another aide described the White House as now operating in a type of
''conundrum,'' in which Mr. Reagan cannot focus only on taxes but risks losing
his effectiveness if he speaks out on other matters as well.

White House surveys show that the tax issue has a high degree of public
approval. But, as one of Mr. Reagan's key strategists in selling the tax plan
said: ''If you stand up and speak and argue the merits of the tax bill, after
three or four days the newness is gone and reporters have heard the arguments,
so they are looking for something that is new and different. The only way that
you can require them to cover taxes is if you have got them as sort of a captive
audience and that's all you talk about.''

The strategist said the search was on for ''new backgrounds'' that provide Mr.
Reagan more effective settings for promoting his tax plan.

Asked what he had mind, he replied: ''How do you do education? He goes into a
classroom and you have a nun up there and those little kids asking questions and
the camera has got to focus on that.''

On Thursday Mr. Reagan is expected to travel to Bloomfield, N.J., near Newark,
to address an audience of people invited because they support the
Administration's tax revision plan. Aides say the event will be devoted solely
to taxes in an effort to force the press to report Mr. Reagan's remarks.

Thus, the White House will be following an approach used effectively in Mr.
Reagan's first term to promote major Administration initiatives by linking them
to specific audiences or locations. He traveled to the Chesapeake Bay area, for
example, to underscore what the Administration was doing to clean up toxic
waste, and he visited a parochial school to promote the idea of tuition tax
credits for parents with children in private and parochial institutions.

But whether this approach can be used on the tax plan is uncertain. One aide
said that, unlike the first term, when Mr. Reagan was starting fresh and could
set the agenda, he is now driven by a legislative clock that forces him to act
on issues whether he is ready or not.

The 'Golden Months of 1981'

''Everybody looks back at the first golden months of 1981, but when you begin a
second term issues are already in the pipeline that are time-sensitive,'' he
said.

Moreover, officials say it might be impossible for the White House to contrive
enough events to dramatize the tax plan, especially since Michael K. Deaver, the
former deputy chief of staff who was known as the President's image man, has
left the staff and now operates his own consulting concern. The first
Congressional vote on the plan is not expected until the fall, which at best
means a martharon effort on the part of Mr. Reagan to keep up public interest.

''We just can't ignore other issues that arise,'' said a White House official,
referring to the long time before the vote. ''The tax plan is a long sell job.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 13, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A CRITIQUE ON PBS OF VIETNAM SERIES SETS OFF A DISPUTE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1342 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, June 12


A Public Broadcasting Service program that will offer a conservative group an
unusual chance to criticize the network's prize-winning series on Vietnam has
touched off a dispute over whether PBS has given in to pressure from the Reagan
Administration.

The two-hour program, which will be available to PBS stations beginning June 26,
will include a 57-minute film prepared by Accuracy in Media, the conservative
organization. It will be shown on WNET/Channel 13 in New York on June 27 as part
of that station's ''Intercom'' series of first-person documentaries.

Accuracy in Media, which terms itself a media watchdog group, is headed by Reed
Irvine, who strongly supported Gen. William C. Westmoreland in his libel suit
against CBS and views PBS as a network ''with a long history of putting on
left-wing programs.'' Among the members of its advisory board are Clare Boothe
Luce, Edward Teller and William E. Simon, the former Treasury Secretary.

The group contends that the 1983 PBS series on Vietnam contained ''serious
errors and distortions,'' denigrating the role of American soldiers and
underestimating the Communist nature of their opponents.

Charlton Heston, who narrated the Accuracy in Media film, ''Television's
Vietnam: The Real Story,'' contends that America's purpose in Vietnam was
''noble'' but that it was misled by ''disinformation'' from the press and
television, which helped lose the war.

The PBS program will also include interviews with some of the producers of the
original Vietnam series, ''Vietnam: A Television History,'' in which they are
asked to answer these charges, as well as a panel discussion moderated by Arthur
Miller, the Harvard Law School professor.

PBS officials insist that their decision to air the Accuracy in Media
documentary was made without pressure from the White House. ''We had been
interested for a long time in finding a way to do letters to the editor on
television,'' said Barry Chase, the vice president for news and public affairs
at PBS in Washington.

''It wasn't so much that we picked the AIM program but that it picked us,'' he
explained. ''In public television, we just don't have the resources'' to show
responses from all points of view, Mr. Chase said, and when Accuracy in Media
came along with a film already prepared, it offered an interesting opportunity
for PBS to present viewer response.

But Richard Ellison, the executive producer of the original Vietnam series on
PBS, which was made at WGBH in Boston, expressed skepticism of Mr. Chase's
explanation.

Cites Indications of Pressure

''I can't prove it, but I suspect there was political pressure from the
Administration,'' Mr. Ellison said. ''There is a strong right-wing climate in
the country, and these people may have been susceptible.''

He pointed to what he contended were two indications of pressure. One was that
the Accuracy in Media film was partly financed by a special $30,000 grant from
William Bennett, then chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities. Mr.
Bennett, who has since been appointed Secretary of Education by President
Reagan, has said he made the award out of an emergency fund he controlled
without going through the endowment's council.

The endowment, before Mr. Bennett's term, had provided $1.2 million for the
13-hour PBS series on Vietnam, its largest source of funds.

Mr. Ellison also pointed out that last December, while PBS officials in
Washington were debating whether to show the Accuracy in Media film, Bruce
Christensen, the president of PBS, received an invitation on White House
stationery to attend ''a briefing and special showing'' of the program. Mr.
Christensen declined the invitation, which was sent out by Faith Whittlesey,
assistant to the President for public liason.

A White House official said the screening was one of several it has done for
films that underscore Mr. Reagan's policies. Others were ''The Silent Scream,''
an anti-abortion documentary, and a forthcoming movie on the Miskito Indians'
fight against the Sandinistas in Nicaragua.

'Chilling Effect' Foreseen

''I think this is a very serious matter,'' said Mr. Ellison. ''It is going to
have a chilling effect on what public television does.'' Mr. Ellison is now
working on a 10-hour series on the Soviet Union for WGBH in Boston, in
conjunction with the Harriman Institute at Columbia University, and he is
concerned about possible interference by right-wing groups.

Mr. Ellison at first refused to participate in the other hour of the two-hour,
June 26 program, ''Vietnam Op-Ed: An Inside Story.'' But he later changed his
mind and agreed to be interviewed after realizing, he said, that ''PBS has given
the AIM film respectability by putting it on the air and I couldn't just let it
go unanswered.''

But Stanley Karnow, who wrote the script for the Vietnam series as well as the
best-selling book that accompanied it, ''Vietnam: A History,'' has refused to
appear. ''This is a free country,'' Mr. Karnow said, and Reed Irvine, the head
of Accuracy in Media, ''can do whatever he wants.''

''But the question is, why is PBS putting on an extremely one-sided view,'' Mr.
Karnow continued. ''There's plenty of room for debate about Vietnam, so why pick
a right-wing lobby group instead of a panel of historians to discuss the
series?''

''It's a dangerous precedent,'' he asserted. ''Is PBS going to let AIM or any
other group respond whenever they have a complaint?''

Called 'Important Experiment'

To insure journalistic balance and rebut criticisms by Mr. Karnow and Mr.
Ellison, Ned Schnurman, the producer of the overall, two-hour PBS program and
the former producer of the PBS series ''Inside Story,'' is planning a 20-minute
introduction to the Accuracy in Media film he is preparing. He says he hopes
that this, in addition to the interviews and panel debate after the documentary,
''will clear up the rumors that PBS caved in to political pressure.''

But Mr. Schnurman believes the program is an important experiment ''which can
also clear up the feeling among many Americans that the media is unresponsive.''

He wants to focus on three criticisms of the Vietnam series raised by the
Accuracy in Media film: that it made Ho Chi Minh out to be a Jeffersonian
democrat rather than a hardened Communist, that it suggested many American
G.I.'s were drug addicts or psychopaths, and that it made the South Vietnamese
all look like prostitutes, cowards or black marketeers.

Among the participants in the panel discussion are to be Mr. Irvine, the head of
Accuracy in Media, Richard Salant, the former president of CBS News, Col. Harry
Summers, an Army historian, Huynh Sonh Thong, who directs Yale University's
Southeast Asian refugee project, and Lawrence W. Lichty, a journalism professor
at the University of Maryland who helped put together the archival film used in
the Vietnam series.

Mr. Lichty contends the Accuracy in Media program is ''a piece of propaganda''
and says it is hard to answer the film's charges because most of them are
matters of opinion, not fact.

But critics of the Accuracy in Media film concede that Mr. Heston lends the film
credibility.

Otherwise, much of it is what television producers call talking heads, a series
of interviews with historians, former American diplomats in Vietnam, Colonel
Summers and a South Vietnamese professor. Some of the points they raise may seem
esoteric to viewers not steeped in Vietnamese history, such as a debate over who
was responsible for an anti-French uprising in 1930.

Interspersed with the interviews and Mr. Heston's sonorous voice is some
archival footage from Vietnam, the most arresting of which includes shots of
Jane Fonda on her much-publicized trip to Hanoi in 1972. Looking like a young
girl, Miss Fonda is shown joking with North Vietnamese anti-aircraft gunners who
are scanning the sky for American planes.

Unlike the PBS series on Vietnam, which forsook an emotive musical score to try
to keep an even tone, the Accuracy in Media film dramatizes its points with
music.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Ellison (page C33); photo of Charlton Heston (page
C33)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 13, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Thai-Vietnamese Clash

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 30 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 12


Thai forces today battled 400 Vietnamese troops who crossed into Thailand in
pursuit of Cambodian guerrillas opposing Hanoi's occupation of their country,
military sources said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 13, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SUSPECT ARRESTED IN SLAYING OF GREENWICH VILLAGE ARTIST

BYLINE: By LEONARD BUDER

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 597 words


A 38-year-old drifter was arrested yesterday on charges of murdering a Greenwich
Village artist who had met and counseled him at a Bowery agency while training
to be a social worker.

The authorities said the suspect, Michael Joseph Walsh, was a Marine Corps
veteran who had served in Vietnam and had attended Fordham University from 1965
to 1968 as an undergraduate majoring in education. They said that in recent
years he had no steady job and no permanent home and had an alcohol problem.

They said the victim, Ellen S. Fox, 39, had a ''purely professional
relationship'' with him at first, but that they later developed ''a personal
relationship,'' which she apparently broke off.

Mr. Walsh's arrest was announced shortly before noon as family nembers and
friends of Miss Fox were preparing to attend a service for her at the New York
Ethical Culture Society, at 2 West 64th Street.

The authorities said Mr. Walsh, who made no statement to the police, was taken
into custody earlier in the day at the McAuley Water Street Mission, at 90
Lafayette Street, where he had spent Tuesday night. A shelter registration card
listed his occupation as chemist.

Mr. Walsh was arraigned early this morning in Criminal Court. He was charged
with second-degree murder and was held without bail for a hearing tomorrow.

Capt. Charles Luisi of the Manhattan detective command said investigators had
not yet established a motive for the murder, but he added that ''we have
developed physical evidence that ties Mr. Walsh with the crime scene.'' He would
not describe the evidence.

Miss Fox, a ceramics artist active in cultural and community affairs, had been
awarded a master's degree in social work from New York University last Thursday.
She was strangled hours after the end of a graduation party that she and a
friend had given in Miss Fox's loft at 652 Broadway, near Bleecker Street. Her
body was discovered Sunday night in the loft, with an electric cord twisted
around the neck.

Detectives said Mr. Walsh had not been at the party.

Became Counselor to Him

Miss Fox served during the 1983-84 academic year as an unpaid intern at the
Bowery Residence Committee, at 191 Chrystie Street in lower Manhattan, and it
was there that she met and became a counselor to Mr. Walsh about 18 months ago.
The committee is a voluntary health and social-service agency that works with
the homeless, including those with alcohol problems and mental disabilities.

''They had a purely professional relationship initially - he was someone she was
trying to help,'' the captain told reporters at the Ninth Precinct station house
at 321 East Fifth Street.

After about six months, a ''personal relationship developed,'' and after another
six months, that relationship ended, the captain said. But he said Mr. Walsh
continued to come to the building where she lived, attempting to see her.

Window Found Open

Captain Luisi said Miss Fox's eighth-floor loft had apparently been entered
through a fire-escape window that was later found open.

Charles Ross, the executive director of the McAuley Water Street Mission, said
Mr. Walsh had stayed at the shelter four nights in April, once in May and six
nights this month, including last Friday night, when Miss Fox held her party,
and last Saturday night, after the slaying occurred.

Miss Fox was a daughter of George A. Fox, the president of the Grow Tunneling
Corporation and the New York Building Trades Congress. He is also vice president
of the board of trustees of Cooper Union. Miss Fox's mother, Cecily, is a
retired librarian.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo fo Michael Joseph Walsh (NYT/Edward Hausner)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 13, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW SUMMARY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 860 words


THURSDAY, JUNE 13, 1985 International The House voted aid to the rebels seeking
to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government. The representatives voted 248 to 184 to
send the rebels $27 million in nonmilitary aid over the next nine months in an
action marking a major victory for President Reagan. [Page A1, Columns 4-6.]
President Reagan praised India and warmly welcomed Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi
to the White House, saying the United States sought to ''broaden the
understanding and deepen the cooperation'' between the two countries. [A3:4-6.]
North Korea still has wide damage from the Korean War nearly 32 years after the
armistice. The country is tightly sealed, but a few American reporters are being
allowed in for brief visits, and officials guiding them seem anxious not to make
too much of the war. For North Korea, the policy marks a major change. [A1:3-5.]
National United Airlines and its pilots agreed tentatively to terms for ending
the pilots' 26-day-old strike, the National Mediation Board announced. The pact
provides for a two-tier pay scale under which newly-hired pilots would initially
receive much lower pay than those now employed. [A1:3.] Import curbs on shoes
were recommended to President Reagan by an advisory panel that called for a a
five-year program that would lead to price increases for both imported and
domestic shoes. [A1:1-2.] A peacetime death penalty for people who sell military
secrets to a hostile power may be restored. Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger said a panel had been formed to determine whether the Uniform Code of
Military Justice should be changed to allow the execution of military officials
for spying in peacetime. [A1:4-5.] A nuclear reactor had an accident similar to
the early stages of the one at the Three Mile Island plant in 1979, according to
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. But the commission said there was no release
of radiation in the seven-hour incident Sunday and no major damage at the plant,
which is near Toledo. [B10:4-6.] The chances of a hurricane disaster are more
likely along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts because of record development,
according to emergency planners in several states. They said a major hurricane
could isolate and kill thousands of residents, who have become complacent
because there have been few severe storms in recent years. [A16:1-3.] The lowest
interest rates in five years have spread through most sectors of the nation's
economy. If the rate relief persists - and most economists generally expect
stable or lower interest rates for the next few years -it will bolster such
basic industries as housing and automobiles and help lower the Federal deficits.
[A1:1-2.] A Rhode Island priest lied in a sworn statement he made in 1983 to
help Claus von Bulow gain a new trial on charges of trying to kill his wealthy
wife with insulin injections, according to a new indictment. The indictment of
Rev. Philip A. Magaldi raised questions about the actions Mr. von Bulow's
lawyers took to overturn his 1982 conviction. [A27:6.] Metropolitan The police
seized four gang members and charged them with murder and narcotics trafficking.
The Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said the four routinely
killed competitors. Mr. Morgenthau said he expected six more members of the
Harlem gang to be arrested soon for drug-related crimes and added, ''We think
they're responsible for 15 murders.'' [A1:1-3.] A drifter was charged with
murder in the slaying last weekend of a Greenwich Village artist who had met and
counseled him at a Bowery agency while she was training to be a social worker.
The authorities said Ellen S. Fox, a 39-year-old ceramics artist, was killed by
Michael J. Walsh, 38, a Marine Corps veteran of Vietnam who has no steady job
and an alcohol problem. [B3:5-6.] City leaders agreed on a budget. The New York
City Council and the Board of Estimate, threatened with a veto by Mayor Koch,
agreed in principle to adopt his proposed $20 billion budget without additional
spending. In exchange, the Mayor agreed to back about $75 million proposed by
the two groups that would be financed by revisions and reductions in programs he
proposed. [B1:1-2.] A PBS program will offer conservatives an unusual chance to
criticize the network's prize-winning series on Vietnam. The two-hour program,
which will be shown on WNET/Channel 13 in New York on June 27, has touched off a
dispute over whether the Public Braodcasting Service has bowed to pressure from
the Reagan Administration. [A1:6.] Rules curbing smoking in New Jersey will
begin taking effect soon under four bills signed by Governor Kean. The
regulations will restrict smoking in restaurants and supermarkets and in public
vehicles and require the 9,000 employers in New Jersey with 50 or more employees
to ban smoking or restrict it to designated areas by next March 1. [B7:1-2.] The
sole survivor of a group of nine teen-age patrons sobbed as she testified about
how she had become separated from the others in a fun house when it caught fire
last year at the Great Adventure amusement park in Jackson Township, N.J.
[B7:1.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WALTERS STARTS U.N. TENURE ON THE OFFENSIVE

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 320 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., June 13


Lieut. Gen. Vernon A. Walters made his debut in the Security Council today and
delivered a scathing attack against what he called the misrepresentation of
American policy by some delegates.

General Walters, who became the chief American delegate last month, had not been
one of the scheduled speakers in the Security Council debate on South-West
Africa, which is also known as Namibia. But the former ambassador-at-large used
his right of reply in defense of American policy toward Namibia at the end of
the fourth day of debate.

General Walters said some delegates ''deliberately and falsely represented the
policies of my country for propagandistic purposes,'' adding, ''The United
States yields to no one in its support of Namibian independence.''

''Countries which suppress opposition in their own country are scarcely
qualified to judge the functioning of democracy,'' he added. ''The Reagan
Administration, whether people like it or not, is the Government of the United
States, so chosen freely by the American people in a free election.''

Secret Paris Talks

General Walters, who helped arrange the secret negotiations in Paris between
Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho of North Vietnam, singled out Le Kim Chung,
the Vietnamese delegate, for criticism.

Mr. Chung had charged that the United States bore responsibility for what he
called South Africa's ''intransigence,'' and, in a reference to the Vietnam War,
said, ''the Vietnamese people enjoyed the sympathy and support of the American
people.''

General Walters told the Security Council, ''I hope the Vietnamese delegate's
sympathy for countries occupied by foreign powers extends to the neighboring
people of Cambodia.''

After the debate he was asked if his speech had set the tone for his tenure as
chief delegate. ''When somebody attacks the United States and twists our real
purposes and policies, it is my duty to respond,'' he replied.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              373 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC SCENE;
THIS 'GROWTH' RECESSION

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


IS the United States economy slouching toward recession? Since the first half of
1984, when the gross national product, adjusted for inflation, soared at an
annual rate of 8.6 percent, growth has slowed to a crawl. Real G.N.P. rose at an
annual rate of only 1.6 percent in the third quarter of 1984, perked up to 4.3
percent in the fourth quarter and then slowed down to seven-tenths of 1 percent
in the first quarter of this year, yielding an average growth rate of just 2.2
percent for the last three quarters.

Thus, the economy appears to be in a ''growth recession,'' which Stephen S.
Roach, a vice president and senior economist of Morgan Stanley & Company,
defines as a period marked by real G.N.P. growth of 2.5 percent or less for
three consecutive quarters. Looking back over the last 30 years, he finds that
the economy has gone through six growth recessions. In five of them, increasing
idle industrial capacity and rising interest rates pushed the economy into
outright recession.

The sixth case, at the time called a ''mini-recession,'' lasted from the second
quarter of 1966 through the second quarter of 1967, with real growth averaging
2.4 percent. The five quarters of growth recession culminated in resumed
expansion, with the help of bulging military spending during the Vietnam War.

Could the current episode prove to be another exception to the norm of real
recessions following growth recessions? As Mr. Roach notes, one significant
difference now is that interest rates have been coming down. Since the third
quarter of 1984, the 90-day Treasury bill rate has declined by more than 15
percent, whereas in the six preceding growth recessions it rose by almost 15
percent.

Offsetting that decline in interest rates, however, are other negative forces.
The capacity utilization rate of manufacturing industry was at 82.8 percent at
the start of the present growth recession and had fallen to 80.5 percent in
April. By comparison, the capacity utilization rate in manufacturing averaged 87
percent at the outset of the last six growth recessions and, four quarters
later, was down to an average of 85 percent of capacity.

The effect of the current low rate of capacity use is already evident in lower
business capital spending plans. The latest Commerce Department survey,
conducted in April and May, found that businesses plan to expand capital
spending in 1985 by just 6.2 percent, rather than the 7.3 percent increase they
reported in the January-March survey.

Before the current survey, industry was planning to reduce its capital outlays
in the second half of this year from a seasonally adjusted peak annual rate of
$388.9 billion in the second quarter to $384.3 billion in the second half of
1985, with the manufacturing industry trimming its capital outlays from a rate
of $157 billion in the second quarter to $153.3 billion in the second half. But
uncertainties over the President's proposal to overhaul the tax system, which
would affect capital cost recovery and end the investment tax credit, have
apparently caused manufacturers to raise their capital spending plans by 1.5
percent, to get in ahead of the changes.

Another factor pushing the economy down that was not present in earlier growth
recessions is the overvalued dollar and the weakened foreign trade position of
the United States. Unless there is a significant correction in the value of the
dollar, Mr. Roach warns, ''a replay of cyclical history becomes a distinct
possibility.''

Even if the current growth recession does not turn into an outright one, most
economists are marking their forecasts down for the rest of this year. The
latest roundup of more than four dozen economists by Robert J. Eggert, editor of
Blue Chip Indicators, finds that they are now forecasting real G.N.P. growth for
1985 of just 2.9 percent over 1984, compared with their forecasts of 3.2 percent
only a month ago and 3.9 percent in early March - one of the sharpest declines
in the nine-year history of the survey.

About one-fourth of the respondents are now looking for a real recession -
defined as two quarters of negative growth - next year.

Some economists think the recession will come sooner and will end in early 1986.
Pierre Rinfret, president of Rinfret Associates, an economic consulting concern,
says the latest consumer confidence surveys and income data ''suggest the
American economy has already peaked and is sliding into recession.'' But he
expects declining interest rates and strong housing demand to keep the recession
''short and mild.''

''If President Reagan's tax program is in place by the first quarter of 1986,''
Mr. Rinfret says, ''it will stimulate the economy with a net tax cut,''
supporting his forecast of a material upturn after the recession.

The outlook for sluggish economic growth, or worse, is worsening the outlook for
the Federal budget deficit. New estimates by the Administration's Office of
Management and Budget and the Senate Budget Committee indicate that the deficit
would run $50 billion to $70 billion higher in 1988 than the Administration and
Congress have been projecting. That would put a huge dent in the budget-cutting
effort of the Administration and Congress. And it raises the specter of a tax
increase -which Mr. Reagan has said could be passed ''only over my dead body.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              374 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 15, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Of Debt and Stern Stuff

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Francis X. Clines

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 307 words


The Citizens for a Debt-Free America refuse to be discouraged just because the
nation is more than one and three-quarter trillion dollars in the hole. The
group has been working like Sisyphus since 1961 to reduce the national debt,
which as of the first week in June was $1,776,831,008,783.23.

The national coordinator of the group is Kay M. Fishburn, who issues progress
reports from time to time from her home in New Berlin, Wis., where she also
works as a nurse. In the six months ended last March 31, she reports, a total of
$1,306,460 was sent to the Treasury in Washington. This means that since 1961,
when Congress established the Public Debt Reduction Fund, people have sent in
more than $9 million.

Miss Fishburn has a view of the debt problem that is both practical and cosmic:
''The odds are that the 99th Congress, caught between insatiable demand for more
and determined tax resistance, will be no more successful than its predecessors
in reversing the tide. Few on this planet will escape the consequences.''

But without slipping into a slough of fiscal despond, Miss Fishburn continues:
''Your fellow Americans are made of sterner stuff than is advertised.
Contributions, encouraged by a handful of volunteers, are growing faster than
the debt. Puny in comparison, sure, but a good start. Contributors are retired
generals, bankers, some Congressmen, executives, farmers, retired widows,
children, Vietnam vets. ''

''Blaming each other is not likely to result in solutions,'' she concludes,
adding with hope and some bravado, ''We could retire the debt. Not today or
tomorrow, but within the lifetimes of most of us. We have little to lose, much
to gain. Let's try.''

Checks should be payable to ''Bureau of Public Debt: Debt Reduction'' and sent
to the Bureau of Public Debt, Department G, Washington, D.C. 20239-0601.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              375 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BAND LEADER PREPARES YEARLY SUMMER SERIES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 31, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 442 words


Sometime in the late 1920's, George Seuffert Jr. recalls, the composer John
Philip Sousa told a teen-age friend and student, ''You know, I don't think
there's any chance that you would be anything except a musician.'' Mr. Seuffert,
the teen-ager, has not looked back since, except to savor the comment.

Mr. Seuffert was 16 years old in 1928 when he first lifted his father's baton
and directed the Seuffert Band in the Music Grove at Forest Park in Glendale,
Queens.

That was 30 years after his father had founded the band. The band, which
presently numbers 46 - and includes in its ranks ''a superb Dixieland jazz
band,'' according to Mr. Seuffert - has played there every summer since.

The weekly, free concerts still draw large audiences every Sunday afternoon in
the summer.

Today at 3 P.M. Mr. Seuffert will once again inaugurate the Seuffert Band's
summer series at Forest Park's band shell.

Corporations, chiefly in the New York metropolitan region, underwrite the
Seuffert Band's performances, of which there will be 44 this summer.

The band leader, who turned 73 last month, has been the music consultant for
three Mayors: John V. Lindsay, Abraham D. Beame and now Edward I. Koch. He
organizes summer programs of music for the city and plans musical greetings for
visiting heads of state, kings, queens, astronauts and Olympics heroes.

His most recent project of note was the parade for Vietnam veterans on May 6,
which involved 21 bands.

Each year he neglects to pick up his annual city paycheck of $1. ''I guess I've
earned almost 20 dollars by now,'' the band leader said.

As the music director of the Fordham University Band and a retired music teacher
in the New York City school system, where he taught from 1931 to 1967, Mr.
Seuffert has remained under the influence of his first teacher, Mr. Sousa.

''You see, Sousa had the philosophy that bands should entertain with the finest
music,'' Mr. Seuffert said. ''If in the process of entertaining they also
educated, that was the so-called icing on the cake.''

His many honors and awards are displayed in the white stucco house in
Douglaston, Queens, where he has lived with his wife, Doris, for 17 years. They
include the La Guardia Medal, presented to Mr. Seuffert ''as an outstanding New
Yorker'' by Mayor Koch. It was awarded in part for his efforts in organizing the
parade for American hostages returning from Iran in 1981.

Relaxing in his living room, which is graced by an antique Steinway piano, the
band leader said: ''I would say that my father had a love affair for this city,
and I inherited that. Whenever anybody asked for help with music, I was there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              376 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS PLANNING TO MEET TOMORROW ON CAMBODIANS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 622 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 14


Faced with problems of disease, crime and overcrowding in refugee settlements
along the Cambodian border, Thai officials are planning to meet Monday to
discuss the future of Cambodians driven into this country by the Vietnamese
offensive last winter, officials said today.

The meeting will be held amid reports that there are pressures within the Thai
Government to send the more than 225,000 Cambodians, followers of guerrilla
armies seeking to oust the Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh, back
to Cambodia now that the summer monsoon season has begun.

Thai Foreign Ministry and international aid officials said today that there were
no plans for a forced repatriation of the Cambodians, though officals said that
at least some of them would be moved from overcrowded settlements to new sites
within Thailand, possibly closer to the border.

'These Are Our Friends'

''After all, these are our friends,'' said Nit Pibulsongkram, the head of the
Foreign Ministry's international organizations department. ''We have no reason
to push them back into the arms of the Vietnamese.''

Despite the onset of the rains, making large military operations difficult, aid
officials working along the border say Vietnamese activity is continuing on the
Cambodian side. Followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk said this week that about
200 Vietnamese troops had crossed into Thailand to kidnap exiles. The Sihanouk
supporters later moved deeper into Thailand.

Mr. Nit said the meeting Monday of Thai military and national security officials
would be primarily devoted to the problems of a settlement known as Bang Poo, or
Site 7, the home of more than 50,000 displaced Cambodians, followers of the
Khmer People's National Liberation Front, the larger of two non-Communist
opposition groups. Bang Poo is adjacent to the Khao-i-Dang refugee camp.

Military officers in the border region have said they believe a recent rise in
violent crime in Khao-i-Dang, reserved for Cambodian refugees seeking to
resettle abroad, may have been at least partly attributable to guerrilla
irregulars with access to Bang Poo, which houses Cambodians who fled the
Rithisen settlement on Christmas Day.

Malnutrition a Concern

Malnutrition has become a concern of health officials in the overcrowded camps.
Mr. Nit said sanitation was deteriorating as the rainy season advanced, turning
the grounds of the heavily populated camp into seas of mud.

In addition, there have been outbreaks of resistant strains of malaria in the
border region, affecting Thai troops as well as exiles and guerrilla fighters,
according to Gen. Arthit Kamlang-Ek, the country's supreme military commander.

Thailand has tried to keep separate the temporary settlements, in which the
Government says 225,213 people are now living, and the refugee camps, where more
than 120,000 Indochinese stay, 23,500 of them at Khao-i-Dang. The refugees at
Khao-i-Dang are eligible for resettlement, but the others, with some exceptions,
are not.

Hundreds of thousands of Cambodians have entered, and often re-entered, Thailand
in the last decade, fleeing first the Khmer Rouge regime and, after 1979, the
invading Vietnamese. Every winter for the last six years, Cambodian guerrillas
and their families have been pushed out of their camps in Cambodian territory by
Vietnamese troops trying to stamp out resistance to the Heng Samrin regime in
Phnom Penh.

The guerrillas have usually returned when the summer rains bogged down the
Vietnamese, with their heavy artillery and tanks. This year, however, the exiled
Cambodians and Thai officials say they fear that the Vietnamese will try to seal
the border, leaving 250,000 more Cambodians more or less permanently in
Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              377 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC NOTES;
RALPH SHAPEY RETURNS

BYLINE: By Tim Page

SECTION: Section 2; Page 22, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 970 words


When Ralph Shapey assumes the position of Distinguished Professor of Music at
Queens College's Aaron Copland School of Music this fall, he will be returning
to New York after a 21-year absence. During this period he has built up a
substantial reputation as one of the most talented, independent and outspoken of
American composers. And through his work as a conductor and organizer he has
come to be closely associated - indeed, almost synonymous - with contemporary
music in the Chicago area. Mr. Shapey, who received a no-strings-attached
''genius'' award from the MacArthur Foundation in 1982 - the first composer to
be so honored - has been teaching at the University of Chicago since 1964.

''It'll be good to get back to New York,'' Mr. Shapey said in a telephone
interview last week. ''Most of my best friends - and my best enemies - are
there. I'll be teaching graduate students in composition and I've been asked to
create a contemporary chamber ensemble along the lines of the group I have here
in Chicago.

''You know, I'm going to be 65 in March,'' he continued, ''and according to the
rules, I must retire at the age of 70. So I'm moving to New York, and if I like
it, I'll stay. If not, I'll move back to Chicago next year.''

Mr. Shapey withdrew his knotty, powerful, and uncompromising music from
circulation for two years in 1969. ''I was disgusted with the depth of
degradation the world had sunk to in Korea and Vietnam and withdrew my music
because I didn't want to give it to humanity,'' Mr. Shapey explained. ''I didn't
stop composing, of course, because that would be like being able to stop
thinking. Various friends kept chipping away at me to allow my music to be
played.''

Mr. Shapey reversed his decision in 1971. ''Paul Fromm, of the Fromm Foundation,
convinced me that only when music is performed is it fully born. My brain is my
womb. That is where I create. These compositions are my children.

''There's a lot of cliquishness in New York new music communities, and I'm going
to stay far away from it. I'll go to the concerts I want to, speak to the people
I want to, and play my music when I want to. I've never been a political animal,
and I don't think I'll have much trouble maintaining my independence.''

Although Mr. Shapey has accepted a commission from the Philadelphia Orchestra
(for a work celebrating the bicentennial of the American constitution) he has
reservations about the state of our orchestras. ''Most of our finest groups -
Chicago, Boston, New York - have turned into great big music-making machines. I
grew up in Philadelphia, during the reign of Stokowski. He was a total dictator,
and the players had no power. But what a sound! I don't advocate a return to
that sort of system, but now things have swung the other way, and the players
have much too much power. Everything is the dollar bill; everyone is watching
the clock. I've been told that one famous conductor does not even select his own
programs. He's too frightened of the orchestra.

''It's an attitude problem. Today's musicians go and play a gig. It's a
business. They sightread, and if they can't immediately play a complex new
composition, they think it's not worth playing. It's terrible. Don't get me
wrong; musicians should be paid and paid well, but now they're all watching
their watches, waiting for their union breaks. Can you imagine a Toscanini, or a
Stokowski putting up with such a thing? I do not write music for people who
watch the clock.''

Sounds for Silents

What we've come to call the silent film was rarely actually silent. Live music
was an important part of the early cinema, and composers as diverse as Erik
Satie, Arnold Schoenberg and Dimitri Shostakovich created scores to accompany
the flickering images on screen. This summer, the first showing of Sergei
Eisenstein's ''Battleship Potemkin'' in nearly 60 years to utilize the film's
fully orchestrated original score will given in Minneapolis.

The screening will take place at the Walker Art Center on July 30 as part of the
Minnesota Orchestra's''Sommerfest'' celebration. Leonard Slatkin will conduct
Edmund Meisel's music. This performance will restore an important element to
Eisenstein's silent classic, widely considered one of the most influential
motion pictures ever made.

Meisel composed his score for the film's Berlin premiere in 1925; it was later
performed at engagements in New York and throughout Europe. The music was lost,
and presumed destroyed, in the 1930's, then rediscovered when the film historian
Jay Leyda found a set of parts in the Eisenstein archives several years ago.

HEMIDEMISEMIQUAVERS: The Light Opera of Manhattan, recently displaced from the
theater it had occupied on East 74th Street for 10 years, has relocated to the
American Theater of Actors, 314 West 54th Street, and will open its summer
season this Wednesday with a four-week run of ''The Vagabond King'' by Rudolf
Friml. . . . The Cleveland Orchestra will present two staged performances of
Mozart's ''Magic Flute'' at Blossom Music Center in Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio, on
Aug. 30 and Sept. 1. The cast will include Judith Blegen, Denes Gulyas, Mikael
Melbye, Celina Lindsley and John Macurdy; Christoph von Dohnanyi will conduct.
This will be the first staged opera in the Blossom Music Center's 17-year
history. Franco Colavecchia will be the scenic designer, F. Mitchell Dana will
design the lighting, and Judith Dolan will create the costumes. . . . Music in
the Mountains, under the artistic direction of Gundaris Pone, will present five
concerts of 20th-century music at the State University of New York, New Paltz,
between July 5 and 27. The first concert will feature Aaron Copland's ''Lincoln
Portrait,'' with the actress Estelle Parsons narrating, and will include music
by Charles Ives and Richard Strauss.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              378 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
PBS Will Air Vietnam Rebuttal

BYLINE: By Richard Levine and Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 282 words


On June 27, Channel 13, New York's public television station, will carry a
two-hour response to the award-winning series on the Vietnam war that it and
many other public stations carried in 1983.

Half of the new program, which will be available to all PBS stations, consists
of a film prepared by Accuracy in Media, a conservative organization that has
often criticized PBS for ''putting on left-wing programs.''

The group charges that the Vietnam series denigrated the role of American
soldiers and underplayed the Communist nature of the enemy. Its film,
''Television's Vietnam: The Real Story,'' which is narrated by Charlton Heston,
lays blame on the American press and television for helping to lose the war.

Richard Ellison, the executive producer of the original series on Vietnam, which
was made at WGBH in Boston, said he suspected that PBS had succumbed to
''political pressure from the Administration.'' PBS officials denied that there
had been any such pressure.

In addition to the film, the PBS documentary will include an interview with Mr.
Ellison and a panel discussion with Reed Irvine, the head of Accuracy in Media,
Richard Salant, the former president of CBS News and several scholars.

The Accuracy in Media film was financed in part by a $30,000 grant from the
National Endowment for the Humanities, which gave $1.2 million for the 13-hour
Vietnam series.

No Swap

On another front, the board of trustees of Channel 13 last week rejected any
effort to exchange the station's channel for cash and a station with a weaker
signal. Several public television stations have been exploring the possibility
of such a swap as a means of supplementing their incomes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              379 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

          Fiction

 1        ''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven
          Santmyer. (Berkley, $5.95.) Life in an Ohio
          hamlet, 1868-1932.

 2        FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $4.50.)
          The relationship of a mother and daughter is
          altered by the changing values of the past 40
          years.

 3        THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Bantam, $4.95.) An Arab's
          experience in the wars of the Holy Land.

 4        DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $4.50.) One
          man copes with a sinister Asian shipping family
          and an even more threatening Soviet plot.

 5        THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch. (Fawcett,
          $4.95.) A wealthy Welsh family is haunted by an
          ominous heritage.

 6 *      LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Ballantine, $4.95.) A
          fictionalized account of the Civil War
          Presidency.

 7        THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam,
          $3.95.) A young man from Brittany sets out to
          free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.

 8        MISSISSIPPI! by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam,
          $3.95.) The ''Wagons West'' series reaches the
          post-Civil War South and New Orleans.

 9        TENDER IS THE STORM, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon,
          $3.95.) A New York heiress's passionate encounter
          with an Arizona rancher.

10        POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $4.50.)
          A woman discovers the truth about her husband
          after he disappears.

11        THE MODIGLIANI SCANDAL, by Ken Follett.
          (NAL/Signet, $3.50.) A ''lost masterpiece'' and
          dirty dealings in the international art world;
          first published pseudonymously several years ago.

12        RAMBO: First Blood Part II, by David Morrell.
          (Jove, $3.50.) Novelization of the film about a
          Vietnam vet who returns to rescue prisoners of
          war.

13        THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum.
          (Bantam, $4.50.) A lawyer finds himself caught in
          a conspiracy to take over the world.

14        SUMMER HARVEST, by Madge Swindells. (NAL/ Signet,
          $3.95.) Thirty years in southern Africa.

15 *      THE WISHSONG OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del
          Rey/Ballantine, $8.95.) The battle against evil
          continues in the Four Lands; conclusion of a
          fantasy trilogy.

          Nonfiction

          General

 1        THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
          (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.) Psychological and
          spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 2        IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and
          Robert H. Waterman Jr. (Warner, $8.95.) Lessons
          from well-run corporations.

 3        SON, by Jack Olsen. (Dell, $4.50.) The case of a
          young psychotic rapist at large in Spokane, Wash.

 4        FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.
          (Fawcett, $3.95.) Memoirs.

 5        PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Berkley,
          $3.95.) The tell-it-all autobiography of the
          actress.

          Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1        PENGUIN DREAMS AND STRANGER THINGS, by Berke
          Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoons from
          the syndicated ''Bloom County'' strip.

 2        BRIDE OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson. (Andrews,
          McMeel & Parker, $5.95.) Cartoon humor.

 3        RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada,
          Mexico. (Rand McNally, $5.95.) For 1985.

 4        THE SILVER PALATE GOOD TIMES COOKBOOK, by Julee
          Rosso and Sheila Lukins with Sarah Leah Chase.
          (Workman, $11.95.) Recipes from the owners of a
          Manhattan gourmet food shop.

 5        THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and
          Spencer Johnson. (Berkley, $6.95.) How to
          increase your productivity.

 6        EAT TO WIN, by Robert Hass. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.)
          A regimen for sports and fitness activities.

 7        MORE SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and Friends.
          (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) Words that should
          appear in dictionaries, but don't. With cartoons.

 8        GARFIELD MAKES IT BIG, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine,
          $5.95.) Cartoon humor.

 9 *      AAA NORTH AMERICAN ROAD ATLAS 1985. (American
          Automobile Association/Random, $5.95.) Maps and
          traveling advice.

10 *      SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and Friends. (Collier/
          Macmillan, $5.95.) Newly minted words.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              380 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOCUMENTS ON LOWENSTIEN

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 105 words


To the Editor:

Since I supplied Richard Cummings with information he used in his book on Allard
Lowenstein and since I am a former military intelligence officer, some of my
liberal friends may assume I am the source referred to by Mr. Cummings in his
letter. I was not that source and, in fact, was surprised by the revelations.
Even if true, they do not mean Allard Lowenstein was insincere in his devotion
to the peace movement and in trying to stop the war. He was as appalled as I was
by the horrors of Vietnam, which we both felt hurt rather than helped America's
reputation internationally. SAUL SCHINDLER Hewlett, L.I.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              381 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A CORPSE AT THE DOORSTEP

BYLINE: By harold Beaver; Harold Beaver, who teaches American literature at the
University of Amsterdam, is the author of ''The Great American Masquerade.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 936 words


THE ASSAULT By Harry Mulisch. Translated by Claire Nicolas White. 185 pp. New
York: Pantheon Books. $13.95.

WHAT must a Dutchman do to be published in English? Despite Rembrandt and
Ruisdael, his home ground is simply not part of an international geography of
the imagination. The Champs-Elysees or Nevsky Prospekt are more familiar to us
(from literature) than their Dutch equivalents, the Damrak or Rokin. So the
scene in the Netherlands is consistently discounted or ignored.

Readably though sometimes awkwardly translated by Claire Nicolas White, ''The
Assault'' is the first novel to appear in America by one of the Netherlands'
most revered, award-winning novelists. Published in Dutch in 1982, it is set
mainly in Amsterdam and Haarlem. The odd reference to ''the Haarlemmer Hout'' or
''Nieuwe Zijds Voorburgwal'' need not discourage readers; the brick houses,
canals and flat meadows are familiar from any tourist brochure.

But ''The Assault'' holds out no tourist attractions. Nor was it just runaway
sales (more than 200,000 copies sold in the Netherlands) that attracted foreign
publishers. It is as a parable of war, whose guilts and neuroses reach well into
the present, that this novel is so persuasive. Certainly in the Netherlands the
book raised again, at a deeply personal level, the problem of national
reconciliation.

For there was a Nazi party in the Netherlands; there were, of course,
collaborators. Proportionally to the general population, more Jews were
exterminated there than in any other occupied country. But this is not a novel
about Jews. It is about the murder of a Dutch policeman - a willing Nazi tool -
as he pedals quietly home on his bicycle at dusk past four prim villas on the
banks of a canal on the outskirts of Haarlem. It is January 1945, only months
before the liberation of Europe. A wheel spins for a moment; the corpse lies
inert in the gutter. It is just a Dutch suburban still life, except for one
appalling detail. Then a man emerges, followed by his daughter, to drag away the
corpse lying before his house and dump it in front of his neighbor's.

One boy from that marked villa survives when it is blown up by the Germans in
''retribution''; the rest of his family is wiped out. It is his narrative. Like
Job's messenger, he is alone escaped to tell us. But tell us what? He just wants
to forget and live a normal life. He joins an uncle and aunt in Amsterdam. He
eventually becomes a doctor. He is no detective determined to unravel the crime
of the policeman's death. In any case, it was no crime - whatever the personal
cost - to murder that Fascist.

Yet eventually he does return to Haarlem. The surviving neighbors reveal clues.
He meets the policeman's son. He even meets one of the two assassins. The
Netherlands is comparatively small, with a comparatively small population.
Eventually, it seems, everyone meets everyone. He receives each new piece of
evidence like a sleepwalker as he moves from his first to his second marriage
and a concluding antinuclear rally in the heart of Amsterdam. We may read ''The
Assault'' in part as a thriller. But it is a political thriller that re-moves
the postwar scar tissue protecting society. And it is a psychological thriller
probing the moral devastation between neighbors, fellow students, husbands and
wives that is still a fading factor, 40 years after the event, in Dutch life.

For the aging protagonist, one question resounds as the past unfolds: who was
guilty? Who was ultimately responsible for his mother's and father's and
brother's brutal and pointless deaths? The Germans? The resistance fighters who
murdered a police bully when most of the rest of Europe was already liberated?
Or the hidden Jews, for whose protection the body was dumped in front of the
narrator's house rather than one of the other villas? And why move the body at
all?

So the debris of memories, of guilt and anguish, is exposed. The neurosis among
the older generation in the Netherlands is pervasive to this day. In the wake of
such a repressive occupation, the devastation has been psychological. To those
puzzled by Dutch politics - its peace marches and antinuclear rallies - this
explains much. Americans moved on to the Korean War and the Vietnam War. The
Dutch still nurse memories of World War II. It was their war. Forty years are as
nothing. On the recent anniversary of the liberation, flowers were laid
everywhere, below monuments or at street corners where citizens were killed.
Tears welled up as families stood solemnly in front of their television sets for
taps. The communal secrets and cowardices and terrors of such an occupation are
never over.

It is Mr. Mulisch's triumph to have revealed all this - among characters that
range from ambassador to anti-Communist thug - with an X-ray cunning. His form
is a simple narrative, its chronology that of one life. ''The War is still on;
right?'' the protagonist asks. ''Sure,'' a former resistance hero replies.
''Sure.'' If none of the characters (whether plumber or nurse) can ultimately
leave the war alone, the war does not leave them alone either. The confusions of
a democratic society built on such divisive memories can only - ultimately - be
repressed.

Harry Mulisch himself is now in his late 50's. He was born in Haarlem to a
Jewish mother whose family died in the concentration camps and a Hungarian
father who was jailed after the war for collaborating with the Nazis. That
heritage made him a telling witness of the internal splits that still haunt such
a prosperous, jovial-seeming community as that of the contemporary Netherlands.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              382 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON, RIPE FOR DISASTER

BYLINE: By Stanley Hoffmann; Stanley Hoffmann, Douglas Dillon Professor of the
Civilization of France at Harvard University, teaches United States foreign
policy.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3275 words


ALL FALL DOWN America's Tragic Encounter With Iran. By Gary Sick. 366 pp. New
York: Random House. $19.95.

IN the minds of many Americans, Iran stands second only to Vietnam as a disaster
for American foreign policy. The fall of the Shah, America's most powerful ally
in the vital Persian Gulf region, and the seizure of Americans whom mobs of
''students'' held captive for 15 months, together constituted a national
humiliation of formidable proportions. As usual, it has led to a searing
domestic debate about who is to blame. Was Jimmy Carter's human rights policy
one of the main reasons for the Shah's demise? Could the Carter Administration
have done more to stiffen the Shah's backbone and so prevent the triumph of the
fanatically anti-American Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini? Should the United States,
on the contrary, have put more distance between itself and the doomed Shah, and
tried to ingratiate itself with the Iranian opposition? After the Ayatollah's
victory, would Washington have been wiser to have denied the Shah's request for
medical treatment in the United States? Could the hostages' release have been
obtained sooner, by diplomacy or by force? Was the military rescue operation, in
April 1980, a close miss or a predictable failure? Should the whole hostage
crisis have been played down instead of being allowed to become a masochistic
national drama?

Many of the principal actors have already given us their views in their memoirs.
None has been as convincing, fair and balanced as Gary Sick in ''All Fall
Down,'' his account of the Iranian crises of 1978-1980. Mr. Sick, a retired
captain in the United States Navy and a specialist on Middle Eastern affairs,
was the staff member on Iran in the National Security Council of the Carter
Administration. He thus served as Zbigniew Brzezinski's chief assistant
throughout the Iranian ordeal. It is well known that Mr. Brzezinski, Mr.
Carter's national security adviser, and the State Department disagreed radically
over the handling of these crises. M R. SICK, however, who can be very critical
of the State Department, does not whitewash his own former boss. The title of
the book conveys the spirit of his analysis perfectly. To sum up, there was
little the United States could have done to avoid disaster: like the fall of
China some 30 years earlier, events were beyond America's control. Nevertheless,
nobody performed flawlessly, and the tragedy revealed some glaring American
mistakes. Will we be able to learn from them? The crucial error was the
unlimited commitment made by President Richard Nixon and his national security
adviser Henry Kissinger to Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlevi in 1972, when they granted
him full access to advanced American military technology; in exchange he agreed
to play ''a principal role in protecting Western interests in the Persian Gulf
region.'' Mr. Nixon's extraordinary plea to the Shah, ''Protect me,'' turned the
United States into a dependent of the Shah rather than the other way around.

The Shah also pursued his very risky program of instant economic modernization
that produced profound social and cultural dislocations without any political
safety valve; opposition was suppressed and no potential rival was allowed any
power. He took the initiative for OPEC's enormous increase of oil prices in
1973; the oil revenues thus obtained helped him order more weapons and launch
more big projects. But within a very short time the boom was over, Iran was hit
hard by the world recession, and austerity measures had to be imposed.
Discontent, exacerbated by rising expectations, by the spectacle of the
profligate and sycophantic court, by the evidence of corruption in high places
and by the excesses of Savak, the secret police, was bound to rise.

It was at that moment, toward the end of 1976, that the Shah decided to
liberalize his regime somewhat. This decision coincided with the election of
President Carter but was taken for internal reasons (the Shah had known since
1974 that he was ill with cancer and wanted to secure his regime for his son).
The Shah still did not intend to share, or of course abandon, power: he merely
loosened some screws. Thus, the classical conditions for a revolutionary
explosion had been created; Mr. Sick quotes the historian Crane Brinton, but
Brinton had borrowed the idea from Tocqueville - it is when a government relaxes
its pressure that old grievances and all the remaining abuses appear
intolerable.

As for America's relationship to the Shah: ''Iran was the regional tail wagging
the superpower dog.'' It was an unhealthy connection in three ways. First, the
strategic importance of Iran was such that the new Carter Administration,
despite the President's intention to curb arms sales and promote human rights,
on the whole preserved the relationship established in the early 1970's. Second,
one of the main effects of the American commitment to the Shah was the absence
of contacts with the opposition, and the consequent stake developed by United
States officialdom in the success of the Shah's breathless social and economic
enterprise. Third, a deeply ingrained feature of Iranian political culture is
the belief in conspiracy, and especially in foreign conspiracy. Thus the United
States Administration had to be particularly careful, since every move or
statement was bound to be interpreted in Iran as part of a deliberate, decisive
plan. The result of all this, as Mr. Sick shows, was that Washington did not see
much in Iran besides the Shah, whereas the Iranian officials, in turn, ''failed
to comprehend the nature of the forces progressively tearing the country apart''
and ''instinctively took refuge in the wholly unrealistic expectation that they
could or would be saved by some super power deus ex machina.''

All the conditions for disaster had thus been established. Trouble began in
January 1978 - and took everyone by surprise. The Shah, who did not realize the
depth of his predicament until September (when the armed forces fired at a
religious rally in Teheran), now began to ask for expressions of American
support and for advice - while still stating his determination to liberalize.
The Americans, on their side, figured out earlier than the Shah that the
situation was serious; but ''the immense responsibility of proclaiming a
generation of U.S. policy bankrupt'' kept them from either appreciating how
grave the threat to the Shah really was or daring to say that the virus was
''terminal'': indeed, any such statement, one feared, could make it so. It was
not until the beginning of November, according to Mr. Sick, that William
Sullivan, the previously complacent United States Ambassador in Teheran (and,
clearly, Mr. Sick's bete noire), reported that the Shah had hinted he might
consider abdication. Now the United States policy establishment realized at last
that it was faced with a major emergency.

At that point, Washington had to operate with a triple handicap. First, as Mr.
Sick puts it, the foreign policy process is best equipped ''to deal with
chess-like questions'' that are amenable to rational control and incremental
moves. It is much less capable of coping with hurricanes, when the ordinary
rules of prudence can actually become disastrous. No bureaucracy likes to face
the fact that there is no good alternative to the current course, should this
course collapse; hence a tendency to cling to a stated status quo and to
underestimate the threat to it - in Iran as earlier in Vietnam.

Second, the United States foreign policy machinery was overtaxed at the end of
1978: the last phase of the negotiations with the Soviet Union on limiting
strategic arms, the normalization of relations with China, the need to move
beyond the spectacular breakthrough in the Egyptian-Israeli conflict achieved at
Camp David in September, all had to be dealt with simultaneously. The system was
not capable of handling so much at once; as a result, the Secretary of State,
Cyrus Vance, played only a limited role in the Iranian drama of 1978. Mr. Carter
(partly because he must have realized the limit of America's power to calm the
hurricane) ''did not engage himself actively in the day to day policy making''
and contented himself with ''establishing the outer boundaries for U.S. policy
at key moments of decision.''

Third, and most important, as always happens in a democracy when disaster
appears suddenly imminent, each person or faction had his own solution but no
one had adequate information, and every ''solution'' was based on mistaken
assumptions. The result was inevitable impotence compounded by feuding and
confusion. Mr. Sick denies Ambassador Sullivan's assertions that he was left in
Teheran without adequate instructions. But the record Mr. Sick himself describes
shows that when the system, in Washington, quickly succeeded in defining a
position acceptable to all the players - the White House as well as the State
Department - it either told the Shah that the United States would support
whatever he deemed useful (which he did not find too helpful) or else enumerated
alternatives. One option, predictably enough, the State Department would openly
prefer, whereas another would be stressed by the National Security Council. In
addition, the lack of adequate intelligence led each player to seek his own
private sources of information, or disinformation (Mr. Brzezinski relied on the
Iranian Ambassador in Washington, who grossly overestimated his own importance),
and to keep his thoughts, sources and memos from other players. M UCH of Mr.
Sick's story is devoted to this internal struggle and to the strange alliances
that were made and unmade as the situation became more desperate. The boldest
suggestion for an active United States role, the plan offered in December 1978
by George Ball, a former Under Secretary of State, for the Americans to press
for a transfer of power from the Shah (who would become a constitutional
monarch) to a new government, was blocked by Mr. Brzezinski and Ambassador
Sullivan and rejected by President Carter. Mr. Sick is rightly critical of his
counterpart in the State Department, and of academics who believed that the
revolution, if it triumphed, would be moderate, led by liberal, Westernized
nationalists, and not by the Ayatollah, whose role would be solely spiritual.

But he is equally and just as persuasively critical of Mr. Brzezinski's fixation
on the idea of a tough military government beating down the revolution. Indeed,
martyrdom made the hurricane stronger. The Shah, as long as he remained in
power, refused to take responsibility for a bloodbath, and after his departure,
despite American exhortations about the need for the military to preserve its
cohesion, the army, which the Shah had carefully organized so that it would not
become a political force, began to fall apart and to go over to the
revolutionaries. Nor is Mr. Sick any kinder to Ambassador Sullivan's own plan
for an accommodation between the moderate revolutionaries and the army, for the
success of which, as he shows, none of the conditions (such as the Ayatollah's
consent) existed.

The fact is that there was no way to avoid or divert the hurricane. The
Ayatollah pursued, implacably and successfully, a course of total intransigence
and deliberate confrontation. It paid off beautifully against a stumbling Shah
and a demoralized army, and also insured first the subordination and later the
emasculation of the moderates. The Shah, for far too long, played his usual game
of refusing to appoint really independent ministers (civilian or military),
until he had no other choice but to leave. And Washington, torn by the feud
between those who hoped for a stable, liberal Iran after the Shah and those who
feared that the victorious revolution would veer to the left and end in a
Communist takeover, completely failed to understand the irrelevance of Western
models of revolution and the possibility of a religious, antimodern ''popular
revolution lead-ing to the establishment of a theocratic state.''

The problem of wrong assumptions continued to plague, and indeed dominate, the
second Iranian crisis, that of the hostages. Before the seizure of the United
States Embassy in November 1979, there was the illusion that the moderate
government of Mehdi Bazargan was in firm control and should protect the embassy,
even after the Shah's arrival in the United States for medical treatment. After
the hostages had been taken, there was excessive optimism about the
effectiveness of the American effort to mobilize world opinion against Iran and
of the different forms of pressure (mainly economic) adopted by Washington: ''As
it happened, Iran's capacity to manage near total chaos was greater'' than the
Administration expected. The skill of the Ayatollah in manipulating the hostage
question again and again in order to weaken or discredit the moderates, to
deflect discontent and to obtain the kind of regime he had wanted (and
announced) all along was underestimated many times. O NCE again, frustration
bred division. Secretary Vance and the State Department objected to plans for
the use of force. Mr. Brzezinski, always the activist determined to win, favored
the study and enforcement of military options. The hawks finally had their day.
An increasingly exhausted Secretary Vance, whose policy of diplomatic
accommodation with Moscow and avoidance of the use of force in the third world
had been discredited by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, was overruled when
he opposed the military rescue operation favored by Mr. Brzezinski (and Mr.
Sick). Mr. Carter, acutely aware of the failure of his diplomacy in the hostage
crisis, had become increasingly impatient for action. Mr. Sick, critical of
Secretary Vance's ''unwillingness to act in the face of provocation,''
interprets the collapse of the rescue operation as a failure of technology and
as ''a failure of military execution, not of political judgment or command.''

To be sure, a successful rescue would have been a domestic and external triumph.
Mr. Sick blames the failure of the rescue mission on the military for their
''can-do'' spirit. But in an earlier passage he notes that the intense personal
commitment of Washington policy makers to the hostages, their sense of guilt
about having left these men and women exposed, led to ''a strong impulse to do
something, almost as if action was a necessary end in itself. . . . Given the
mood of the time . . . the one course of action that would have been impossibly
difficult for the government would have been to do nothing at all.'' And yet he
himself concludes that ''doing nothing was in fact the wisest course of
action,'' since the United States could do little to affect events (beside
threatening retaliation if the hostages were tried or harmed) and since the
release of the hostages depended on internal Iranian developments. Indeed,
downplaying the crisis might have resulted in ''political damage-limitation''
for Mr. Carter. But the President, to whom Mr. Sick, throughout his book, pays a
very moving and convincing tribute, was not that kind of leader: ''Not only was
Jimmy Carter prepared to take risks, but he almost seemed to court political
danger on issues that he thought were important and when he believed he was
right.'' In the first Iranian crisis, he had remained relatively aloof because
he had, rightly, judged that the storm was beyond control and that the fate of
Iran had to be settled by the Iranians. In the hostage crisis, he ''identified
himself closely with the fate of the imprisoned Americans.'' Both stances were
going to be held against him, insofar as - by Nov. 4, 1980 - both seemed to have
led to humiliating fiascos.

Gary Sick draws no general lessons from his cool, sharp and restrained analysis,
but some cannot fail to come to mind. They all have to do with the limits of
American power. First, there is the danger of ''can-doism,'' whether it takes
the form of misplaced activism or of blaming statesmen for having failed to act
tough in hopeless cases.

Second, the Iranian affair is one more episode in the long story of America's
inability to cope with major revolutions abroad. Although each one shows some
features common to all - a suddenly disoriented leader, a divided and
disaffected elite, the convergence and radicalization of previously dispersed or
hidden oppositions - each revolution differs from the others and should be
understood in its own terms. And yet, the record - China, Cuba, Vietnam, Iran,
Nicaragua - shows America - in its dread of Communism - frantically looking for
an impossible ''third force,'' or whistling in the dark in the hope that good
Western liberals will ultimately triumph. It also shows a deep reluctance to
accept the idea that revolutions are, indeed, manmade hurricanes that Washington
for all its might cannot stop or master once they begin to blow.

Third, this inability to control events, despite the national impulse to try,
points to the need for the United States to dissociate itself in time from
regimes that court disaster by destabilizing themselves. As Mr. Sick shows, it
was not Mr. Carter's timid human rights policies (never aimed at Iran) that
undermined the Shah, it was the Shah. L ESS grandiose expectations about
American power, less reliance on troubled allies, and a more modest definition
of American interests and possibilities would be essential, not only to stop
courting defeat abroad, but also because the neglect of limits strains the
complex and fragmented American policy machine to the breaking point (Mr. Sick
provides many startling examples of this). It also leads to domestic
disillusionment and incites familiar orgies of recriminations and witch hunts.
This is a point often made by George F. Kennan, among others. If all those pleas
for intelligent restraint have not been heeded yet, it is because of the deep
and persistent tension between the conviction that there is little the United
States cannot do in behalf of its global mission - a conviction still strongly
held in Washington and in many parts of the nation - and the equally formidable
intellectual and institutional obstacles that so often curtail the effectiveness
of American foreign policy. KEEPING THE SHAH HAPPY Writing about the Iranian
crisis and the American hostages, Gary Sick decided to stick close to the facts
but to use storytelling techniques. ''I realized that the actual participants
were larger than life,'' he said. ''How could I have invented more 'fictional'
characters than Ayatollah Khomeini, the Shah or Jimmy Carter?''

Mr. Sick, who is 50 years old and works on the Ford Foundation's foreign policy
programs, was in London when he was interviewed. As Captain Sick, he served in
the Navy for 24 years. Even before he retired, his compass pointed toward a
book. The Navy sent him to Columbia University where he earned a Ph.D., writing
his dissertation on superpower politics. Armed with military and academic
credentials, he got a job with the Secretary of Defense, then moved to the
National Security Council during the Ford and Carter Administrations. Mr. Sick
became the principal White House aide on Iran during the revolution.

''Basically, my job was to figure out how to keep the Shah happy,'' he said. ''I
got quite a postgraduate education in Iranian politics for four years. A week
after President Carter offered a toast in Teheran calling Iran 'an island of
stability,' things blew up. Since I had an unparalleled vantage point at the
White House, I felt that I had almost an obligation to set it all down in a
book.'' - Herbert Mitgang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of American hostage Jerry J. Miele and Iranians; Photo of Gary
Sick

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              383 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HIJACKING OF FLIGHT 847: A GRISLY ACCOUNT;
HOSTAGE'S FAMILY PRAYS AND BURIES HIS FATHER

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1429 words


As the family of the flight engineer on hijacked Trans World Airline Flight 847
gathered yesterday to pray for his safe release, it was also preparing to bury
his father.

The Rev. Elmer Zimmermann, an 88-year-old retired theology professor and expert
on Islam, suffered a heart attack and died late Saturday night in St. Louis
after he learned that his son, Benjamin C. Zimmermann, had been taken hostage.
Pastor Zimmermann was already in the hospital as a result of other ailments, but
was said by his doctor to have gone ''right downhill as soon as he heard.''

''He was simply beside himself,'' Dr. Fred Mortensen said. ''He kept saying,
'They're going to kill him, they're going to kill him.' ''

Across the nation yesterday, other relatives and friends of the hostages aboard
Flight 847 also waited anxiously for word of their loved ones' fates.

For some, huddled around television sets with their neighbors and clergy, the
vigil that began Friday was rewarded with news of the release of family members.
But for the Zimmermanns and many others, the ordeal showed no signs of ending.

''I just wish there were something we could do,'' said Ruth Maresca of Baldwin,
L.I., mother of the first officer, Philip G. Maresca, another of the three
T.W.A. crew members who were still being held. ''One minute you're optimistic,
the next minute you're pessimistic, with all your hopes dashed.''

'There's a Limit,' Wife Says

''My husband must be feeling so low, seeing everyone else getting off and they
still won't let him go,'' said Donna Jill Brown, wife of Robert Brown, a
42-year-old medical-equipment executive from Stowe, Mass. ''He's a strong man,
but there's a limit to how much anyone can endure.''

Mrs. Brown, 39, said that when she last talked to her husband. on Wednesday
night, ''He said he'd be home at 3:10 on Friday'' from his business trip. But
she heard of the hijacking early Friday and has been glued to her television set
ever since.

''I don't think the ending to this is going to be easy,'' she said. ''I think
these hijackers put no value on human life, including their own, and by now they
are exhausted.''

The worst moment thus far, said Mrs. Brown, came when she heard news reports
identifying the man killed by the hijackers in Beirut, Lebanon, as a Mr. Brown
and giving a description that matched her husband. A local television station
then invited her to view film footage of the body.

''I was hysterical,'' she said. ''But I went and saw the film with two good
friends, and we were sure it wasn't him.''

Mrs. Brown is now devoting her attention to comforting their 13-year-old
daughter, Melissa. When she needs emotiotal support herself, she has been able
to turn to the friends and relatives who flocked to her side over the weekend.

''I'm just functioning on adrenaline now,'' she said. ''I can't afford to be
weak and wobbly.''

Wife Alone With Baby

In Virginia Beach, Va., Chantel Suggs, the wife of 29-year-old Clinton Suggs,
another hostage, said she had been alone except for a television set and the
couple's 9-month-old baby until her mother came down from Canada to join her
this weekend.

''We're just holding on,'' she said. ''I don't know how to resolve this thing
and I can't see any easy way out of it.''

David Darsch of Reston, Va.,, brother of Stuart Darsch, a 30-year-old graphic
designer from Boston who was also being held, is also at a loss about what to
do. He says he thinks negotiation is the only solution to the crisis, but also
worries that ''the situation has been compounded by the fact that other
Americans are being held hostage somewhere else that nobody knows about.''

''You can't use logic when you're dealing with illogical people,'' said David
Darsch, president of a data processing company. ''If things are too publicized,
who knows what the result will be?''

In an effort to keep the family members and friends of passengers informed of
the latest developments, the State Department set up a special department to
maintain links to the families of those aboard the hijacked plane.

'Swamped' With Phone Calls

''We're in touch with the embassies in Algiers, Paris and Beirut and have gotten
lists of where people are and what condition they are in,'' David Noble, a
member of the task force, said yesterday. ''We have index cards with a list of
next of kin and their phone numbers, and with each new development we try to get
through to everybody to keep them up to date.''

Mr. Noble said the center had been ''swamped'' with phone calls, including
numerous requests from Congressmen and their aides, and calls to the White House
that had been rerouted to the office. As a result, he said, ''Sometimes the
relatives find out what is happening from television before we can get through
to them, and that's not so good.''

In the case of John Porter, though, television and radio have been the bearer of
glad tidings. Mr. Porter, 28, said yesterday that he, a brother and a sister,
and their children had been gathered since Friday at their parents' home in
Geneva, Ill.

Their parents, Mr. and Mrs. Douglas Porter, were with a church group that left
for a Holy Land tour on May 31 and was en route home when T.W.A. Flight 847 was
hijacked. Mrs. Porter was in the first group of passengers released, but the
family worried about what would happen to Mr. Porter until he ws freed during
the last stopover in Algiers.

''When we saw him on the videotape and heard his voice coming over the
television, everybody in the room just went crazy,'' said Mr. Porter. ''Until
then we thought the situation could go either way.''

Joy, and Lack of Knowledge

For the Garza family of Laredo, Tex., joy at the release of six family members
has been tempered by a lack of knowledge about two others. Vincente Garza, 53,
signed the letter to President Reagan from the hostages on the plane. His
son-in-law, Robert Trautmann, did not, but has not yet been reeased. The women
in the family have been freed.

''We're happy they're all safe,'' said Pat Hearn, another family member, about
the women. ''But we're still very concerned about the other two still being
held, and are just hoping that everything concludes well.''

Also among the families split apart by the hijacking were three young newlywed
couples on their honeymoons. Though the women have been released, all three men
were still being held, and were among hostages who yesterday signed the
statement calling on President Reagan to meet the hijackers' demands and not to
take military action.

''They were coming back from their honeymoon when their flight was cancelled and
they were put on the one that got hijacked,'' Ray Synnestved of Bryn Athyn, Pa.,
said of his son Blake, 24, and Blake's bride, Jane, 21. ''They only got married
on May 31.''

The mother of Mr. Maresca, the first officer, said there was also an element of
chance in her son's presence on Flight 847.

Usually Flies Domestically

''Normally, he flies domestically on 727's,'' she said. ''He was just in Athens
for the month, and we were expecting him home by the Fourth of July.''

Mrs. Maresca said her son, who is divorced and has no children, had done the
same duty last summer. He lives in Salt Lake City and has recently spent a lot
of time in New York, she said, adding that he joined T.W.A. as a flight engineer
in 1967 after serving as a military pilot in Vietnam.

''When he came home, he wasn't interested in a nine-to-five desk job,'' she
said. ''He wanted to keep on flying.''

Mrs. Maresca said she was ''too distraught'' by the hijacking to think clearly
about the crisis and how it would end. But she said the important thing was not
to take any action that would result in the loss of more lives.

''All of us and the Government, too, need to urge Israel to release these people
they are asking for,'' Mrs. Maresca said, referring to the hijackers' demand
that Israel free a group of Shiite Moslem prisoners in return for the hostages'
freedom. ''They should do anything to get the hostages back safely.''

Her comments were echoed by relatives of several other hostages.

''Let the hijackers save face if they want to by blowing up the plane,'' Mrs.
Brown said. ''I don't care. But let the hostages go.''

''The important thing is not to do anything hasty,'' Mr. Porter said. ''I'm glad
to see that the Algerians have kept on negotiating.

''My heart is with the people still on board that plane and with their
relatives. We know exactly what they're going through, because we were going
through the same thing just 24 hours ago.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of passengers released (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              384 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DESERTERS IN SWEDEN: AN ODD LITTLE 'V.F.W. POST'

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1349 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM


One day a few years ago, as David Smith was driving the No. 52 bus here, a
Swedish passenger and a Yugoslav immigrant got into an argument. The driver
stopped the bus and tried to break it up.

Then the Yugoslav started shouting at him. ''You Swedes all stick together!'' he
screamed. Mr. Smith, annoyed at the insult to his fairness, threw him off the
bus.

He recalled the anecdote with an ironic smile. A 39-year-old with dark, curly
hair, brown eyes and a gold earring in his right ear, he could hardly look less
Swedish.

Mr. Smith, now a Stockholm bus dispatcher, deserted his unit at Fort Ord in
California rather than be sent to Vietnam. Like many of the hundreds of young
Americans who made their way to Sweden during the Vietnam War era as deserters
or draft resisters, he remembers well the days when he felt what a fellow
American called ''the intense desire to be a super Swede.''

Numbers Have Dwindled

Those days are gone. Nearly 1,000 Americans came here during the Vietnam years;
the 50 to 75 believed to remain are all-but-invisible members of Swedish
society. Few of them see other Americans regularly, and they say they rarely
think about how Swedish or American they are.

Some have become Swedish citizens. Bruce Mayor, who came here from the San
Francisco area in 1968, just before reaching draft age, has served in the
Swedish Army and has run for a seat in Parliament.

Those who fled to Sweden were a small part of the 27 million draft-age Americans
who faced decisions about their future during the Vietnam era. Almost 9 million
did military service during those years, including 3.4 million who actually
spent time in Southeast Asia. Tens of thousands are estimated to have gone to
Canada to escape the draft.

Unlike the Americans who went to Canada, more than two-thirds of those in Sweden
were deserters rather than draft evaders. Most of the deserters say their action
was spontaneous.

Steven Kinneman, who grew up in a what he describes as ''a typical working-class
family in Indianapolis,'' deserted from the Army in Thailand in 1967 and
wandered in Laos for five years before making his way here.

Having overcome years of anger and bitterness, Mr. Kinneman says he now feels
''the process of growing into our new lives is finished.''

He and his companion, Bitte, have three children and have scraped together
enough money from their jobs at a day care center to make that most Swedish of
all investments - the purchase of a summer cabin in the Baltic archipelago.

To endure in Sweden, Americans like Mr. Kinneman had to learn a new language,
adapt to a different culture and eventually establish themselves as functioning
adults, in nearly every case without having previously lived on their own.

Relationships Didn't Survive

In many cases they were isolated from relatives and friends who could not afford
to travel to Sweden. Although some had wives or companions who joined them here,
interviews and published studies indicate that none of the relationships
survived the move to Scandinavia.

Although the exiles, as they initially called themselves, were denied political
refugee status, they were welcomed far more than in Canada. Indeed, they were
lionized in some intellectual and cultural circles.

''The United States is no longer the country to which rebels and revolutionaries
flee,'' wrote Vilhelm Moberg, the author of ''The Immigrants,'' an epic novel
about the journey of 19th-century Swedish peasants to the United States. ''Just
this category of people are instead now leaving the U.S.A. and going in exile to
Canada and Europe. For me, these Americans fulfill the great heritage of their
country; in reality they are faithful to this heritage.''

'Such a Long Time Ago'

''It all seems like such a long time ago,'' said Richard Bailey, a 37-year-old
inventory control manager for a small electronic components company in suburban
Stockholm. He deserted from Southeast Asia in November 1967 with three other
Americans and came to Sweden from Japan. Once here, the four came to prominence
as activists against American policy and encouraged other American soldiers to
desert. Only one of the other three, Michael Lindner, is still in Sweden; he
works nearby as a carpenter.

Most of the Americans who came here soon found that survival in a new land was
too demanding to leave much energy for political activism. The Americans also
got bad publicity because of crime and drug use among some of them. By 1977,
even the large Stockholm group had been reduced to what Mr. Kinneman called ''an
odd type of V.F.W. post.''

The more than 100 blacks who came to Sweden, many of whom were reacting to
racial problems in the military as much as the threat of going to Vietnam, had a
particularly tough time. The southern port of Malmo, where most of the blacks
arrived and settled, turned out to be the city least receptive to the deserters.

''We didn't come here intending to make a new life,'' said Michael Deberry, who
deserted in West Germany in 1971 and now works as a lathe operator. ''We came
here to get away. For three years, I lived with a packed suitcase ready to go.''


'Would Never Have Seen Sweden'

''Let's face it,'' said Herbert Washington, a black American who also deserted
in West Germany. ''Except for Vietnam, I would never have seen Sweden in my
life, not even as a tourist.''

Today, he said, probably fewer than 5 of the 75 blacks who went to Malmo remain.

Nearly all the Americans who remain here have visited home, but the question of
returning permanently is not an easy one.

''I still get calls from my parents in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, trying to get us
to move back,'' said Mr. Washington, who married a Dane and has two children.
''But they aren't living any better there than we are here.''

A social worker who handles young adults with drinking, drug and crime problems,
Mr. Washington said employment prospects in Rhode Island in his field looked
grim when he visited his family. ''I'm 44, with a wife and two kids to think
about,'' he said.

Trying to Fit In

One of those who did go home from Sweden, Irving Rubin, said he felt torn
between the two countries. ''We were brought up in ways that don't fit there,
but we learned adult values that don't fit here,'' he said by telephone from his
home in Rockland, Mass., where he returned in 1978 after two earlier visits. He
is now considering moving back to Sweden or moving to Israel.

Many of the Americans here said they felt that the next generation of young men
in the United States may well face the kind of choice they did.

''Here we go again,'' said one of them, Jim Walch, when asked about United
States policy in Central America.

Mr. Walch, who was notified that he had been given conscientious objector status
after he moved here from Wisconsin in 1969, is a teacher with a research
interest in preschool education. He is married with three children and has a
suburban home, an interest in Swedish folk music and a quiet, eminently Swedish
manner. He cast an absentee ballot for the Rev. Jesse Jackson in last year's
Democratic Presidential primary in Wisconsin.

''There are lots of different ways of leaving,'' said Mr. Walch, who suggested
that some men who never emigrated dropped further out of American life than
those who did.

Views of Vietnam War

Most of the Americans in Sweden said they still considered the Vietnam War a
brutal, immoral error. Many would like to see reparations paid to the
Vietnamese. Nonetheless, a common theme among them is sympathy for those who
went to Vietnam.

''Everyone I was in the Army with was a nice guy,'' Mr. Males said, ''and I hope
they get better treatment.''

Despite that attitude, the welcome that Vietnam veterans are finally being
accorded in the United States has reopened old wounds. Many of the deserters are
bitter that President Carter's 1977 amnesty program offered them
less-than-honorable discharges.

''I still feel I didn't do anything wrong,'' said Mr. Smith, the bus dispatcher.
''Just because you left America doesn't mean you don't love it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Herbert Washington and wife, Birthe (NYT/Lars Astrom)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              385 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
20 DOWNHILL YEARS

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


The more you study the wealth of statistics and analyses now available on recent
American elections, the more one particular conclusion seems warranted - that
the Republican Party has virtually claimed the Presidency as its own, winning it
in four of the last five elections - three times by landslides -and in 6 of 10
since World War II.

That's not quite the same as a ''party realignment,'' since the Democrats still
control the House, have a reasonable chance to retake the Senate in 1986, count
34 governors in power, and form the majority in 59 state legislative chambers.
But in the only national election we have, to fill the single most powerful
American political office, the Democrats have been offering little competition
for the last 20 years. They might not have won the Presidency even once in that
period had not the Watergate scandals significantly aided Jimmy Carter in 1976.

Stuart Eizenstat, a Washington attorney who was Mr. Carter's chief domestic
affairs adviser, lamented in a recent speech to the Women's National Democratic
Club that except for Lyndon Johnson in 1964 no Democratic Presidential candidate
had won a majority of ''the white middle class vote'' since 1948. Among such
voters, he said, ''only one in three nationwide supported Walter Mondale last
year - one in four in the South.''

And it's in the South - a Democratic stronghold for most of the years since the
Civil War - that the party's Presidential plight can be most dramatically seen.
In the losing campaigns of 1968, 1972, 1980 and 1984, Democratic Presidential
candidates, Mr. Eizenstat pointed out, ''have won a grand total of two Southern
states.'' The party is even worse off in the West, where by his definition of
that region, its national candidates have carried only one state since 1964 -
Texas, by Mr. Carter in 1976.

John Kenneth White, a political scientist at Potsdam State University in New
York, studied returns back to those of 1968 and found that in the period's five
national elections the Republicans had won 2,075 electoral votes (77 percent of
the total) to only 567 (21 percent) for the Democrats, with 47 votes going to
non-major party candidates.

In a survey of numerous election studies, Mr. White also cited one by Everett
Carll Ladd showing that in the same five elections, Republican Presidential
candidates carried 23 states with 202 electoral votes (only 68 short of a
majority) every time, including the Carter victory of 1976. But in the same five
elections the only constituency the Democrats carried every time was the
District of Columbia, with three electoral votes.

As all these studies suggest, the national Democratic Party is in danger of
becoming what Stuart Eizenstat called ''a narrowly based regional party of the
Northeast-Midwest, the slowest growing areas of the nation, without a broad
national dimension.'' Such a party could help to elect a President only when the
governing Republicans encounter disaster.

Mr. Eizenstat's explanation of what went wrong for the party of F.D.R., Truman,
Kennedy and Johnson is that Democratic policies - Mr. Carter's as well as
Congressional and those proclaimed by Presidential candidates - caused voters to
lose faith in the party's ability to lead at the Presidential level - to promote
prosperity through stable economic growth, provide equal, not preferential,
opportunity for all Americans, and use U.S. power to defend freedom around the
world.

Most Democrats seem to agree with this view, which obviously has much validity,
but it seems to me to leave out of account one major factor: the Democratic
candidates in those five elections since 1968 - a year when party leaders
engineered the nomination of Hubert Humphrey, who was disastrously associated
with Lyndon Johnson and the war in Vietnam, but very nearly won anyway.

After that, nominating reforms resulted in the choices of George McGovern, Jimmy
Carter twice and Walter Mondale - weak candidates all, in hindsight, and
representative of some or all of the policy problems Mr. Eizenstat cited.

Don't Presidential candidates do more to establish voters' impressions of a
political party than anyone but a President in power? If that's so, the
Democrats won't be much helped by study groups writing new position papers no
one will read. They need a Presidential candidate who in 1986 can both embody
and articulate more appealing policies, persuading the party to follow by the
prospect of regaining the White House. That proposition seems worth examining in
another article.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: First of two articles

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              386 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Congress;
A Wildcatter Drills for Power

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


In early 1981, when Dave McCurdy was a newly minted member of Congress, he went
to the White House with a group of senior colleagues to discuss the budget with
President Reagan. The Oklahoma Democrat recalls his surprise when the other
lawmakers just listened respectfully and declined to ask the President any tough
questions.

''Up here, they were kings of Capitol Hill, but down there, they were sheep,''
Mr. McCurdy said the other day. ''Their personalities changed in the Oval
Office. So I learned very early that there's no magic in seniority.''

Now serving his third term, the 35-year-old Mr. McCurdy is building a reputation
on Capitol Hill as a foe of convention and a forger of compromise. As a Democrat
with moderately conservative leanings who represents a state that is part of
neither the North nor the South, he stands just about at the political center of
the House, and that position gives him the chance to work with a wide range of
legislators from both parties.

Last week he defied his own party leaders and joined two Republicans in
co-sponsoring a package of nonmilitary aid to the Nicaraguan rebels that won a
decisive victory in the House. This week he and Nicholas Mavroules, a liberal
Democrat from Massachusetts, will advance an amendment that would rebuff the
White House and virtually halt the MX missile program.

Earlier this year Mr. McCurdy took on the power structure of the House and
helped a friend, Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, to leap over six other
senior Democrats and capture the chairmanship of the Armed Services Committee.
In the last session of Congress, the Oklahoman irritated the Pentagon by helping
devise a plan to place stricter limits on cost overruns in military contracts.

''I took a calculated risk when I came up here,'' said Mr. McCurdy, who won a
Congressional seat only five years after graduating from law school. ''I wasn't
going to wait 20 years until I had a voice in the way this place operated.''

Mr. McCurdy traces his streak of independence back to the frontier character of
his native state and the five generations of his family that have spanned
Oklahoma's entire history of statehood. ''People out there were independents,
wildcatters, prospectors, settlers,'' he said. ''They determined their own
destiny.''

The Congressman also belongs to the generation that was shaped by the Vietnam
War era, a time when established authority and aged wisdom were not held in high
regard on the nation's campuses. And when Mr. McCurdy arrived in Washington, the
ripples of rebellion caused by the war had already washed over Capitol Hill,
undermining the seniority system and giving newcomers a greater say in policy
decisions.

Mr. McCurdy's chance to influence policy toward Nicaragua came in late April
when the House rejected all forms of aid to the insurgents, known as contras.
His wife, Pam, a child psychiatrist, remembers that night well.

''Pam says that she had only seen me get mad twice during 14 years of
marriage,'' said Mr. McCurdy, the father of three small children. ''That night
was the third time.''

'We Can't Bury Our Head in the Sand'

''The extremes in this institution had done it to us,'' he said, explaining his
anger. ''I honestly believe we can't bury our head in the sand in Nicaragua.''

Over the next five or six weeks, Mr. McCurdy met repeatedly with moderates in
both parties, crafting a compromise that would renew aid to the contras but
place strict limits on how it could be used and who would dispense it.
Representative Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican whip, describes the
process as a ''word by word, trench-warfare type effort,'' and, in the end,
President Reagan reluctantly accepted the package as the best he could get.

''The Administration had to come back toward me,'' Mr. McCurdy said. ''The
forces converged in the middle, and I happened to be there.''

Both sides credit Mr. McCurdy with helping to persuade about a dozen moderate
Democrats from Southern and border states to reverse their position and support
an aid package. ''McCurdy was a symbol, a magnet,'' said Christopher J.
Matthews, a spokesman for Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. ''They clearly
identified their product and marketed it very effectively.''

But Mr. McCurdy also made some enemies. Republicans complain that he was too
difficult to work with and too eager for the spotlight, and Mr. Lott
acknowledges that ''at times, I became frustrated with him.'' Others say Mr.
McCurdy insisted on staging a White House meeting with the President last week
so he could garner some extra television exposure.

The Democratic leadership was even more irritated. Speaker O'Neill told the
columnist Mary McGrory that his young colleague had ''put the knife in us,'' and
he expressed regret that the Oklahoman had been given a highly-prized seat on
the Intelligence Committee.

Mr. McCurdy called the Speaker's feelings ''unfortunate'' but added, ''It
doesn't break my heart.'' Mr. O'Neill, he notes, has announced his retirement
and will not be around after next year.

The young Oklahoman also believes that the Democratic Party must move away from
the New Deal liberalism represented by Mr. O'Neill. Instead, he says, it must
develop a more centrist approach of the sort expressed by the 73 Democrats who
broke with the Speaker and supported aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.

''You can't keep stepping on one-third of the Democrats in this institution,''
Mr. McCurdy said. ''We should not be taken for granted. They'd be high and dry
if it wasn't for us. They've got to wake up - the trend is against them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rep. Dave McCurdy (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              387 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Veteran for Hire

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 147 words


Jan Scruggs, the man who for six years ran the organization that built the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial, is looking for a job. ''I'm looking for a new
cause,'' he said. On his resume, Mr. Scruggs, 35 years old, says he seeks a
''challenging career as lobbyist, director of nonprofit organization, public
relations, management or fund-raising consultant.'' He notes that he
successfully lobbied Congress for two acres near the Lincoln Memorial as a site
for the memorial, for which he was instrumental in raising $9 million. He
describes himself as ''persuasive and persistent'' and the holder of a degree
from American University. The tersest section of his resume says: ''Military
Service: August 1968-1970. Served as an Infantryman in the Republic of South
Vietnam. Decorations include the Purple Heart, three Army Commendation Medals
and an award for Valor under enemy fire.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              388 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 19, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S.-SOVIET SESSION ON '72 NAVAL ACCORD CANCELED

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 18


For the first time in the 14-year life of a Soviet-American agreement on
preventing dangerous incidents at sea, naval officers from the two nations have
failed to hold their annual meeting.

Reagan Administration officials said Moscow canceled the meeting after the
Pentagon changed the terms for the session. The officials said the move could
jeopardize what they see as one of the most successful military-related pacts
between the two nations.

Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, who as Secretary of the Navy was
one of the negotiators of the 1972 accord, said today that ''It is imperative we
proceed,'' with the meetings. ''We should not link the operation of the
agreement to problems elsewhere in the world,'' he said.

June Date for Meetings

The meetings were scheduled for earlier this month when, officials said, Defense
Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger decided the trip by Soviet naval officers to the
United States should be shortened and shorn of all the usual social engagements
in retaliation for the killing of an American officer by a Soviet soldier in
East Germany in March.

Pentagon and State Department officials said Mr. Weinberger made the decision
against strong opposition from the Navy and the State Department and without
regular high-level deliberations at the White House.

These officials said Mr. Weinberger ordered the Navy to inform its Soviet
counterparts of the new schedule without discussing the matter with Secretary of
State George P. Shultz or with Robert C. McFarlane, the national security
adviser.

Response by Soviets

On June 7, two days before the talks were to begin, Soviet diplomats told the
State Department that their team would not be coming. The Soviet note charged
the Administration with changing the schedule unilaterally and introducing
''extraneous factors.''

Mr. Weinberger, in a statement issued today by his office, said the two sides
had at first agreed to hold the regular annual meeting this month in Washington,
''so as to continue the professional discussion that both sides agree are
important to our mutual interests.''

But, referring to Maj. Arthur D. Nicholson Jr., a member of the American
military mission in East Germany who was shot by a Soviet sentry on March 24,
Mr. Weinberger said, ''In view of the murder of Major Nicholson by a Soviet
soldier and the failure to apologize or even compensate the family for this
tragedy, we did not think this was an appropriate time to include a larger
social program.

''The Soviet side informed us on June 7 that they had decided not to come for
the talks at this time,'' the Weinberger statement said, ''apparently not
wishing to have the substantive talks without a large social program.''

Other Meetings Still Possible

He added that ''both sides agree to seek a mutually convenient date in the
future when the talks can be held under appropriate circumstances.''

Despite the chance that the meetings will resume, other officials said they were
concerned that the American move would be seen by the Russians as breaking
precedent. That could open the way for Moscow to do the same and risk
undermining a process that has worked well for both sides, these officials said.

In 1972, Moscow and Washington signed an Agreement on the Prevention of
Incidents On and Over the High Seas. The purpose was to reduce the number of
dangerous confrontations that stemmed from the regular contact between the two
navies by setting up rules of the seas and regular meetings to work out details.


Praise for Accord

Secretary of the Navy John F. Lehman has said the agreement ''worked very
successfully'' in reducing serious incidents to only one or two a year ''way
down from what it was in the 1960's and early 1970's.''

In a 1983 statement he also termed the pact ''a good example of functional,
navy-to-navy process,'' that ''is helping to really stabilize the naval
balance.'' He added that it is one area of Soviet-American relations ''that's
getting better rather than worse.''

Administration officials said the Soviet delegation was going to visit the
United States from June 9 to 17, with the formal talks scheduled for June 11 to
13. Officials said about week before the meetings were to begin, Mr. Weinberger
and Fred C. Ikle, the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, told the Navy to
cut the schedule and tell Moscow of the new plan, but not to explain the change.

''They would know it was because of Nicholson without our telling them,'' a high
Pentagon official said today.

Officers Raise Arguments

Other officials said that Naval officers and American diplomats argued that
Moscow would consider the unilateral changes as an American act of linking the
naval talks to other events. They said such a breach of precedent would let
Moscow do the same and might undermine a process that had worked well for both
sides.

They were also said to have noted that past meetings took place despite strained
Soviet-American relations, such as last year's session in Moscow after the
Soviet shooting down of a Korean airliner. They also noted that the pact was
signed when the United States was mining Haiphong harbor against Soviet shipping
to North Vietnam in 1972.

State Department officials were also said to be worried about any move that
might link arms control negotiations to other policy matters. Ever since a
speech by Mr. Shultz last summer, the department has been trying to insulate
talks on the military and on arms control from continuing conflicts with Moscow
on other subjects.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              389 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 19, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
Judge Increases Award to Lawyers

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 149 words


A Federal judge has added $1.4 million to the amount awarded in January to more
than 80 lawyers and law firms that represented Vietnam veterans and their
relatives who claimed harm from Agent Orange, the chemical defoliant.

The original award was for $9.3 million, substantially less than the $40 million
the lawyers were reported to have requested.

The ruling yesterday by Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court
in Brooklyn followed a recommendation by a Federal magistrate, who said the
award should be modified to reflect administrative costs not considered in the
original ruling.

The decision came in response to a lawsuit by 23 lawyers and law firms.

A $180 million fund was established last year by the manufacturers of Agent
Orange to settle a class-action suit brought by veterans and their families.
With interest, the fund has grown to more than $200 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judge Jack Weinstein (NYT)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              390 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 20, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

XUAN THUY, HANOI ENVOY AT PARIS TALKS, DIES

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 577 words


Xuan Thuy, vice chairman of Vietnam's National Assembly and North Vietnam's
chief diplomat at the Paris peace talks that led to the withdrawal of American
forces from Vietnam, died Tuesday in Hanoi, according to a report on Radio Hanoi
Wednesday. He was 73 years old.

Although Mr. Thuy has acted as an international spokesman for Vietnam for nearly
four decades since its Communist leadership emerged in the 1950's, his most
prominent public position was as North Vietnam's chief representative at the
Paris peace talks.

For more than four years until the cease-fire agreement was signed Jan. 27,
1973, the slight, smiling man with the cherubic face headed the North Vietnamese
negotiating team. Other negotiators described him as articulate, informed,
generally affable and a consumate diplomat. He also served as Hanoi's chief
deputy in secret negotiations between Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, the
North Vietnamese Politburo member.

Mr. Thuy was born in 1912 in the Ha Dong province of North Vietnam and educated
at a French high school in Hanoi. He became involved in nationalist politics
while still in his early teens.

Fought French Rule as Teen-Ager

In 1926, when he was 14 years old, he joined Ho Chi Minh's Revolutionary Youth
League. He was arrested by the French for political agitation twice during the
1920's, the first time when he was 16. When he was 18 he was sent to the penal
colony on Con Son Island, then known as Poulo Condore, in the South China Sea.

He joined the Indochina Communist Party in 1938. In 1939, after the outbreak of
World War II, he was imprisoned at Sonla in northern Vietnam, and was held there
for six years during the Japanese occupation. In prison he edited a clandestine
Communist newspaper, Suoi Reo.

Mr. Thuy was released from prison in 1945 at the same time as the Viet Minh, the
coalition of Communist and nationalist groups that opposed both the French and
the Japanese during the war, was taking power from the Japanese occupation
forces. He became editor and director of Cuu Quoc, the official newspaper of the
Viet Minh.

In 1946 he was elected to the National Assembly of the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam, which the Viet Minh established to resist French rule.

Traveled Abroad in 1950's

Mr. Thuy was sent abroad in 1950, during the war for independence from the
French, and in the following years he traveled extensively, visiting Vienna,
Stockholm, and Rangoon, Burma, as well as Peking and Moscow. He spoke French and
Chinese fluently.

In 1961 and 1962, Mr. Thuy was deputy chairman of the North Vietnamese
delegation to the Geneva Conference on Laos. There, facing W. Averell Harriman
across the bargaining table, he was described as ''a top-drawer negotiator, a
dreadful fellow to face across the table day after day,'' according to an
American negotator.

On returning to Hanoi from Geneva, he became Foreign Minister in 1963, but
stepped down, ostensibly ''health reasons'' in 1965 after losing a political
struggle within the country's leadership when he supported a pro-Moscow line.
His replacement, Nguyen Duy Trinh, was regarded as a hard-liner who leaned
toward Peking in the Chinese-Soviet ideological struggle.

Mr. Thuy seemed to fall out of favor in Hanoi for several years until returning
as a negotiator in the Paris peace talks that began in 1968.

Mr. Thuy was said to have married and had children, but it was not known how
many or if they were still alive.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Xuan Thuy (UPI, 1972)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              391 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 20, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: WATERGATE AND NIXON

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 625 words


ONCE again, almost 11 years after Richard M. Nixon resigned the Presidency in
disgrace, the intensity of interest that many Americans felt for one of their
most durable but unlikely political leaders has been freshly revived by ''Secret
Honor,'' a 90-minute, one-actor film, with an added dimension of fiction that
does not seem at all out of place.

The critics have already had their say - mainly in praise. To this reporter, who
has covered the life and times of Richard Nixon over the years, and who looked
at the movie in an effort to separate fact from fiction, there is something
eerily fascinating about ''Secret Honor.'' Perhaps this is because the
incredible truth about our 37th President is told in such accurate and
convincing detail that the outrageous bit of ''political myth'' that follows
seems just as believable.

The film, produced and directed by Robert Altman, is not likely to help Mr.
Nixon rehabilitate his reputation, a task he has pursued with single-minded
diligence and no little success in recent years as the memory of the Watergate
scandals faded and as he became a celebrated author, lecturer and
behind-the-scenes adviser on foreign affairs to the Reagan Administration.
Watergate again comes alive for what it was - a corruption of the Presidency
under Mr. Nixon's leadership.

The scene is a paneled study where Mr. Nixon, played by Philip Baker Hall, is
alone late at night attempting to dictate a defense of his actions in the White
House into a tape recorder. Except for the Nixon hairline and bulbous nose, Mr.
Hall does not much resemble the former President, but Mr. Hall's mastery of the
Nixon mannerisms, rationalizations, voice inflections and world view is so
complete that it seems viewers are indeed in the same room with Richard Milhaus
Nixon. Pacing the floor in a smoking jacket, he consumes a bottle of Chevas
Regal and becomes boozy and profane as he attempts to build his case but winds
up instead in a heap of self-devastation.

The film is convincing, too, because the whole scene prior to the surprise
fictional ending is drawn from Mr. Nixon's own writings, including his
two-volume memoirs, and from what has been documented about him elsewhere over
the years. The portrayal is accurate down to his uncoordinated physical
movements, his low tolerance of alcohol, his list of ''enemies,'' his troubled
relationship to his mother and his brothers, and his political philosophy. So
far, this is the real Nixon, however implausable he has always seemed.

The fiction begins in his explanation for the Watergate burglary and coverup,
the crime that led to his resignation and sent most of his top aides to prison.
He blames the ''Committee of 100,'' the group of California Republican
businessmen who first enlisted him into politics and supported him over the
years in his anti-Communist crusades. ''The Committee,'' according to the
script, dictated his pursuit of Alger Hiss and his slashing attacks on Helen
Gahagan Douglas, whom he defeated for the Senate when he was 37 years old.

Somehow, by the time he reaches the White House, ''the Committee'' has come to
include about everybody of influence who has befriended him and now wants to
dictate his policies - opening relations with China, for example, so American
business interests can ''carve up the world markets.'' When ''the Committee''
promises him a third term if he will prolong the war in Vietnam, Mr. Nixon's
sense of honor comes to the fore and he engineers the Watergate affair as a
means of escape.

As a work of fiction, this ridiculous and impossible scenerio does not seem much
more implausable than the real reason for Watergate: Mr. Nixon's paranoia about
the people and institutions he viewed as mortal enemies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Philip Baker Hall

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              392 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CHURCH SANCTUARY WORKER GETS 2-YEAR TERM

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, June 20


A Federal district judge today sentenced the former director of a refugee center
to two years in prison for hiding a Nicaraguan in her car trunk at a border
check point.

Judge Ricardo Hinojosa of Brownsville imposed the sentence against 41-year-old
Lorry Thomas, former director of Casa Oscar Romero, a shelter for Central
Americans, after she said that she would continue to help those fleeing Central
America despite the conviction.

The Government early in the year began to move against church workers who
smuggle central Americans into this country as a matter of conscience. On Jan.
14, 16 sanctuary workers were indicted on 71 charges.

Miss Thomas was arrested May 12 at a border patrol checkpoint 70 miles south of
Corpus Christi and pleaded guilty May 30 to a charge of transporting an illegal
alien. A 28-year-old Nicaraguan, Raul Dominguez Cardoza, was hiding in the trunk
of her car.

'I Will Continue to Do So'

In a presentence interview with court authorities, Miss Thomas said, ''I have
done this many times before and I will continue to do it.''

The Government had offered to reduce her charge to a misdemeanor, but she
refused, and said when she entered her guilty plea: ''I understand the statute
and I understand that my Government holds that noncompliance with that statute
is a felony.''

But she said, ''I also understand the Commandments and understand that it is
wrong to kill and that my Government right now is bringing a war, an illegal
war, in Nicaragua.''

She faced a maximum sentence of five years in prison and a fine of up to
$250,000.

Judge Hinojosa said he had no choice but to sentence her to a prison term. But
he said he would give her 120 days to decide if she wanted to retract her vow to
continue to defy the law.

Miss Thomas is the third worker at Casa Oscar Romero to be sentenced to prison
for bringing Central Americans into this country. Her predecessor as director,
Jack Elder, 41, is now serving a five-month sentence in a San Antonio halfway
house.

One Conviction Overturned

Stacey Lynn Merkt, 30, who had been a worker at the shelter, sponsored by the
Roman Catholic dicocese, had been convicted of transporting Salvadorans in May
1984, but that conviction was overturned Tuesday and the case sent back to a
Federal court. She had appealed a a six-month sentence.

In addition, Government charges of conspiring to transport and of transporting
illegal aliens are pending against 12 church workers who are part of the
sanctuary movement in Arizona.

The Government maintains that church workers have no more right to violate the
law than others, and that those who smuggle aliens into this country for
religious reasons face the same prospect of arrest and prosecution as those who
do it for money.

Some church workers say the conflict and attendant court actions constitute the
most serious confrontation between church and state since the Vietnam War, when
some religious groups and leaders encouraged resistance to the draft.

The National Council of Churches and the national governing bodies of several
denominations have taken the position that the transporting of Central American
refugees into this country is a matter of religious conscience.

Last month, nearly 80 local and national church and refugee organizations
brought suit against the Government to stop prosecution of those offering
sanctuary to Central Americans, chiefly Guatemalans and Salvadorans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              393 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NORWEGIAN EX-DIPLOMAT GETS 20 YEARS FOR SPYING

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: OSLO, June 20


Arne Treholt, a 42-year-old former diplomat once regarded as a rising star in
Norwegian politics, was convicted today of spying for the Soviet Union and Iraq
and sentenced to 20 years in prison.

Mr. Treholt gave the Russians a wide range of classified or sensitive
information from 1974 until his arrest 18 months ago, including insights into
Norway's civil and military defenses and its military cooperation with other
North Atlantic Treaty Organization nations. The information also included
briefings about meetings between Norwegian officials and foreign statesmen, such
as Henry A. Kissinger, Helmut Schmidt, the former West German Chancellor, and
Lord Carrington, Britain's former Foreign Minister.

The spying began because Mr. Treholt was ideologically attracted to the Soviet
Union and flattered by the K.G.B.'s interest in him, the seven judges of the
Crown Court concluded in their unanimous decision. They said money later became
a motive, particularly in his willingness to pass political and military
information to Iraq from 1981 on.

The 20-year sentence is the most severe allowed under Norwegian law for
espionage. Mr. Treholt must also turn over to the Government $52,000 in a Swiss
bank account and more than $81,000 that the judges estimated he earned from
spying, as well as paying court costs of almost $12,000.

Said He Never Harmed Norway

Mr. Treholt maintained from the start of his trial on Feb. 25 that he had never
given his Soviet or Iraqi contacts information harmful to Norway.

Impeccably dressed in a white double-brested suit, he listened gravely but
impassively to the sentence as it was read this morning and then scribbled
frequent notes to himself during the all-day reading of the decision. He is
expected to appeal to the Supreme Court.

Many Norwegians were stunned at the news of the arrest of the popular diplomat
at Fornebu Airport here on Jan. 20, 1984. Then head of the Foreign Ministry's
press office, Mr. Trehold was carrying a briefcase with 66 documents that the
police said were to be handed over in Vienna to Gennadi Titov, a K.G.B. agent
Mr. Treholt had known since 1971.

The verdict today was harsher than most Norwegians expected. The sentence is
twice as long as that handed down in any other spy case here. About 50
Norwegians have been charged with spying since World War II, mostly in
connection with the Soviet Union.

Much of the trial was conducted in open court. But several weeks of testimony
were taken behind closed doors, and about 100 pages of the 255-page decision
were read in secret today as well. It is widely assumed that this evidence
sealed Mr. Treholt's fate.

Soviet Ties Date to 1967

Mr. Treholt's ties with the Soviet Union date back to 1967, when as a young
journalist for the Oslo tabloid Arbeiderbladet, he was introduced to Yevgeny
Belyayev, a Soviet consular official later identified as a K.G.B. agent. He
became a valuable source of information for the Russians when he embarked on a
diplomatic career in late 1972 as personal secretary to Jens Evensen, then
Minister for Trade and Shipping.

Mr. Treholt moved to New York in 1979 as an economic and social affairs officer
for Norway's delegation to the United Nations. At that time, suspicious
Norwegian security authorities asked for and received help from the Federal
Bureau of Investigation in monitoring Mr. Treholt's contacts with the Russians,
some of which resembled the complicated dropoffs from which spy novels are made.

In 1982 the Foreign Ministry, unaware that Mr. Treholt was suspected of spying,
suggested that he enter Norway's Defense College. The decision by the new
Conservative-led Government to hide its suspicions and let Mr. Treholt enter the
school, where lectures and tours often deal with secret information, has been
hotly debated since his arrest.

The Government has maintained that it was not sure of its evidence at the time.
The decision today did not comment but made it clear that much of the damaging
information was passed to the Russians after Mr. Treholt became a student at the
school.

Political Effect May Be Limited

Leading politicians suggested tonight in cautious interviews with Norwegian
television that political fallout from the case may be minimal. The opposition
Labor Party cannot go too far in raising questions about the Government's
judgment on admitting Mr. Treholt to the Defense College without reminding
voters that it is the Labor Party's left wing that spawned Mr. Treholt's
ideological beliefs and vulnerability to Soviet influence.

Mr. Treholt is the son of a former Labor Party member of Parliament and became
active in party politics as a young man. At the time he first made contact with
the Russians, he was an outspoken opponent of American involvement in Vietnam
and Norway's membership in NATO, as well as a supporter of the Greek Socialist
opposition to that country's military rulers.

His energy, outgoing personality and marriage in 1967 to Kari Storaekre, a
Norwegian television star, contributed to his image as an rising young man.

The marriage is among the things shattered by his arrest. Miss Storaekre
recently filed for divorce and has taken their 7-year-old son to Stockholm,
where she is working for Swedish television.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Arne Treholt (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              394 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'Boat People' Reach Japan

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 37 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, June 20


A group of 90 Vietnamese refugees arrived in the southern Japanese city of
Sasebo today aboard the American tanker Ranger, which picked them up off a boat
in the South China Sea last week, the Foreign Ministry said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              395 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 22, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam to Seek Change In Setting Wage Levels

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 120 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 21


Vietnam's leaders have called for an end to large state subsidies and
''bureaucratic centralism'' for setting wages and prices, the Vietnam press
agency reported today.

The Communist Party leadership proposed the changes in a communique issued on
June 17, after the conclusion of their eighth plenum. The plenum, a full meeting
of party members, was devoted to transforming the economy and discussing prices
and wages.

The text of the communique was carried in a Vietnam press agency report
monitored here.

It appeared that the proposed changes referred only to wages and prices. The
communique called for increased state control over production and distribution
of goods and expansion of the state-run economy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              396 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 22, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR REBELS ACKNOWLEDGE RAID

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 900 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, June 21


A Salvadoran guerrilla group took responsibility today for a sidewalk attack at
a restaurant here Wednesday night in which 13 people were killed, including 4
United States marines and 2 American businessmen.

A communique from the group, Urban Guerrillas-Mardoqueo Cruz, said the off-duty
marines were the intended target of the attack. The statement said the nine
civilians were killed because several of them pulled out guns and fired at the
assailants.

Urban Guerrillas is affiliated with the Revolutionary Party of Central American
Workers, the smallest of five anti-Government rebel groups operating in El
Salvador. The communique, delivered to a news agency office here, said the
shootings were part of a campaign titled ''Operation Yankee Aggressor in El
Salvador - Another Vietnam Awaits You.''

The statement added a warning that Salvadorans should not rent houses to
American military personnel here, saying the owners and their property would be
considered ''military targets.''

Tied to Other Killings

Earlier this year, the same group took responsibilty for ambushing a truck
carrying policemen, killing two of them. Later, the group said it had killed a
passer-by in an attack on the National Police headquarters.

Salvadoran and American officials said today that they would search for ways to
fight what some described as a new urban terrorism phase by the guerrillas.

President Jose Napoleon Duarte also called on the political leaders of the
insurgency to ''say something about this murder'' and to open the private talks
that he has proposed to seek ways to reduce the war toll on civilians.

President Duarte and most of the high command of the Salvadoran armed forces
took part in a brief airport ceremony today as the coffins containing the bodies
of the four marines were placed aboard an American military cargo plane for a
flight to Howard Air Base in Panama. Bodies to Be Flown to U.S.  The coffins are
to be flown to Andrews Air Force Base outside Washington on Saturday.

''There are people in the world who have lost all reason,'' Mr. Duarte said as
he stood before the coffins coffins on the runway of the military airport. ''The
doctrine of terrorism and the religion of death have been created in which life
is not important.

''We in El Salvador have lived, during all these years, moments of great crisis,
but even in the midst of so many deaths there has never been an act so savage,''
he said.

Marines Not in Uniform

The marines, who were guards at the American Embassy here, and the nine other
people were gunned down Wednesday night by a group of men who had drove up
beside a cluster of outdoor bars and restaurants in one of the capital's most
affluent areas.

Robert E. Lamb, Assistant Secretary of State for Administration and Security,
who led the United States delegation that came for the bodies, said, ''Terrorism
of this type represents ideological bankruptcy.

''It's the last desperate act of men and women who think their cause has no
future,'' he said. ''It's a perverse tribute to the fine work that's being done
here in El Salvador to achieve your goals. This new warfare is waged by cowards
who stalk the innocent and prey on the weak. It is a war without frontiers, a
war that is not easy to win, but it is a war we cannot lose.''

Col. Carlos Reynaldo Lopez Nuila, a Deputy Defense Minister who oversees the
police and internal security forces, said in an interview that El Salvador might
use the incident to ask for American aid for the three organizations under his
command: the National Police, the Treasury Police and the National Guard.

There is a longstanding Congressional restriction that limits American military
aid and training to the Salvadoran Army, which is most responsible for fighting
the war on rural battlefields.

But the guerrillas have been proclaiming in recent months that they are
returning to urban violence, street demonstrations and economic destruction that
they followed in an earlier phase of the war. Joaquin Villalobos, military
commander of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, the guerrilla
umbrella organization, has said this would be coupled with prolonged, but
smaller scale, warfare against the army.

Increase in Attacks

The new strategy has been clear in the last few months in increased attacks on
the nation's electric power and communications systems and in the kidnappings of
several mayors. The rebels have also asked people to refuse to pay local taxes
in hope of bringing municipal governments to a halt. President Duarte and other
Government officials say that a recent surge of work stoppages by unions
connected to the left is part of the new strategy.

Gen. Jaime Abdul Gutierrez, the former armed forces commander and now president
of the state electric commission, said recently that more than 1,000 utility
posts and towers had been destroyed in five years of war.

Until recently, utilities had prided themselves on being able to repair downed
lines quickly, but General Gutierrez said that guerrillas were now threatening
the lives of repair workers and that the rebels sometimes planted mines around
damaged towers.

Much of the eastern part of the country has recently been without electricity
for long periods, but he said it was impossible to make repairs in many of the
affected areas without pulling soldiers from combat to protect work crews.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Salvadoran soldiers carrying coffin of American (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              397 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 22, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SIHANOUK FINDS CAVIAR AND KIM IL SUNG MIX WELL

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1196 words

DATELINE: PYONGYANG, North Korea, June 16


As Prince Norodom Sihanouk tells it, his friend came to him one day and said,
''You've lost a country, the least we can do is to build you a house.''

The friend was Kim Il Sung, one of the most forbidding figures in the Communist
world, and the house he built for the Prince on a wooded hillside outside the
North Korean capital was fit for a king.

The Prince, King of Cambodia as a teen-ager, and later Prime Minister and
constitutional head of state, tells visitors that the 40-room mansion in this
austere workers' state is the grandest residence he has ever had.

''I call it my palace,'' he says, breaking into the nervous laughter that
punctuates much of his conversation.

On the face of it, the politics of this region has produced few odder couples
than the Prince, 63 years old, and Mr. Kim, his 72-year-old benefactor.

Caviar and Champagne

Prince Sihanouk is a gentle-mannered aristocrat with a passion for French
civilization. He is a Buddhist who says of the Khmer Rouge, murderers of 5 of
his children and 14 grandchildren, ''I have to pardon.''

After 15 years under house arrest in Cambodia or in exile, either here or in
Peking, he remains an aesthete, immaculate in Paris-tailored pin stripes,
partial to caviar and Champagne.

In addition to the mansion, Mr. Kim has provided 100 Koreans to staff it, and a
fleet of luxury cars are at the Prince's call. There are also hefty
hard-currency expenses to be met for the Prince's frequent overseas travels and
even for his clothes. ''It was not France which gave me this suit,'' the Prince
says. ''It was President Kim.''

Then there are the lesser favors, the imported wines and foods, the sports hall
near the artificial lake where the Prince plays badminton with Pyongyang-based
diplomats, the dances for the diplomatic corps at which the Prince, manning the
stereo, favors American pop music.

Despite his financial dependence on North Korea and China, he is astonished when
a visitor inquires whether he has become a Communist himself. ''Sihanouk a
Communist?'' he says, almost choking on the word. ''Never!''

'More Than a Friend'

Mr. Kim, whom the Prince refers to as ''more than a friend, more than a
brother,'' is a man who has rarely been called that outside the Communist world.
A peasant's son who took power when the Soviet Army arrived here in 1945, he has
built a Government that critics have compared to the one depicted by George
Orwell in ''1984.''

Through his Korean Workers' Party, Mr. Kim has imposed a chilling regimentation
on his country's 18 million people, and bolstered it with a personality cult
that many believe even Stalin could not rival.

The ''glorious and beloved leader,'' one of Mr. Kim's many titles, has been for
40 years a bitter enemy of much that Prince Sihanouk admires, including the
United States.

The two men first met in 1965 at a gathering in Bandung, Indonesia, to
commemorate the 10th anniversary of the movement professing nonalignment. Prince
Sihanouk recalls how President Sukarno, the host, placed the two leaders in
adjoining suites in his palace and told them: ''You are both nice men. I want
you to be friends.''

In 1970, the Prince had reason to be grateful. While visiting Moscow, he was
ousted as ruler of Cambodia by pro-American generals who resented his neutralism
- one often tilted toward Hanoi - during the Vietnam War. China helped arrange
an alliance of convenience between the Prince and the Khmer Rouge, the Communist
rebels who had been fighting to topple him, and the Prince, titular head of the
alliance, took up residence in Peking.

Mansion Was Built in 1974

Mr. Kim proposed that he make an additional home for himself in Pyongyang. In
1974, the North Korean leader built the mansion in the Jang Su Won hills north
of the capital, a few miles beyond Mr. Kim's own headquarters. Since then, the
Prince and his wife, Princess Monique, have lived in the mansion for a few
months each year, except from 1976 to 1979 when the Khmer Rouge placed them
under house arrest in Phnom Penh.

The differences between the exiled Prince and his host are reflected in the
architecture. When Mr. Kim asked what kind of place he would like, the Prince
specified something restful, beside water. What resulted was a two-story
building in Korean style, with fluted tile roofs, overlooking the lake. There
are pheasants and cuckoos and lengthy woodland walks for the Prince and his
Maltese poodle, Miki.

The ''assembly hall'' where Mr. Kim is to be found much of the time, off the
beech-lined avenue that leads back into the city, is a massive granite and
marble structure that looks more like an airport terminal. It is ringed by
troops, and diplomats say there are signs that Mr. Kim rarely sleeps there,
shifting from place to place on short notice.

With all their differences, the two men share a taste for a lavishness.

In the chandelier-lighted dining room, the Prince says, chuckling: ''Not much
here that's proletarian, is there? More like the life style of a millionaire!''

The Prince is treated as a head of state. Since 1982, he has been nominal head
of a government-in-exile, this time contesting the Vietnamese occupation that
supplanted Khmer Rouge rule in Phnom Penh.

The Khmer Rouge, with China's backing, are the strongest element in the
alliance. This places the Prince in harness with men who locked him up in his
own palace, slaughtered part of his family and, he believes, killed ''about two
million'' other Cambodians.

It is an association that disturbs many old friends of the Prince, and one that
is not easy for Mr. Kim to accept, either. Habitually careful to balance his
ties with Moscow and Peking, the North Korean leader has been squarely on
Peking's side on the Cambodian issue. Lately, he has shown signs of edging away
from the Khmer Rouge, but according to the Prince, Mr. Kim has never tried to
influence him politically.

Why, then, does the Korean leader make such extravagant efforts on the Prince's
behalf?

Diplomats here say they believe Mr. Kim may have been influenced by a desire to
increase his prestige in the non-Communist world, but the Prince says this
underestimates his host's generosity. Similarly, he denies that the reason he
has been spending more time lately in Pyongyang than Peking, where he has
another mansion, is because he resents the inflexible Chinese commitment to the
Khmer Rouge.

The real reason, he says, is that the environment in Pyongyang is quieter, more
conducive to writing his memoirs and to guarding his health. But an outsider
walking through the eery midday quiet of the mansion wonders privately how happy
he can be in this remote place, linked to the more sophisticated world he
cherishes by the shortwave broadcasts of the BBC and the Voice of America.

As though sensing his visitor's thoughts, the Prince says: ''To understand
Sihanouk, you have to know that I am an Asian man - I am a yellow man, not a
white man. So I am guided by sentimental feelings, by feelings of gratitude, and
it is those that are most important to me. I will always be grateful to my hosts
here, and in China, for giving me everything when everything was lost.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Sihanouk's home in North Korea (NYT/John F. Burns); Photo of
Prince Norodom Sihanouk

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              398 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

HOSTAGES IN LEBANON: Where Safety is Taken Seriously;
SURVEY FINDS SECURITY AT AIRPORTS USUALLY SERIOUS, SOMETIMES NOT

BYLINE: By CONSTANCE ROSENBLUM

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3140 words


Airport security varies widely around the world, but a review of procedures
shows that in general those practiced in developing countries tend to be lax
while those in North America and the Communist bloc tend to be stringent.

In Europe, the review shows, the major airports usually follow a high standard
of security. A notable exception is Athens, where hijackers last week seized a
T.W.A. plane, some of whose passengers are still held hostage in Beirut,
Lebanon.

The review was conducted by correspondents for The New York Times and
supplemented by interviews with State Department officials and representatives
of the International Air Transport Association and the International Federation
of Airline Pilots Association. Officials of the Federal Aviation Administration
and the Central Intelligence Agency declined to be interviewed.

In arriving at an assessment of what is and is not a safe airport, the experts
stressed that the quality of the equipment in use is not always the determining
factor. Equally important, they noted, are the training and attentiveness of the
personnel and the efficiency with which they conduct security checks and use
such things as hijacker profiles to recognize security threats.

Referring often to Athens, they also emphasized the importance of airport
design, particularly the way passengers are routed through a building and how
tightly access to airstrips is controlled.

The review showed that safety procedures lagged in much of Latin America,
particularly Rio de Janeiro, Mexico City, and Lima, Peru, as well as in parts of
Africa and the Middle East.

Among airports receiving high marks for safety were those in Tokyo, Tel Aviv,
Zurich, London and most of Western Europe. Airports in the United States and
Canada are also considered highly secure.

Some of the most rigorous airport security is in the Soviet Union, China,
Vietnam and Poland. Security was also described as high in Bangkok, Singapore
and Kuala Lumpur, but the emphasis was seen as focusing on preventing drug
smuggling rather than hijackings.

In the Middle East, Beirut is considered a major and persistent trouble spot,
and Cairo and Amman, Jordan, are regarded as unusually stringent in security.

In general, representatives from the pilots and airlines organizations agreed
with the findings of the review, particularly the assessment of Beirut and
Athens.

''There are a very small handful of airports, perhaps half a dozen, that are of
serious concern for us worldwide, not all of them in the Middle East,'' said
Harry Atterton, director of public relations for the International Air Transport
Association.

Mr. Atterton, whose organization is the trade group for airlines that fly
international routes, declined to identify specific problem airports. But he
said there were ''one or two in Africa and in South America,'' adding that
airports near or linked by air routes to known trouble spots were in greatest
danger.

As for airports with tight security, Mr. Atterton singled out Tokyo, which he
described as ''incredibly thorough,'' and Tel Aviv, which he said had by
necessity become expert in this area.

Rodney Wallis, the international association's security chief, said that in such
regions as Southeast Asia, preventing hijacking must compete with efforts to
control drug smuggling. ''The potential exists for attention to smuggling to
detract from attention to preventing hijackings,'' he said. ''We musn't allow
that to happen.''

The air transport association regularly receives reports from its member
airlines on the safety of airports. When problems are indicated, Mr. Wallis
said, the organization recommends improvements to the appropriate airport or
government. Then, if improvements are not forthcoming, individual airlines might
take steps to strengthen their own security, as was the case with T.W.A. at
Athens.

James Callahan, public affairs adviser for consular affairs at the State
Department, also cited the airports in Beirut and Athens as key security
problems, noting that the department had issued travel advisories regarding
both.

Erwin von den Steinen, of the department's Office of Aviation, praised European
airports as having ''a fairly consistent level of concern.''

But he described Athens as having been ''a trouble spot for years'' and
characterized Rome as having had sporadic problems related to the ease with
which people can get aboard an aircraft.

According to Capt. Laurie Taylor, executive secretary of the International
Federation of Airline Pilots Association, airport security is better in those
countries in which Government and industry cooperate on airport safety, such as
the United States, France and Britain.

In parts of Latin America and Asia, where the level of screening may depend on
whether a flight is international or regional, the degree of security varies
enormously, he said. He specifically said of the airports in Colombia that there
was ''just virtually no security at all - a year or two ago they had three
hijackings in one day.''

The following are details from the review of security at major airports: EUROPE
London Heathrow Airport is consistently cited by travelers and officials as one
of the most security conscious in the world. Though British officials would not
disclose any security information about Heathrow, travelers say X-ray machines
are used for screening and physical searches are sometimes conducted. Airport
personnel are described as attentive, and access is closely controlled
throughout. Domestic and international operations are kept separate, and all
arrivals are separated from departures. Police officers are regularly on duty.
Paris The essential element at Paris airports is that police officers are
involved in almost all security operations. At terminals 1 and 2 at Charles de
Gaulle, passengers clear passport control, then go through X-ray machines
operated either by police officers or teams of hired security guards and police
officers. The procedure is the same at Orly Airport's international area, but a
recent passenger reported that there were no X-ray machines and that hand
baggage was individually scrutinized. Madrid Security at Barajas International
Airport is rigorous, in part because the Spaniards are concerned about possible
attacks by Basque terrorists. All carry-on luggage goes through X-ray machines
and passengers pass through metal detectors. The Guardia Civil, a highly
disciplined force, frequently check passengers with a hand-held detector. Access
to the passenger departure lounge is controlled by barricades and other devices.
Direct access to the runway area appears difficult without a boarding pass.
Domestic and international operations are in separate terminals and arrivals and
departures are also well separated. West Germany Security is taken seriously at
the major airports in Frankfurt, Dusseldorf, Hamburg, Stuttgart and West Berlin,
and it is considered extremely difficult to get a weapon, or anything that looks
like one, onto a flight originating in West Germany. Travelers say they are
routinely asked to open briefcases even after they have been X-rayed. Body
searches are common even after passengrs have walked through metal detectors. In
periods of particular tension, passengers must identify their suitcases on the
runway before boarding planes. Stockholm At Arlanda Airport, which has separate
domestic and international terminals, all hand baggage is X-rayed on
international flights and security guards are in evidence. Access to the
airfield is carefully controlled, and the staff seems trained and professional.
Athens At the international terminal at the Athens airport, hand baggage is
X-rayed and passengers pass through a metal detector. According to the airport
commander, police officers are posted at each station. On a recent visit, all
posts were manned and workers seemed alert, but at other times attention has
been perfunctory. Physical searches seem rare. Some airlines re-check passengers
as they prepare to board their plane. There appears to be no easy way of getting
out onto the runway area without passing by police and airline personnel. The
perimeter of the airfield is considered the weakest link in the airport's
security. Recent improvements have been made in the fencing, and tighter
security measures are planned. In view of the airport's proximity to the Middle
East, many believe that security measures here should be much tighter. Warsaw At
the Warsaw airport all passengers must pass through X-ray machines, and security
personnel are well trained. Customs officers inspect much of the baggage that is
checked on flights. Well-armed troopers are sometimes in evidence in the airport
and on the runway area watching aircraft. Domestic and international passengers
use different terminals. Rome At the international airport, hand-baggage is
X-rayed and passengers pass through metal detectors, but some travelers have
found that the equipment is not highly sensitive to the presence of metal
objects. Some airlines carry out their own security checks, particularly
regarding carry-on baggage. Guards can be seen patrolling the catwalk that
overlooks the main passenger area. The airport is well designed, preventing
people from wandering about unnecessarily, but airport workers sometimes seem
listless rather than attentive. Zurich Mr. Wallis of the international airlines
group characterized the security at Kloten Airport in Zurich as ''first rate.''
Passengers are checked with a hand-held metal detector, and frisking is routine.
Hand-held baggage is X-rayed, and bags are generally inspected by hand. Armed
guards are in evidence, and armored cars are sometimes stationed on the field.
Passenger movements are well controlled, and airport personnel, though polite,
are attentive, businesslike and highly professional. Soviet Union The strict
controls on passenger movement at Soviet airports would seem to discourage air
piracy. But there have been at least 14 hijacking attempts, usually by people
trying to leave the country. At international airports, procedures are tight,
though probably for reasons of national security. All luggage is X-rayed, all
passengers go through a metal detector, and some are searched. Police officers,
soldiers and plainclothes officers are very much in evidence. MIDDLE EAST Tel
Aviv Ben Gurion International Airport is regarded as one of the world's most
security conscious, with unusually thorough and time-consuming procedures.
Arriving passengers are interviewed by officers who examine their luggage,
sometimes item by item. After going through passport control, passengers and
their luggage are X-rayed. Physical searches take place when there is cause to
suspect a traveler. Security personnel are trained to recognize what are known
as hijacker profiles. Access to the departure lounge and the runway area is
strictly controlled. Domestic and international flights are separated, as are
international departures and arrivals. Police and security guards are
conspicuous. El Al, the Israeli national airline, provides its own supplementary
security checks in airports abroad. Amman Queen Alia International Airport,
which opened in 1982, was designed with air piracy in mind. Only ticketed
passengers may enter the upper deck, where departure lounges lead directly to
docking gates. Terminals have at least two screening points, and armed police
officers are conspicuous. Passport control is computerized, and airport
personnel are familiar with terrorist profiles. Cairo Security is extremely
tight at the two main terminals of Cairo International Airport. All movement
between departure areas and planes is by bus, and no passengers may walk on the
runway area. Police officers screen passports and tickets. Before entering the
departure area, passengers are screened again by electronic gates, and hand
luggage is X-rayed. A third screening, which involves a physical search and the
opening of carry-on luggage, occurs in the departure lounge, where police
officers abound. Armed officers guard each aircraft day and night. Mr. Wallis of
the international airlines association praised ''the high level of awareness
about security.'' AFRICA Nairobi At Jomo Kenyatta Airport, luggage is X-rayed,
and attendants often inspect carry-on luggage by hand. A hand-held metal
detector is also used on passengers. Access to the departure lounge and the
runway area is closely controlled. Police officers are noticeable, and personnel
tend to be strict. ASIA India: All major Indian airports used X-ray machines,
and passengers are searched upon entering the departure lounge. Access to
departure lounges is closely controlled, and metal detectors are used when
passengers leave the transit area to board planes. Carry-on luggage is searched,
and entrances to check-in areas are guarded by armed police. The New Delhi
airport has separate buildings for international arrivals, international
departures and domestic flights. Peking At the Peking airport there is a single
''choke point'' between the check-in area and the aircraft through which all
departing passengers go. All hand luggage is X-rayed and much of it is opened.
After passing through a metal gate, passengers are often searched with a metal
detector. Every flight carries sky marshals. Tokyo Security at the new
international airport at Narita is among the tightest in the world. About 1,500
police officers and 400 civilian guards patrol the grounds. The airport is
surrounded by barbed wires, steel barricades and electrified fences, aimed not
specifically at would-be hijackers but at local people who have protested the
construction of the airport. Since it opened in 1978, there have been no
hijacking attempts. The diligence and training that Japanese workers are famous
for extends to the officers who examine passengers and luggage. At the entrance
to the ticket counters, officers run hand-held metal detectors over baggage to
be checked. This baggage is X-rayed again before being loaded onto the plane.
After immigration checks, passengers must have their hand-held luggage X-rayed
and must pass through metal detectors, and nearly everyone is physically
searched. Seoul Kimpo International Airport in Seoul is unusual in that even
passengers on arriving flights must walk through metal detectors and have their
hand baggage X-rayed. SOUTHEAST ASIA Bangkok In Donmuang Airport, the busiest in
Southeast Asia, security is unobtrusive but appears very efficient, although
actual searches are rare. In these respects, the airport it is typical of others
in the region. In the departure lounge, passengers go through X-ray and metal
detector equipment when a flight is called, though passengers from several
flights can mix in the areas beyond the detectors. Access on the runway area is
strictly controlled. Airport personnel seem competent and alert. Kuala Lumpur
The airport is alone in the region in X-raying all baggage of passengers
entering the terminal building even before check-in. Hand baggage is X-rayed and
subject to an additional search before the passenger boards the plane. Domestic
and international flights are strictly separated. Singapore Only Singapore
Airlines requires all baggage to be inspected on entering the building. Though
access between arrivals and departures is easier here than in some other
airports, detection devices are situated at the gate of each flight's boarding
lounge. The airport is spacious and never crowded, so personnel can easily
observe the proceedings. Jakarta In April, a new international airport opened at
Cenkareng, outside the city. The layout - a series of Java-style pavilions
connected by open walkways - probably makes the airport vulnerable to
unauthorized entry. Luggage is examined only once. LATIN AMERICA Rio de Janeiro
At Galeao Airport, airport security is lax, as it is in most of Latin America,
although there have been almost no hijackings in the region in recent years.
Individuals and hand luggage are screened by X-ray devices on international
flights, but not for domestic flights. The police presence is minimal. In
addition, although international and domestic departure lounges are different,
it is easy to move from one to another. Commented Mr. Taylor of the pilots'
association: ''The level of security varies enormously.'' Lima At Jorge Chavez
Airport, X-ray machines are used for international flights but not for domestic
flights, despite the fact of Peru's guerrilla war. There is more of a military
presence here than in Rio de Janeiro. As is true elsewhere in the region, drug
smugglers are the main target of security. Mexico City At Benito Juarez airport,
security is minimal, and officials allow almost anyone with a serious-looking
credential to accompany departing passengers or await arrivals at the door of
the plane. Managua Security procedures at Augusto Cesar Sandino International
Airport are much tighter than at other Central American airports. Plainclothes
police officers patrol waiting areas. All baggage is searched . Armed soldiers
patrol the runway area. NORTH AMERICA Ottawa Security at Canadian airports is
virtually identical to that of the United States. X-ray machines are used to
screen all carry-on luggage, and passengers must walk through a metal-detecting
device. Police are on duty. New York ''We have no questions about its safety
whatsoever,'' Mr. Wallis said of Kennedy International Airport. Along with the
usual metal detectors and X-ray machines, there are alarm systems to detect
intruders, and uniformed and plainclothes officers are in evidence. Special
badges and license plates are among the devices used to keep the airfield
secure. Miami At the international airport, passengers appear to be screened
thoroughly by X-ray machines and metal detectors, but they move quickly through
the checkpoint - at the rate of less than 20 seconds each. Security is provided
by private companies employed by individual airlines and by Dade County, which
has a 120-member police force covering the airport. Because of Miami's proximity
to the Caribbean, the companies give their personnel specialized training, an
airport official said. In the last 12 years only two hijackings have originated
from Miami, he added. Los Angeles At the Los Angeles International Airport, the
busiest on the West Coast, the personnel monitoring X-ray equipment and metal
detectors are described as alert and well trained. All arriving international
passengers pass through the new Tom Bradley International Terminal, where
travelers say security seems extremely tight. Throughout the airport the
presence of law-enforcement officers does not appear to be pervasive. Airport
officials say they have conducted trials to measure the airport's vulnerability
to terrorists and found the security to be adequate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION:

An article last Sunday on airport security around the world incorrectly
described the use of X-ray machines in security procedures in Bangkok, Miami,
Paris, Rio de Janeiro, Tel Aviv and Warsaw. Passengers must pass through metal
detectors; the X-ray machines are used for screening baggage.

GRAPHIC: Photo of security checkpoint at Kennedy International Airport (NYT/Ruby
Washington); Table of security tips for travelers

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              399 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOSTAGES IN LEBANON: A WEEK OF TENSION;
AMERICANS WEARING RIBBONS AND SHOWING LIGHTS FOR HIJACKING HOSTAGES

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 957 words


Yellow ribbons bedeck lapels, trees, light poles, storefronts and churches; the
Empire State Building glows in red, white and blue, and car headlights blaze in
the daylight as people show support for Americans held hostage.

''There are yellow ribbons everywhere - people are even wearing them,'' said
James Bourgeois, a disc jockey at KTIB-AM in Thibodaux, La., near Choupic, home
of Steve Willett, one of the 40 men still held hostage in Lebanon from hijacked
Trans World Airlines Flight 847.

Streets in Richmond, Mo., home of the plane's pilot, Capt. John L. Testrake, are
lined with American flags, and residents have tied yellow ribbons around trees
and poles.

In Baton Rouge, La., Mayor Pat Screen and others joined a Girl Scout troop on
Friday to tie yellow ribbons around the oaks lining North Boulevard.

Black Balloon for Slain Hostage

Merchants in Gainesville, Ga., on Friday tied yellow ribbons and bows to
storefronts, street lights, trees and the city's Confederate monument. Forty
yellow balloons - and one black balloon representing the one slain hostage -
were released as about 100 people prayed for the hostages' release.

Yellow ribbons first became a widespread symbol of support for American hostages
when the United States Embassy in Teheran, Iran, was seized in 1979 and
Americans were held for 444 days. The inspiration for the symbol was the song
''Tie A Yellow Ribbon Round the Old Oak Tree,''

Nurses at Deaconess Hospital in St. Louis who work with one of the passengers
freed from the T.W.A. plane, Debra Toga, are wearing yellow ribbons on their
uniforms because her husband, Arthur, is still being held hostage, a hospital
spokesman, Shirley Althoff, said yesterday. Mrs. Toga is a registered nurse in
the hospital's psychiatric ward.

''Some other people are beginning to wear them and there has been suggestions
that everyone wear them'' in the hospital, Miss Althoff said.

Ribbons 'All Over Town'

Yellow ribbons are ''all over town'' in Geneva, Ill., home of the Rev. James W.
McLoughlin, a Roman Catholic priest still being held, said Bob Dillenburg, a
parishioner at St. Peter's Catholic Church. ''Everybody seems to have them,'' he
said, ''on the trees, on the mailboxes, and so forth.''

''Everywhere you go in Algonquin you have yellow bows and yellow ribbons,'' said
Jerry Kautz, a spokesman for St. Margaret Mary Church in the Illinois city. The
church's steeple also is draped with ribbons.

Thirty-five members of the Algonquin and Geneva parishes who had been returning
from Israel and a Greek cruise were aboard the T.W.A. plane when it was
hijacked.

Ribbons of red, white and blue also blossomed in New York City as taxi owners
passed out 30,000 lapel ribbons Friday.

Skyscraper Memorial

''The taxi fleet industry and independent owners decided the American people
should show some kind of solidarity with the hostages,'' said Ron Stoppelmann,
president of the Metropolitan Taxicab Board of Trade.

Red, white and blue also adorns the Empire State Building. A spokesman, Robert
L. Tinker, said colored floodlights would illuminate the top of the tower until
the hostages are freed.

Many broadcasters urged motorists to keep their headlights on in a show of
support.

''People are really frustrated at this and the light thing gives them the
feeling that they're doing something,'' said Bob Mohan of WSB radio in Atlanta,
who with Russ Minshew of WSB television proposed the idea to listeners and
viewers in Georgia. ''It's a symbolic gesture of unity and thoughtfulness for
the hostages and basic support for the President's attempts to get them back,''
Mr. Mohan added.

Banners for America

Traffic helicopter pilots reported Friday that more than two-thirds of the
vehicles headed into downtown Atlanta had their lights on in bright sunshine.

Arthur Stivaletta, 49, of Dedham, Mass., who is said to have started the
prisoner of war bracelet campaign during the Vietnam War, said he and a friend
planned to fly their planes over beaches during the weekend towing banners. One
of the banners is to read, ''U.S.A. Is No. 1.''

''I'm doing this for the hostages, but more so for the American people,'' said
Mr. Stivaletta. ''The abuse has to come to an end. If we don't take a hard-core
line now, they are going to blackmail us every day for the rest of our lives.''
---- Campus Remembers a Hostage INDIANAPOLIS, June 22 - The hand-lettered sign
has been standing in a Butler University flower garden for five of the days that
James W. Hoskins Jr. has been held hostage.

''Bring Jim Hoskins and the other hostages home,'' the sign says. ''Set them
free.''

Mr. Hoskins, an education major who graduated from Butler on May 19, boarded the
Trans World Arilines jet in Athens for the flight home after a three-week
European vacation, a gift from his parents. He is now among 40 hostages left
after the hijacking of the plane over Athens.

Sally Francis, a trumpeter and percussionist in the school band, put up the Jim
Hoskins sign on Wednesday. ''I want students to say a prayer or think good
thoughts,'' he said, ''because I'm a believer in the idea that if enough people
think good thoughts, he'll know.''

Miss Francis and 10 other Butler students also tied ribbons around trees on the
Butler campus. Mr. Hoskins's fiancee, Kathryn Davis, a recent graduate of
Indiana University, was also on the plane when it was hijacked. The gunmen freed
Miss Davis last week.

Mr. Hoskins, who attended Butler on an athletic scholarship, played varsity
football during his junior and senior years and was the Butler Bulldogs' leading
receiver last year. Students and faculty members here say he was a popular
figure on campus, a highly motivated, disciplined competitor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Russ Minshew, who proposes that motorists keep their lights on
in the daytime in tribute of Beirut hostages (UPI)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              400 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Thailand Is Seeking a Place To Move 50,000 Cambodians

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 81 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 22


After a series of meetings this week, Thai officials and international aid
organizations are still searching for a place to move more than 50,000 civilian
followers of a Cambodian guerrilla army. They are among more than 225,000
Cambodians who fled into Thailand last winter because of a Vietnamese attack.

The roughly 50,000 Cambodians are in the overcrowded camp of Bang Poo near the
border town of Aranyaprathet. There are reported to be disagreements over what
is a safe site.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              401 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA STEPS UP DRIVE TO REVIVE BUREAUCRACY

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 542 words

DATELINE: PEKING, June 22


Deng Xiaoping's campaign to rejuvenate China's sluggish bureaucracy has been
stepped up with the naming of a new Shanghai party chief and the promotion of
three 42-year-old officers to top military posts.

Earlier this week, the Government announced the appointment of nine new
officials to head ministries that play a crucial role in Mr. Deng's
modernization drive. At the same time, he has been pressing ahead with a
shakeout of regional military commanders and top Communist Party and Government
officials in the provinces.

The latest changes are part of a process that began at least three years ago at
lower levels of the bureaucracy. Mr. Deng, himself 80 years old, insisted that
the retention of power at all levels by aging, poorly educated officials who
began their careers in the the revolutionary period was a major obstacle to
economic and social change.

He started a drive to ease these officials aside, some of them into retirement
and others into advisory positions. By the end of last year, about 900,000 party
and Government officials had been sent into compulsory retirement, and a process
to weed out the armed forces' officer corps had begun.

As well as promoting younger, college-educated men, Mr. Deng has been using the
changes to unseat officials with questionable loyalty to his policies. An
example this month was the removal of Li Desheng, commander of the strategic
Shenyang Military Region in the northeast, who was once an ally of Mao Zedong's
widow, Jiang Qing. Several other elderly commanders in the 11 regions were also
sent into retirement, and the number of regions was reduced to seven.

The change in Shanghai, the country's largest city and its industry and commerce
hub, appeared to stem partly from dissatisfaction in Peking with the pace at
which the city has put into effect the market-oriented policies at the heart of
Mr. Deng's program.

The new party secretary in the city, Rui Xingwen, was previously Minister of
Urban and Rural Construction and Environmental Protection, which has played a
major role in the large building program that has accompanied the economic
growth of recent years. He replaces Chen Guodong.

The new deputy party secretary, Jiang Zemin, was until this week Minister of the
Electronics Industry, another sector that has expanded rapidly under Mr. Deng.
Mr. Jiang will also serve as Mayor, or head of the city Government, replacing
Wang Daohan.

Other reports confirmed the appointment of a new party secretary, Chen Huiguang,
a 46-year-old engineer, in the Guangxi-Zhuang Autonomous Region bordering
Vietnam. Changes in top posts had previously been announced for the provinces of
Sichuan, Shandong, Jilin, Guizhou, Hebei, Jiangxi and Tibet. Most of the new
appointees are in their 40's and 50's.

The new military appointments involve top positions on the general staff in
Peking. The announcement noted that in addition to their youth - at 42, the new
generals are at least 20 years younger than the men they replace -those promoted
are military academy graduates.

He Qizong becomes a deputy chief of the general staff, Zhou Wenyuan becomes a
deputy director of the general political department, and Zong Shunliu becomes a
deputy director of the logistics department.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              402 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE JOE PAPP

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani; Michiko Kakutani is a book critic for The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 15, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5548 words


PACING BACK AND FORTH IN HIS cluttered office, Joseph Papp lights up a Havana
cigar and starts reciting some of the Duke's lines in ''Measure for Measure.''
Papp is directing a new production of the play - which this weekend kicks off
the Shakespeare Festival's 30th summer season - and his set and costume meeting
has soon turned into a one-man exercise in acting. Playing various characters,
Papp roams about the room, punching the air for emphasis, pulling his jacket
lapels up for effect. His intermittently interrupted monologue also bounds from
subject to subject, as he expounds upon his concept of the play, sandwiching his
opinions between puns, lengthy asides on the quality of sunlight in Brooklyn,
sexual imagery in ''Henry IV,'' and maybe a few bars from ''Hallelujah, I'm a
Bum'' or ''Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?''

At 64, Papp has the quick, fast movements of someone trained as a dancer or
basketball player, and one might easily mistake him for an actor - so swiftly
does he slip in and out of impersonations, moods and poses. Listening to Papp
talk is like listening to a Ren-aissance scholar on Benzedrine. The voice is
Brooklynese - neutralized by impeccable Elizabethan elocution; the delivery,
brisk, verging on manic. While every opinion is announced with authority,
nothing seems to have been analyzed or subjected to internal debate - rather,
it's spilled out, contradictions and all, for the listener to absorb.

The costume designer, Lindsay Davis, a young man meticulously dressed in a suit
and tie, is kneeling by the coffee table, nervously scribbling down every word
Papp utters, while Robin Wagner, the set designer, who has known Papp for two
decades, sits slouched on the couch, casually lobbing one-liners at the
producer: ''Matzohs for lunch, Joe? You're turning into a religious fanatic. I
remember when I thought you were Greek.'' ''You added a line? - so now, it's
going to be by William Shakespeare and Joseph Papp?''

Papp ignores Wagner's jibes. Or perhaps he doesn't hear. Talking about the
character Angelo, he is reminded of Harry Belafonte, whom he saw the other night
at a benefit. Which reminds him that he wants to try to cast more black actors
in ''Measure for Measure.'' Which reminds him of changing demographics in the
city. Which reminds him of his plan to redesign the city's educational system.
He is most interested, he says, in the character of the Duke, the head of state
in the play, who likes to go among his people, dressed in disguise. As Papp sees
it, the Duke is a great leader, someone perceived by his people as ''abrupt and
even cruel - but who also ends up being very human.'' As a character, says Papp
later, the Duke is totally inexplicable - a hundred times more ''complex than
Jesus Christ.''

Lindsay Davis wants to know how old Papp thinks a low comic character named
Elbow is.

''One hundred,'' says Papp, not missing a beat. ''He's a guy who falls asleep
all the time, an old guy - very tall and thin.''

''Those old skinny men, they don't fall asleep,'' says Robin Wagner.

''This one does,'' says Papp, ''I know he does.'' ''Of course,'' he adds, almost
pausing, ''everything's subject to change.''

The sort of theater that Papp loves most are plays like Shakespeare's -plays
that are epic in dimension, drawn with great, sweeping lines and filled with raw
emotions, plays that ''have a kind of ardent compassion, where peo-ple are
screaming at life.'' And in per-son, Papp himself projects a similar intensity,
a kind of unaccommodated and kinetic passion. He hates being bored, hates
sameness, inertia and silence; and his own moods can vacillate between a dark
melancholy and an almost electrical enthusiasm. Equally fluent in the worlds of
art and business, he is decisive and direct - sometimes to the point of rudeness
- impulsive and yet somehow deeply vulnerable.

There is something about him, an imaginative sympathy that makes writers and
actors want to confide in him, impress him - or simply make him laugh; and
around the Public Theater, headquarters for the Shakespeare Festival in the East
Village, they tend to pick up on his every mood, echoing his responses with
their own. ''I think of him as a combination of a very intense and wily Talmudic
scholar and a bad vaudeville comedian,'' says the composer and playwright
Elizabeth Swados. ''I think he's very, very sentimental, which he dares to be in
a time when most people are very aloof.''

Although ''Measure,'' a dark comedy about sex and politics, is one of
Shakespeare's more problematic works, Papp liked its ambiguities - and having
decided to stage a show in Central Park for the festival's 30th anniversary
season, he embraced its textual difficulties as a wonderful directorial
challenge.

MEASURE'' IS the 41st production that Papp has staged himself, but he is not
recognized, mainly, as a director. It is as a producer, a midwife to others'
talents, that Papp has made his reputation, and his influence on the theater
consequently remains a highly personal affair, measured less in terms of an
esthetic vision or a single body of work than in terms of projects he has
assembled and people he has affected - among many others, such playwrights as
David Rabe, John Guare, Wallace Shawn, Michael Weller, Thomas Babe; and such
actors as George C. Scott, Colleen Dewhurst, James Earl Jones, Meryl Streep and
Kevin Kline.

If the last three decades have diminished neither Papp's energy nor his passion
for the theater, they have witnessed remarkable changes: The festival has
evolved from a provisional acting workshop, housed in the basement of a Lower
East Side church, into America's largest theatrical arts institution; and as its
founder, architect and presiding spirit, Papp has become one of the most
influential men in American theater today.

While he has been assailed for being too avant-garde, on the one hand, too
commercial, on the other, the festival has developed an eclectic agenda over the
years - an agenda that has included such disparate works as ''A Chorus Line,''
''Sticks and Bones,'' ''Hair,'' ''That Championship Season,'' ''Short Eyes,''
''Marie and Bruce,'' ''Dead End Kids,'' ''The Pirates of Penzance'' and
''Plenty.'' Under Papp's leadership, the festival has revivified classics and
brought Shakespeare to the public; helped bring radical new works into the
mainstream; given black, Hispanic and Asian-American authors a valuable
showcase; and provided a model for not-for-profit theaters around the country.
''Joe's shown more courage to do more things than anybody else,'' says Bernard
Jacobs, the president of the Shubert Organization. ''I think he's one of the
major reasons we still have a theater today.''

Of course, as New Yorkers well know, Papp also exerts a presence in the city
that extends well beyond the theater. A child of the ideological 1930's, Papp
has always been committed to using theater as a ''societal force'' - he set out
to open the theater to ''the disenchanted and disenfranchised'' - and his own
taste still inclines toward plays like ''Tracers'' (Vietnam) and ''The Normal
Heart'' (AIDS) - plays that ''have something to say about contemporary issues.''

Active on nearly a dozen cultural and social committees - from the Mayor's
Theater Advisory Council to Planned Parenthood - Papp often seems omnipresent in
New York, the proverbial model citizen and good Samaritan. And in recent years,
he has also emerged as one of those public figures whose names appear in New
Yorker cartoons and elicit strong opinions from people who haven't met them -
someone variously hailed and assailed as ''a punk version of Diaghilev,'' the
''Don Quixote of the Great White Way'' and the ''David Merrick of the 70's.''

PAPP DOES LITTLE to discourage the hyperbole; like a politician on the campaign
trail, he cultivates, even enjoys, a high visibility. ''I feel it's important
that the public be let in on everything,'' he explains. ''I'm a public figure,
and a public figure should be in the public eye. The theater needs it. It gives
you a certain amount of power to do things you want to do.''

Publicity campaigns for the festival, in fact, have increasingly played up
Papp's role as figurehead of the institution. At one point, the picture of
Shakespeare that stands at the center of the festival's insignia was replaced
with one of the producer, and last year's advertising campaign for ''The Human
Comedy'' featured a likeness of Papp on the show's program, in newspaper
advertisements and even on the Broadway marquee. Such public displays of
personality, Papp explains, are just good business; and, in a sense, his role as
a spokesman for the festival did begin as a publicity and fund-raising tactic.
As Merle Debuskey, a press agent associated with the festival since its start,
observes: ''An institution can't be interviewed or photographed. So we
consciously tried to make Joe synonymous with the institution - he had to be
known so the project would grow as we hoped.''

At the same time, though, Papp's identification with the festival is much more
than a public-relations gimmick - the producer himself experiences it as a
visceral fact. When the future of the theater is threatened, he feels physically
ill; and he has taken negative reviews of shows as personal attacks. When one
critic dismissed David Rabe's ''Boom Boom Room'' as ''an empty and poorly
crafted play,'' Papp rang him up on the phone and shouted: ''You think you're
going to get me? Well, I'm going to get you.'' ''The institution is Joe,''
observes the playwright Thomas Babe, ''and Joe is the institution.''

Today that institution has five stages, 110 full-time employees, and an annual
budget of $10 million, and Papp is in a position, as the British playwright
David Hare points out, to ''put enormous resources into what he believes in, and
withhold resources from something he doesn't believe in.'' Papp's faith in his
own judgment is absolute, and at the Public, his judgments are the only ones
that really matter. He's unhappy with how an all-male production of ''Anthony
and Cleopatra'' is proceeding - he cancels the show that afternoon. Albert
Innaurato wants to write a new scene for ''Coming of Age in SoHo,'' featuring a
family of eight -Papp calls his casting department, and the next day there are
23 suitable actors waiting to be auditioned. He decides to move ''The Human
Comedy'' to Broadway, and he commits $400,000 of the festival's money to the
move.

''Here at the Public,'' says David Hare, ''it's Ruritania, and the Emperor can
do as he likes.''

IN THE BEGINNING, WHEN the festival was still a small acting workshop, Papp
became accustomed to doing everything himself - from directing shows to
installing seats in the theater - and he still approves advertising copy for
shows, tries personally to sign all production contracts, and makes a point of
telling writers and actors, in person, what he thinks of their work. Sometimes
his impatience with bureaucracy and the democratic process also extends to the
staging of shows. In the case of ''Two Gentlemen of Verona,'' he tore apart the
production a week before the opening, and produced a Broadway hit. In the case
of ''True West,'' only acrimony and nasty headlines resulted - both the author,
Sam Shepard, and the play's nominal director disowned the abortive production.
''If a show has problems,'' says Papp, ''something's got to be done. And once
I'm involved, it's difficult for me to get involved halfway.''

All or nothing remains the principle by which Papp has run the theater and his
life. If he decides to give minority performers more jobs, he doesn't cast two
or three actors in a show - he announces the formation of an entire black and
Hispanic company. If he wants to prevent the razing of some Broadway theaters,
he doesn't just sign a few petitions - he takes a hotel room in Times Square so
he can spend 24 hours a day on the scene. Such crusades may not succeed - as was
the case with these two projects - and Papp may abandon one plan for another in
a second, but he says he never looks back. He is a man who tries to live as
though there were no past, a man who willfully lives in the present. Were he an
actor, he says, the two roles he would most like to play are Hamlet and King
Lear. He would play Hamlet as someone out to usurp the throne from Claudius;
Lear, as an irascible authority figure who ''just wants everyone to love him.''

Papp has always had a weakness, he says, for old-fashioned, Broadway-style
''dash, glamour and risk,'' and in a day when most arts institutions are run by
committees, he has developed a personal style reminiscent of such old-time
impresarios as Sol Hurok and Jed Harris. In a 1978 cabaret act, he dressed the
part of an old-time showman - appearing on stage in a top hat and tails,
carrying a silver-headed cane. And on television commercials for the festival,
he affects the swaggering stance of a self-made mogul - talking out of the side
of his mouth and gesturing grandly with a cigar.

Even offstage, there is something insistently theatrical about him. Whether he
is sweet-talking a diffident actress, threatening to lie down in front of a
bulldozer during a demonstration, or presenting his views of Broadway to a
reporter, his audience has the sense of watching a brilliant performance - often
an entirely heartfelt performance, full of real passion and commitment, but a
performance all the same. ''I can't stand it when people are indifferent to
me,'' he says. ''I don't mind it if they get angry, want to kill me, but I want
some kind of reaction.''

Papp has peremptorily stalked out of dinner parties and board of estimate
meetings, and written enraged letters to corporate executives who have ignored
him - but most of the time, such overt tactics aren't required. An astute
observer of others, he uses his intuition, along with his charm and street
smarts, to get whatever he wants. When it comes to fund raising, for instance,
Papp will talk about ''maneuvering'' with the person on the other end of the
phone - ''tap dancing,'' as he says, with their emotions, playing upon their
sense of civic responsibility, their love of the arts, even their fear of
letting him down.

Control matters enormously to Papp - it is the reason he gets a rush of
adrenalin from persuading a new patron to give money to the festival, the reason
he works out three times a week on a Nautilus machine, and the reason, of
course, that he loves to work in the theater. Art gives order to his life,
provides him with a framework in which to function. ''Even if a play's about a
depressing subject, it's still a play,'' he says. ''It's under your control. You
know the show will be over in a certain time, and in that time, no one's going
to get killed. Most things in life are totally out of control, but with a play,
there's a beginning, a middle, an end. You're not just going off into the wild
blue yonder.''

Figuring out an approach to a play like ''Measure,'' negotiating the foreign
rights to a new show, trying to convince Mayor Koch to help save dying Broadway
theaters - all are challenges that fill Papp's compulsive need to orchestrate;
and one has the sense that he welcomes crises and confrontations as additional
ways to test his intellect and reflexes. In his initial fight to stage free
Shakespeare in Central Park - the fight that first brought the festival into the
public eye, back in 1959 - Papp successfully took on the all-powerful Parks
Commissioner Robert Moses. In 1973, he canceled a $7 million contract with CBS
when it postponed David Rabe's controversial Vietnam play, ''Sticks and Bones.''
And during his tenure at Lincoln Center (the festival was ''theater
constituent'' there between 1973 and 1977), he presented such grim, disturbing
works as ''Boom Boom Room'' and ''Short Eyes'' - plays that seemed deliberately
chosen to upset uptown audiences' complacent expectations.

There are few such battles to be fought today, and Papp acknowledges that the
success of the festival has made it increasingly difficult to take an
adversarial role. ''Early on,'' he says, ''I felt, risk everything on one throw
of the dice. Now I have much more to lose - I have a huge institution, I have a
board of trustees. I can't just violate everything.'' Even though Papp still
likes to think of himself as something of an outsider - he shows up at a benefit
at Lincoln Center wearing gray suede shoes with his tuxedo, uses a
four-wheel-drive jeep as a limousine - he has become a member of the
establishment he once took on: Instead of going hat in hand to fund-raising
parties thrown by rich ladies in East Hampton -like ''a trained monkey,'' he
recalls - he can now call up the president of CBS and ask directly for money.
His reputation and connections are enough to move a show to Broadway; and when
an attack on Mayor Koch in Larry Kramer's recent play ''The Normal Heart''
produced nasty rumors in the press, Papp settled matters by picking up the phone
and talking directly with the Mayor.

Not that this state of affairs makes Papp particularly happy. He talks a bit
wistfully of old battles and former opponents, adding, ''I feel I have to be
responsible, but you also have to make sure that that word doesn't make you too
cautious.''

MANY EVENINGS, ON the way to dinner or another show, Papp will wander through
the Public Theater, through its labyrinth of theaters and lounges filled with
young people, dressed in sneakers and army pants and bright T-shirts, and he
will be reminded of the days when Broadway did not mean a hit show but an entire
culture, the days when cafes and hangouts like the Players Club were filled late
at night with actors and directors and fans, all debating the latest
performances and plays. And he will feel, too, a sense of belonging.

''It's just a matter of touching base,'' he says, ''letting them know I'm alive,
I care. When I walk through the theater, I try to make sure the public toilets
are clean, the lights are on properly. It's like it's my own place, so I have a
great deal of concern for how it looks.''

Indeed the theater is where Papp lives. He and his fourth wife, Gail Merrifield
- who is director of play development at the festival - have an apartment three
blocks from the Public but, with its pressed-wood bookshelves and a dining-room
table that doubles as a desk, the place has a modest, improvised feel. His
office at the Public, on the other hand, possesses all the amenities of home: a
fancy stereo system, complete with a compact-disc player, framed pictures of
family and colleagues, souvenirs from trips abroad, as well as a wall that's
covered floor to ceiling with awards (including 23 Tonys, 91 Obies, and three
Pulitzer Prizes).

''I was talking to these students at City College the other day,'' Papp recalls,
''and they asked, why did I start all this, and I said I just wanted a home.
Like the first place we started at on 729 East 6th Street, between Avenue C and
D, it was called the Emmanuel Presbyterian Church, and I was so pleased to say,
'This is my place - I live here.' ''

Even as a kid, Papp seemed to be in search of a surrogate home: He used to
organize clubhouses on his block; and in high school, he took over a
''social-athletic club,'' changing its name, typically enough, from ''the
Mustangs'' to ''the Martyrs.'' Papp's family moved several times a year during
that period - often in the middle of the night, because his parents could not
pay the rent; and he remembers longing to live in a house with real lamps,
instead of bare light bulbs on the ceiling, someplace that would give him the
emotional sustenance he felt he lacked with his parents.

''My father was very outgoing,'' he recalls, ''I think he loved me a lot. My
mother was very proper - she wasn't a cold woman, but she didn't know how to
express her feelings. She seemed to want so much from me - I saw it in her eyes.
And I'd do anything for her - I once climbed up to the fifth floor, up this pole
I had to shimmy up, just to put up this laundry line for her. If she'd asked me
to jump off, I would have jumped. The thing is, you give a lot and sometimes get
nothing back in return. There's this fear where you're called upon to give and
give and there's no payment at all.''

Because of this fear, and because he tends to experience ''things very, very
deeply,'' Papp says he learned, early on, to ''sometimes avoid dealing with it
by not being involved.'' He became a self-reliant child; and as a young man, he
determined to get as far away as possible from the poverty of his family's
immigrant life. Having learned English as a second language - Yiddish was spoken
at home - Papp fell in love with Shakespeare's eloquent use of the words, and he
found in the Bard's plays a way of escaping the bleakness of his menial jobs:
shining shoes, hawking peanuts and plucking chickens.

Later, after a wartime tour in the Navy took him to Hollywood, he returned to
the world of theater, as a student at the Actors Laboratory, and he also
invented a new identity for himself. ''He was Joe Papirofsky out of the Navy,''
recalls Bernard Gersten, his former associate producer, who met him in 1948.
''That was it. I didn't know he was Jewish. I knew nothing about his parents.''
Papp would later re-embrace his family's Judaism, would toy with the idea of
restoring his original name (he had shortened it to Papp during the 1950's, when
he was working as a stage manager at CBS) and he would also pay tribute to his
late father in his 1978 cabaret act - singing the songs his father once had
loved.

Still, the sense of detachment Papp learned as a child would be transferred from
his parents to the five children of his first three marriages. ''My personal
life has been a very zigzaggy thing,'' he says. ''It took all my children to
grow up before I began to have real relationships with them. Now I have a good
relationship with my two oldest daughters, Susan and Barbara. My son Tony, I
have a very good relationship with. Miranda, a fair relationship with. One son I
haven't heard from in a long time - Michael, he's sort of just disappeared.''

When she was growing up, recalls Miranda Papp, who is now 27, she felt very
close to her father, though he was ''rarely home.'' It is in recent years that
she has come to feel his absence. ''If I said to him, 'I'm broke, I'm
desperate,' he'll obviously respond,'' she says, ''but if I don't call him,
months will go by - I don't think he even realizes it. About three years ago, we
had the last deep conversation we've had. It was Christmas, and he said he
realized if Gail died, he'd be alone. That was the most shocking thing he said
to me -I mean he realizes he's kind of pushed my brother and me away. I told him
I'd like a closer relationship with him, and he said, 'Yes, I want that, too.'
We both agreed we'd make a big effort, but he was like a man who comes up out of
the sea for a moment to say, 'Help me' - and since then, he hasn't come back up.
This is my image of him - that he's drowning in some way.''

As for her brother Anthony, who is now 23, he recalls that as a child, he was
jealous of the attention his father lavished on people at work: ''It seemed like
everyone else had him as a father for a while, and I wanted more.'' Papp, too,
notes that it has been easier for him to develop intense relationships with
artists and writers - people who are ''involved in the most important thing
you're doing'' - than with his own children. In the theater, he says, ''you're
all doing the same thing, and you can talk about things directly, which you can
never do at home.''

Of course, the theater, by its very nature, tends to encourage paternal
relationships -between actor and director, writer and producer - and as head of
the Shakespeare Festival, Papp is in a position to be looked upon as a father
figure. When a janitor in the theater got his girlfriend pregnant and needed
$150 for an abortion, Papp was the one he turned to for help; and when Miguel
Pinero, the author of ''Short Eyes,'' was arrested, Papp was the one who went
down to the police station and bailed him out. ''There was a time,'' recalls one
writer, ''when anyone was in trouble, Joe would be the first person they'd
call.''

When Papp decides he likes a particular writer, he not only agrees to do his
first play, but promises to do his subsequent work as well - he makes it clear
that he's embracing the writer as an individual, not merely buying his work. As
a result, a relationship frequently develops that is much more intense than any
ordinary business or artistic alliance. ''It was a kind of spiritual thing,''
says Albert Innaurato, recalling his experience working with Papp on ''Coming of
Age in SoHo.'' ''I'd gone into it feeling my career was over -but I would only
have to talk to him for five minutes to feel an incredible input of energy. He
was there 24 hours a day - he became a colleague, rather than a boss or
producer.''

In a business of intermittent employment, short runs and uncertain futures, the
sense of an ongoing relationship that Papp offers can be extremely alluring -
especially to writers and actors who are just starting out. ''It's like a
combination of high school, summer camp and family,'' says Elizabeth Swados, the
author of ''Runaways.'' ''That's why so many people fall head over heels in love
with the place. The problem is that, at some point, you also have to grow up and
find your own family. My personal experience was feeling confused: I wondered
what was mine, before I became so involved in his incredible charisma. I think
almost everybody at one time or another has said I have to get out of here, but
nearly 85 percent of the people come back. Joe can be very possessive, and his
possessiveness has caused innumerable crackups in relationships.''

Papp, himself, speaks of understanding the problems King Lear has with authority
and filial affection - ''He just wants Cordelia to say the right thing,'' he
says, ''and the little bitch gives him all this intellectual bull.'' But if he
expects undivided ''caring, loyalty and friendship'' from the artists he takes
under his wing, Papp says he also has the same problems sustaining intimacy with
them that he has had with his own children.

''It can be upsetting if you expect to try to hold on to something that's played
itself out,'' says Thomas Babe. ''Joe's openness can encourage people to place
enormous expectations on him, and if, at that point, Joe acts as producer and
makes certain decisions, it can become very confusing. I admire his deep
personal involvement, but I think that means you have to protect yourself
sometimes - that's why some people feel he might be cold or distant after the
heat of battle.''

David Rabe, who says he benefited from Papp's ''real, creative insights'' on his
first play, ''The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel,'' observes that with each
successive play of his, Papp seemed to have ''less and less time.'' ''The Public
had begun its huge rise to prominence,'' Rabe recalls, ''and decisions got made
quicker and quicker. Ultimately, Joe was overextended - he was doing Broadway,
Lincoln Center, Shakespeare in the park and plays at the Public. It was too
much, and if you're one of the many events and you get shortchanged, ill will
develops. In the beginning, Joe offers a kind of haven; and then when you feel
you're not getting it, you feel betrayed.''

''I think I lost something with David,'' says Papp today. ''I'll always love
him, but I could never give him all he wanted. I was building a theater, and you
cannot build a theater and have strong relationships at the same time, except
with those people who are working with you. Everyone expects you to be there all
the time, and it's just not possible for me to be there for one person all the
time.''

Some of Papp's longtime colleagues feel that in recent years, as the actress
Estelle Parsons puts it, ''he's become more protective of himself, more careful,
more aware of his position as a leader in the theater.'' Certainly many of the
people Papp was closest to at the festival have fallen by the wayside. In 1978,
after a disagreement over Michael Bennett's ''Ballroom,'' Papp fired Bernard
Gersten, his associate producer and friend of 30 years. And Merle Debuskey, who
has been with the festival since its beginning, says he, too, feels increasingly
distant from Papp.

''All the people he was intimate with are gone now,'' says Debuskey. ''It's like
he's one of those species of palm tree that grows very tall. All the lower
leaves fall off, so only the leaves at the top are left. That tree trunk, when
it grew, had to be alone - anyone that might challenge it had to be cut off. Joe
can't stand there and be dragged down by anything -including people. Everything
has to be discarded so you can move on.''

CLEARLY PAPP HAS little time, these days, to have casual dinners with friends,
chat on the phone, go away on weekends. Even family matters have a way of
turning into public affairs: This year, the family's annual Passover seder was
filmed by a television crew from the MacNeil Lehrer NewsHour.

But while Papp enjoys being in front of an audience - he once thought of
becoming a stand-up comedian - he says he could never be a professional actor
because ''you must be too concerned with your own psyche.'' He does not like to
worry about himself, he says, and he has orchestrated his life in such a way
that he's rarely ever alone.

Even in the midst of crowds, however, a part of him remains detached - separate
and apart. It is a feeling of isolation that Papp traces back to his childhood,
when he had the sense of living in a ''secret world,'' cut off from those he
loved. ''I'm rather outgoing, but I don't feel that way,'' he says softly. ''I
feel very much by myself. When I was a kid, I always felt lonely, though I
shouldn't have been. I had brothers and sisters and friends, but I guess it was
mostly my mother who gave me that feeling.

''There are lots of time now when I feel lonely for no reason. I get plenty of
attention from Gail, and people are very supportive around the office. But I
don't know if that's what you're looking for, really. It's not discoverable -
it's an inner place that you've already made and it doesn't matter if you're
busy or surrounded by people, because you missed something when you were growing
up, and there's no way to replace that. Some people try desperately to fill it
up - drugs, drinking, sex. I think work is relatively healthy - at least you're
productive.''

The festival, certainly, has thrived on Papp's restless need to keep moving, his
single-minded devotion to its future. Life is time, he believes, and there is
never enough of it. He hasn't taken a real vacation, he estimates, in two
decades; hasn't visited his country house in Katonah, N.Y., in a year; complains
he rarely gets a full night's sleep. Already, he has lined up 15 shows for the
festival's next season, and he is working on adding another $10 million to the
festival's current endowment of $20 million. Income from the long Broadway run
of ''A Chorus Line'' has dropped from $6 million or $7 million a year to $1
million, and Papp points out that the festival needs more shows ''that make
money.'' He thinks that this summer's musical, ''The Mystery of Edwin Drood,''
has a 50-50 chance of becoming a commercial hit and he believes that David
Hare's ''A Map of the World'' has Broadway potential, too. Also planned are
trips to Nicaragua and Vietnam - to look for new plays, a teaching stint at the
University of Florida in Tallahassee, and a blueprint for developing a new
theater audience in New York that involves overhauling the entire school system.
''Some of the ideas I'm working on,'' says Papp, ''would require a whole new
life to do.''

In the meantime, there are more benefits, more projects, more performances at
what Papp calls ''culture baron things - where you're expected to put in an
appearance.'' On a recent Sunday, for instance, Papp's schedule calls for a
speech at Lincoln Center - the event is a tribute to the children of the
Holocaust - followed, immediately, by a benefit for the Williamstown Theater at
Studio 54, followed by another party. Ten minutes after leaving Avery Fisher
Hall, Papp is standing on the glitter-strewn floor of the disco, beneath a bank
of humming red and purple neon lights, exchanging greetings with Sam Waterston,
Joanne Woodward and Dick Cavett - making small talk about the state of Broadway
and coining lots of bad puns.

The audience is quiet, preoccupied - there's ''no connection,'' says Papp,
between ''them and what's going on on stage''; and he starts his routine by
telling them what he thinks. ''This audience seems a little quiet for Studio
54,'' he says, startling the sleepy patrons. ''It seems like a funeral for
someone dead and forgotten. It's not your fault -maybe it's the acoustics or the
dinner. Anyway, I'll just get on with the songs - some golden oldies.'' He then
begins his first number. ''You've got to accentuate the positive,'' he sings in
a loud voice, swinging the mike back and forth, working the audience.
''Elimynate the negative. Latch on to the affirmative. Don't mess with Mister
Inbetween. . . .''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Joe Papp (Barbra Walz/outline); Photo of ''Hair,'' 1967
(George E. Joseph); photo of ''A Chorus Line,'' 1975 (martha Swope); Photo of
Papp at a rehearsal in Central Park (Barbara Walz/Outline); photo of notes and
copies of ''Measure for Measure'' on Papp's desk (Babrara Walz/outline); Photo
of Papp at home with his wife Gail Merrifield; photo of ''Virginia,'' 1985
(Martha Swope); Pho

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              403 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

          Fiction

 1        FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $4.50.)
          The relationship of a mother and daughter is
          altered by the changing values of the past 40
          years.

 2        ''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven
          Santmyer. (Berkley, $5.95.) Life in an Ohio
          hamlet, 1868-1932.

 3        THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Bantam, $4.95.) One man's
          experience in the wars of the Holy Land.

 4        THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch. (Fawcett,
          $4.95.) A wealthy Welsh family haunted by an
          ominous heritage.

 5        DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $4.50.) One
          man copes with a sinister Asian shipping family
          and an even more threatening Soviet plot.

 6 *      LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Ballantine, $4.95.) A
          fictionalized account of the Civil War
          Presidency.

 7        TENDER IS THE STORM, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon,
          $3.95.) A New York heiress's passionate encounter
          with an Arizona rancher.

 8        THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam,
          $3.95.) A young man from Brittany sets out to
          free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.

 9        MISSISSIPPI! by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam,
          $3.95.) The ''Wagons West'' series reaches the
          post-Civil War South and New Orleans.

 10       POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $4.50.)
          A woman discovers the truth about her husband
          after he disappears.

 11       THE MODIGLIANI SCANDAL, by Ken Follett.
          (NAL/Signet, $3.50.) An early work, first
          published pseudonymously, about a ''lost
          masterpiece'' and dirty dealings in the
          international art world.

12        RAMBO: First Blood Part II, by David Morrell.
          (Jove, $3.50.) Novelization of the film about a
          Vietnam vet who returns to rescue prisoners of
          war.

13        THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum.
          (Bantam, $4.50.) A lawyer finds himself caught in
          a conspiracy to take over the world.

14        THE WISHSONG OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del
          Rey/Ballantine, $8.95.) The battle against evil
          continues; end of a fantasy trilogy.

15        SWITCH, by William Bayer. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.)
          The case of two women, murdered in Manhattan,
          whose heads are switched.

          Nonfiction

          General

 1        THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
          (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.) Psychological and
          spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 2        IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and
          Robert H. Waterman Jr. (Warner, $8.95.) Lessons
          from well-run corporations.

 3        SON, by Jack Olsen. (Dell, $4.50.) The case of a
          young psychotic rapist at large in Spokane, Wash.

 4        FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.
          (Fawcett Gold Medal, $3.95.) Memoirs.

          Advice, How-to and
          Miscellaneous

 1        PENGUIN DREAMS AND STRANGER THINGS, by Berke
          Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoons from
          the syndicated ''Bloom County'' strip.

 2        BRIDE OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson. (Andrews,
          McMeel & Parker, $5.95.) Cartoons.

 3        RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada,
          Mexico. (Rand McNally, $5.95.) For 1985.

 4        THE SILVER PALATE GOOD TIMES COOKBOOK, by Julee
          Rosso and Sheila Lukins with Sarah Leah Chase.
          (Workman, $11.95.) Recipes from the owners of a
          Manhattan gourmet food shop.

 5 *      EAT TO WIN, by Robert Hass. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.)
          A regimen for sports and fitness activities.

 6        THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and
          Spencer Johnson. (Berkley, $6.95.) How to
          increase your productivity.

 7        MORE SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and Friends.
          (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) Words that should
          appear in dictionaries, but don't. Illustrated.

 8        GROWING UP CATHOLIC, by Mary Jane Frances
          Cavolina Meara, Jeffrey Allen Joseph Stone,
          Maureen Anne Teresa Kelly and Richard Glen
          Michael Davis (Doubleday/Dolphin, $4.95.) Humor.

 9        SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and Friends. (Collier/
          Macmillan, $5.95.) Newly minted words.

10        GARFIELD MAKES IT BIG, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine,
          $5.95.) Cartoon humor.

11        AAA NORTH AMERICAN ROAD ATLAS 1985. (American
          Automobile Association/Random House, $5.95.) Maps
          and traveling advice.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.
*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              404 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BOMBS ABOUVE, THE MAZE BELOW

BYLINE: By Harrison E. Salisbury; Harrison E. Salisbury reported from North
Vietnam for The New York Times in 1966-67. His forthcoming book, ''The Long
March - The Untold Story,'' is about the Chinese Communist forces in 1934-35.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words


THE TUNNELS OF CU CHI By Tom Mangold and John Penycate. Illustrated. 294 pp. New
York: Random House. $19.95.

THE words ''Cu Chi,'' even in this 10th-anniversary year of Vietnam, fall like
leaden lumps on American ears, alien words, no connotations, hardly even dim
familiarity. Not so in Vietnam. Today in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, Cu Chi sets
off an electric spark the way, say, Guadalcanal does to American ears. In
Vietnam, Cu Chi has become a metaphor of success in the long struggle against
the United States.

There is an irony about this. Again and again in the later years of President
Lyndon Johnson's term he would send Robert McNamara or McGeorge Bundy or Gen.
Maxwell Taylor out to Saigon or call Gen. William Westmoreland back to
Washington. There would be talk of ''light at the end of the tunnel.'' It became
a cliche.

Ironically, what these men knew about the great underground tunnel complex
illuminated in ''The Tunnels of Cu Chi'' by the English reporters Tom Mangold
and John Penycate, is by no means clear. Nor does it seem likely that they had
much understanding of the remarkable tunnel war techniques elaborated by the
Vietnamese guerrillas as a way of balancing off America's overwhelming
technological and logistic superiority.

What went on in the tunnels of Cu Chi was deadly man-to-man combat just below
the level of the ground, a renaissance of tactics and devices as ancient as
those used by the Greeks, Babylonians and early Chinese, as primitive as those
of the cave man, fearsome to defender and attacker alike. This was combat at the
level of savages - tooth-and-claw, knife-and-club.

The story of the tunnels of Cu Chi is an exemplary piece of investigative
reporting and current history. The authors have spent much time on the spot
inspecting remaining tunnels and talking with men and women who fought and
worked in them, commanders and political chiefs, tunnel surgeons, women who gave
birth to babies in these gloomy depths, nurses, entertainers, workers in tunnel
factories. They have talked with every American tunnel fighter they could find,
inter-viewed American field commanders who learned the nature of tunnel warfare
on the job, combed intelligence files, interrogation reports, captured
documents.

There is a certain repetition about the American experience. Again and again,
American fighting forces -notably the 25th ''Tropic Lightning'' Division and
''Big Red One,'' the First Infantry Division - took up base areas only to find
themselves camping on top of a human fire-ant nest - Vietnamese tunnel forces.
The tunnels, as the Americans slowly discovered, extended into Saigon itself and
snaked for dozens of miles across the countryside, so that Vietnamese regulars
from the north could move almost entirely by tunnel from their Cambodian
sanctuaries to the Saigon suburbs and back.

Much planning and direction of the Tet offensive of 1968 was done in the tunnels
of Cu Chi, just north of Saigon, and those of the Iron Triangle, a bit north of
that. Sometimes the tunnels came in three levels - the first a scant five feet
below the surface, the last possibly 15 or 18 feet down, never too deep because
of lack of power and machinery for ventilation. Some tunnels broadened into
caverns for command, logistical or hospital purposes. But for the most part,
they were snakelike crawl tunnels, often too small for American G.I.'s. They
were seldom as much as three or four feet high, twisting, turning, booby-trapped
to a fare-thee-well.

Nothing more fetid could be imagined. Penetrating the Cu Chi tunnels was like
traversing the pit below a latrine. There were water baffles, like those of a
flush toilet (to prevent the spread of chemical gases). Filled with human
detritus, the baffle had to be passed by the tunnel rat. Tunnels were
back-angled with V-twists, trapdoors (tension-balanced to hand grenades) often
stacked with decaying bodies (the Vietnamese tried to recover all wounded and
dead to confuse American body counts). Scorpions and poisonous insects infested
the walls.

Air in these chambers was often too foul to breathe. The Americans tried to pump
the tunnels full of chemical irritants, but the gases sometimes proved fatal in
the close confines. Dynamite blasted the tunnels and bulldozers plowed them up.
Casualties on both sides were heavy. But again and again, a few Vietnamese with
tin bowls and pans gouged out new tunnels.

After Tet, the Americans assaulted Cu Chi and the Iron Triangle with plows and
defoliants. They planted the desert with quick-burning grasses and burned and
reburned it to expose any trace of new tunnel digging. That ended the Cu Chi
tunnels, but not far away new ones appeared. Yet they never regained their old
vigor. Vietnamese casualties had been too heavy at Tet. T HE Americans who
fought in the tunnels were just as brave and in the end as skillful as the
Vietnamese. The real shock of ''The Tunnels of Cu Chi'' is the years it took the
American command to understand why they never could locate the ''light'' at the
end of the tunnel. No one had told them there would be a tunnel war. They had
not informed themselves of the fact that Vietnamese tunnels had ringed Dien Bien
Phu when the French garrison fell in 1954. Not many Americans - military or
civil - bothered to study the French experience. They had lost the war. When we
put our weight on Vietnam, we believed it would crumble. Nothing, it was
thought, could stand up to our firepower of carrier-based planes, the B-52's,
the helicopter gunships, all the rest. Nothing on earth could resist the United
States of America.

Nothing on earth. There was the rub. The Vietnamese guerrillas went under the
earth, hung tough in obscene conditions and lived to see the helicopters lift
off the last Americans from the embassy in Saigon.

''The Tunnels of Cu Chi'' is a chilling and cautionary tale - not a revisionist
view of Vietnamese history, but another textbook to teach us what the war really
was and how it was fought.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietcon in a tunnel

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              405 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PICKING OUR FIGHTS

BYLINE: By Fred Barnes; Fred Barnes is a senior editor of The New Republic.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 788 words


THIS WAR CALLED PEACE By Brian Crozier, Drew Middleton and Jeremy Murray-Brown.
307 pp. New York: Universe Books. $17.95.

CONSIDER the standard right-wing analysis of the cold war. The Soviet bloc,
having nothing but evil on its mind, must be aggressively checked at every
expansionist turn, whether in tiny islands off the coast of China, in Vietnam,
in Korea, in Berlin, in Cuba, or in southern Africa. Those who are willing to
pursue this policy to the extreme, leaders such as, say, Gen. Douglas MacArthur,
are heroes. Those not so inclined - Secretary of State Dean Acheson comes to
mind - are knaves, or worse.

Well now there is a revisionist school that makes the right-wing case in a much
more compelling way. Brian Crozier, who writes on geopolitics for National
Review, Drew Middleton, who recently retired as military correspondent of The
New York Times, and Jeremy Murray-Brown, who teaches in the School of Public
Communication at Boston University, have cobbled the new version together in
impressive fashion in ''This War Called Peace.'' And suddenly, Acheson is a
hero, MacArthur a knave. One thing stays the same - the cold-blooded assessment
of the Soviet Union and its allies. High-toned talk about ''peaceful
coexistence'' cannot mask, the authors insist, ''the permanent war waged by the
Soviet bloc, largely by non-military means, against the West, and indeed against
all countries that have not adopted the Soviet system.'' But knee-jerk reliance
on extreme measures to combat the Russians won't work. The West must be
pragmatic. It must pick its fights, letting realism and prudence be its guide.

How does this work in particular cases? Take the tragically inept Bay of Pigs
invasion carried out in 1961 by anti-Castro Cubans. The conventional right-wing
approach is to blame President John F. Kennedy for the disaster since he refused
to provide air cover for the invaders. But maybe the invasion plan itself was
flawed, and a less ambitious strategy was called for. ''The original CIA plan,
which in retrospect has much to commend it, was to filter small groups of
guerrillas into Cuba,'' say the authors. ''There they would establish resistance
areas to which, it was hoped, dissatisfied Cubans would flock. The theory was
that as these resistance groups prospered they would present a challenge to
Castro comparable with that which he had offered [President Fulgencio]
Batista.'' This might have worked; at the least, it could not have been worse
than what happened.

Or take Korea. The conventional right-wing position here is that unreasonable
restraints on MacArthur - he was not allowed to counter the Chinese attack by
sending bombers into Manchuria - prevented an American victory. Not so, the
authors contend. The victory had already been won when the North Koreans were
driven back above the 38th Parallel. MacArthur's push toward the Yalu River
needlessly brought the Chinese into the war and caused ''the most serious defeat
suffered by a United States army since the Civil War. It need not have occurred.
The West's aims in Korea could have been consolidated, the strategic balance in
north-east Asia stabilized. But these goals were not achieved.''

Worse yet, there was an after-effect in Vietnam, where fear of Chinese
intervention became the overriding strategic consideration. In 1966, the authors
note, ''American forces in Vietnam had the plans and the strength to launch
crippling attacks on the North.'' The war might have been won; only apprehension
about the Chinese kept the assault from taking place. And the Chinese, caught up
in the turmoil of the Cultural Revolution, could hardly have intervened. T WO
other anticommunist stalwarts, Winston Churchill and John Foster Dulles, also
take a drubbing in this revisionist account of the cold war. In his last years,
Churchill stood strongly against Soviet aggression, but at Yalta he compromised
with Stalin. Dulles, for all his fervent anticommunism as Secretary of State,
became mired in ''pactomania,'' the creation of treaties giving America a false
sense of security while failing to deter an expansionist Soviet bloc. The only
pact that has actually deterred is the one that created NATO. It was engineered
by Acheson, long a right-wing target, but now extolled by the authors as
''perhaps the most gifted Secretary of State of this century.''

''This War Called Peace'' is brimming with surprises like that. Not the least of
them is the levelheaded notion that there is no ''historical inevitability about
the success of communism as a world force.'' This, again, clashes with the
apocalyptic view on the right that the West is lost. Lost it isn't, the authors
say, but not for lack of trying by the Soviet Union.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              406 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW & NOTEWORTHY

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words


RANDOM HARVEST, by James Hilton. (Carroll & Graf, $4.50.) The title comes from
World War I battlefield reports that ''bombs fell at random.'' One shell
affected the memory of an English soldier, Charles Rainier, and the plot
revolves around him and the two women he has married. In 1941 Rose Feld
described the story as ''completely real and convincing.'' James Hilton
(1900-1954) was also the author of ''Lost Horizon'' and ''Good-bye, Mr. Chips.''
A memorable screen adaptation of ''Random Harvest'' was made in 1942. WEAPONS
AND HOPE, by Freeman Dyson. (Cornelia & Michael Bessie/Harper Colophon, $6.95.)
''Weapons and Hope'' is a layman's guide to the concepts and problems of nuclear
deterrence. Our reviewer, Michael Howard, said it is ''excellent and talks a
great deal of sense about that most misunderstood and complicated problem, arms
races.'' Freeman Dyson, a physicist at the Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton, N.J., urges nuclear disarmament on the military. NOP'S TRIALS, by
Donald McCaig. (Warner, $3.95.) Last year our reviewer, Jack Sullivan, called
''Nop's Trials'' an adult novel for animal lovers and said it ''does justice to
both its human and canine characters.'' The protagonist is Nop, a border collie,
and the plot concerns his abduction by villainous rednecks and his rescue by the
sheep farmer who owns him. Mr. Sullivan said Donald McCaig, ''himself a Virginia
sheep farmer, writes with an authenticity and crispness that brings a surprising
liveliness to the story.'' LONG TIME PASSING: Vietnam & the Haunted Generation,
by Myra MacPherson. (Signet/New American Library, $4.95.) Thoughts and memories
of those who served in Vietnam and those who did not - 500 interviews of people
from the left and right, hawks and doves - make up Myra MacPherson's 1984 book.
Donald Knox observed in these pages that ''when the author steps off center
stage and allows her interviewees the spotlight, the book sings, soars, explodes
with feelings.'' MRS. ECKDORF IN O'NEILL'S HOTEL, by William Trevor. (Penguin,
$5.95.) In William Trevor's fourth novel, a photographer, Ivy Eckdorf, comes to
a once posh Dublin hotel to shoot a coffeetable photo book about its
inhabitants. In 1970 our reviewer, Martin Levin, remarked, ''What you will
encounter in these ingenious pages is an inspired misanthropy that rings a
medley of changes on the themes of self-deception and utter hopelessness.'' A
DICTIONARY OF MARXIST THOUGHT, edited by Tom Bottomore. (Harvard, $9.95.) Short
and not so short articles on subjects from abstract labor to the Young Hegelians
constitute this dictionary. In 1983 Raymond Williams said here, ''There is no
simple and general accepted theory or body of knowledge that can confidently be
labeled Marxism, even within single disciplines.'' Nevertheless, he added, the
book ''can be confidently recommended as a fair and informed account of the
community of Marxist positions.'' YOU KNOW ME AL: A Busher's Letters, by Ring W.
Lardner. (Vintage, $5.95.) Ring Lardner's 1916 classic is a series of letters by
Jack Keefe, a vainglorious pitcher for the Chicago White Sox. In 1925 Henry
Longan Stuart called a reprint ''funny and devastating. In one great gust of
laughter [the book] blew out the lamp lighted before the shrine of professional
athleticism. . . . Jack Keefe is a great creation.'' Other reviewers said later
that the book set writing standards and created styles not to be eroded by
imitators. ONCE IN GOLCONDA: A True Drama of Wall Street 1920-1938, John Brooks.
(Truman Talley/Dutton, $11.95.) Wall Street at the height of speculative frenzy
in the 1920's and in the depths of scandal in the 30's is the subject of John
Brooks's account, which centers on Richard Whitney, the New York Stock Exchange
president imprisoned for embezzling trust funds. Martin Mayer said here in 1969
that the author provides an ''enjoyable tour through the rise and decline of
various financial wizards,'' telling what happened and why. THE UNBEARABLE
LIGHTNESS OF BEING, by Milan Kundera. (Harper Colophon, $6.95.) Last year E. L.
Doctorow observed here that ''disclaimed fiction'' surfaced in the United States
15 to 20 years ago. In it the author interrupts the text to discourage the
reader from taking the story to heart or believing in the characters' existence;
the author is the only believable character. Mr. Doctorow noted that the
Czechoslovak novelist Milan Kundera continues to find this strategy useful. He
focuses in this novel on two couples in contemporary Czechoslovakia and, Mr.
Doctorow said, ''works with cunning and wit and elegiac sadness.'' THE LAST
PRIMA DONNAS, by Lanfranco Rasponi. (Limelight/Harper & Row, $12.95.) These
interviews with 56 opera singers - including Kirsten Flagstad, Renata Tebaldi,
Dorothy Kirsten, Lily Pons, Lotte Lehmann and Maria Callas - have two common
themes. Each singer in this 1982 collection considered today's singers not as
well trained and more controlled by stage directors, conductors and record
companies than she was. And each emphasized her commitment and
self-protectiveness. Reviewers called the book ''spellbinding'' and ''an
excellent source of oral history.'' THE HEART OF A DISTANT FOREST, by Philip Lee
Williams. (Ballantine, $3.50.) The final year of life of a retired history
professor, Andrew Lachlan, is the substance of Philip Lee Williams's first
novel. Last year Cheri Fein wrote here that ''it is precisely because Lachlan is
not a larger-than-life character that we come to care and find ourselves moving
eagerly with him from one day to the next.'' PARTS OF A WORLD. Wallace Stevens
Remembered: An Oral Biography, by Peter Brazeau. (North Point, $12.50.) Wallace
Stevens, poet and president of the Hartford Accident and Indemnity Company, was
enigmatic. To shed light on his personality, Peter Brazeau interviewed Stevens'
associates. Our reviewer, William Pritchard, called the 1983 book ''exemplary
and seemingly exhaustive,'' with ''at least 50 times as much material for
judgment as was previously available.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Freeman Dyson

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              407 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FIRST LOVE AND LASTING SORROW

BYLINE: By Diane Johnson; Diane Johnson is a novelist and critic whose most
recent book was a biography of Dashiell Hammett. She has completed a new novel
entitled ''Bad News.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1478 words


THE LOVER By Marguerite Duras. Translated by Barbara Bray. 117 pp. New York:
Pantheon Books. $11.95.

BEYOND a certain vogue, as I remember, for ''Bonjour Tristesse'' and Albert
Camus, a pious regard for Proust and Flaubert, and an occasional attempt at
something almost-English, like the fussy, Gothic work of Michel Tournier,
Americans on the whole do not get on with the French novel, and certainly not
with the French experimental writers with whom Marguerite Duras is most often
linked. It is true that in much of her work, Miss Duras uses obscurity - or at
least manner and formal control - to combat or disguise her tendency to be
melodramatic and sentimental. But in her small, perfect, new novel, she has
found in reworking material she has used before - material evidently full of
personal meaning - a felicitous and masterly balance between formalism and
powerful emotional effect. ''The Lover,'' in this fine translation by Barbara
Bray, is accessible the way Thomas Mann's ''Death in Venice'' or D. M. Thomas's
''White Hotel'' are accessible, both because of the interesting narrative
particulars - one might say the surface of the works - and because they deal
successfully with strong basic themes of erotic love and death.

The story is told by a narrator, now in her 60's, whose life resembles in some
details Miss Duras's own. She is looking back on an episode of her adolescence
and its emotional consequences on her life since. She describes herself now as
''ravaged,'' emotionally dead, and it is because of the intensity with which she
felt then, at her initiation into sexual love when she was 15 1/2, a high-school
student in Indochina. She was picked up by a rich young Chinese man in his
limousine and went with him to his apartment, where he became her lover. She
went with him every day.

This is in Saigon, where Miss Duras was born and grew up. The narrator's French
family is bound in poverty and unhappiness, the father dead, an older brother
whom she fears, a younger whom she loves, a mother whom she loves, pities and
dislikes. The mother and brothers know and do not know of her affair, her
disgrace. It is never acknowledged or discussed. Sometimes the lover takes them
all to dinner:

''My brothers gorge themselves without saying a word to him. They don't look at
him either. They can't. They're incapable of it. . . . He, the first couple of
times, plunges in and tries to tell the story of his adventures in Paris, but in
vain. It's as if he hadn't spoken, as if nobody had heard.''

The lover and the girl singlemindedly indulge their passion, described in
language characteristically both lurid and flat: ''I used to watch what he did
with me, how he used me, and I'd never thought anyone could act like that, he
acted beyond my hope and in accordance with my body's destiny.'' As in many of
her other works such as ''Moderato Cantabile'' or ''The Ravishing of Lol
Stein,'' Miss Duras's female protagonist is a dreamlike slave of love, sexual
almost against her will, driven by desire but also passive, and it is her
passivity and desire that compel the male. To him she is a treasured object, a
captive, possessed and imprisoned. There is no doubt these are archetypes of
female sexual fantasy. But perhaps only the fantasies of women of a certain age?
M OREOVER, the lover is Oriental (as in her well-known screenplay for the film
''Hiroshima Mon Amour''). That is, he is exotic and forbidden, the more
attractive for being forbidden. (It seems that interracial passion in literature
in English has usually meant that the woman was Oriental - and it was a long
time before anyone went beyond ''Eurasian.'') In any case, to go with such a man
is emblematic of sin and rebellion. Like Mr. Rochester or Heathcliff, he is
rich, dark, mysterious. His car is a mythic black limousine: ''Yes, it's the big
funeral car that's in my books. It's a Morris Leon-Bollee. The black Lancia at
the French embassy in Calcutta hasn't yet made its entrance on the literary
scene.'' His potency is dependable and she is always desired - he is the perfect
dream lover, and this is all the very stuff of romance.

Passions spring from old and honored prohibitions. In ''Hiroshima Mon Amour,''
the passion and pain arose from memories of the forbidden love of the French
woman for a German soldier, and then her present doomed affair with a Japanese
man who, like the woman, is married. To have felt the risk and strength of all
this, you had to believe in the existence of patriotism, the evils of
miscegenation and adultery. In today's more confusing moral context, a writer
might not depend perhaps, as Miss Duras, who was born in 1914, does here, on our
remembering ideas of guilt, disgrace, domination - but we do remember.

At 15, the narrator ''already had a face that foretold the one I acquired
through drink in middle age. Drink accomplished what God did not. It also served
to kill me; to kill. I acquired that drinker's face before I drank.'' Now she is
an old woman, ravaged by alcohol and sorrow. Her brothers and mother are dead.
She recounts how the affair went on until she had to go away to school in
France, and we learn something of her life since. As the account proceeds, she
adds details, revises and builds on memories, arriving in the course of her
meditation at a new understanding. The loss of beauty and youth, the loss of
love, the isolation of the family, womanhood, even the beauty of landscape - to
particularize these abstractions in a short work of such force and narrative
interest seems a considerable tour de force.

It is hard to think of a recent work in English that so perfectly accomplishes
its complicated aims in a manner so austere. Miss Duras, like some other French
writers, produces the richness of her effects in the blanks and silences of her
minimalist sentences. Can a work be woven from little more than its themes, an
occasional strand of visual detail - ''She's wearing a man's flat-brimmed hat, a
brownish-pink fedora with a broad black ribbon''? One thinks, a little, of the
style (and also of the protagonists, tone and indeed the real life) of Jean Rhys
- problems, like Miss Duras's, with alcohol, the same depressed but sentient
heroines. But Miss Duras seems more artfully to capture the sadness of ordinary
life, and is more interested in sexuality - as opposed to Rhys's interest in
survival.

The novel in English depends upon expansion, digression, the sudden appearance
of humorous characters. Here there are only enough details, characters, words,
to tie the strands together. The novel in English depends upon humor, sometimes
to its disadvantage, potentially good novels, especially lately, straying beyond
the boundary of comedy, that dignified genre, into an area of jokey
facetiousness. It is occasionally instructive to regard the power of
humorlessness. There are no jokes in Miss Duras's work - and jokes would be
fatal. The slightest alteration of tone would give us another work entirely -
something like soft porn perhaps; or a slight change in point of view, say to
the lover's point of view, would give us ''Lolita.'' It is Miss Duras's great
artistic self-confidence that allows her to avoid even the most alluring
temptations to comedy - the scene where the lover takes the family to the
Chinese restaurant, for instance.

Her reward is an unremitting intensity, an effect on some subliminal reserve of
emotion in the reader that one might suspect or resist if the passion and
sincerity of the author were for a moment in doubt, or if she seemed to be
manipulating her readers for an effect of easy tears. It is interesting to think
about the thematic connections, even certain stylistic connections, between this
powerful, authentic and completely successful work, and the enormously popular
supermarket romance genre, which, despite its clumsiness and inauthenticity,
acknowledges - which recent serious American novels less and less often do - the
existence of psychological archetypes and some of the primordial functions of
storytelling. A

* WRITER in a recent French weekly, which featured an Impressionist painting of
a pretty, young, red-haired girl, said it reminded her of Marguerite Duras. The
writer was perhaps thinking of ''The Lover,'' but the reference needed no
explanation. Miss Duras has been a leading, if controversial, writer in France
since the 1950's with ''The Sea Wall,'' a work that is in many ways the
forerunner of this one. On the first page of ''The Lover,'' a man comes up to
the narrator and says, ''Everyone says you were beautiful when you were young,
but I want to tell you I think you're more beautiful now than then. Rather than
your face as a young woman, I prefer your face as it is now.'' These words seem
somehow to describe the development of this artist. That is, one way or another
she has always been beautiful.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of marguerite Duras at age 18, with her younger brother (Editions
de Minuit)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              408 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 25, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SUPREME COURT ROUNDUP;
JUSTICES UPHOLD MILITARY BASES' LIMITS ON ACCESS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 24


The Supreme Court ruled today that a person who has once been barred from a
military base has no constitutional right to re-enter the facility, even during
an ''open house'' to which the general public is invited.

The 6-to-3 decision overturned a ruling by the United States Court of Appeals
for the Ninth Circuit in a case that originated with an antiwar demonstration at
Hickam Air Force Base in Hawaii. The appeals court had ruled that an open house
converted a military base into a temporary public forum to which access was
protected by the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech.

Under military regulations a base commander has broad discretion to issue a
letter barring an individual from re-entering the base without permission. A
1909 Federal law makes it a crime to violate the terms of such a letter.

Security Risks Cited

In 1972, James V. Albertini received such a letter after he poured animal blood
on official documents at Hickam. Nine years later, he entered the base along
with 50,000 other people for the annual Armed Forces Day open house, and he and
four friends stood in front of a B-52 bomber with a banner reading ''Carnival of
Death.''

The five were asked to leave, and Mr. Albertini was later arrested for violating
the terms of the letter. But his conviction, for which he received a three-month
jail sentence, was overturned by the Court of Appeals.

The Federal Government appealed on the grounds that the decision would increase
security risks and discourage the military from holding open houses. Those
events, the Government said, ''serve an important function in alleviating the
isolation of the military from the civilian community and in informing citizens
about the military.''

Writing for the Court today, Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor said it was
not necessary to decide whether the open house converted the base into a public
forum.

Restriction Is Incidental

Mr. Albertini's exclusion, she said, did not violate the First Amendment in any
event, because it promoted an ''important Government interest in assuring the
security of military installations.''

Under the Court's precedents, Justice O'Connor said, ''application of a facially
neutral regulation that incidentally burdens speech satisfied the First
Amendment if it furthers an important or substantial governmental interest; if
the governmental interest is unrelated to the suppression of free expression,
and if the incidental restriction on alleged First Amendment freedoms is no
greater than is essential to the furtherance of that interest.''

Appeal to Common Sense

The opinion, U.S. v. Albertini, No. 83-1624, was joined by Chief Justice Warren
E. Burger and Associate Justices Byron R. White, Harry A. Blackmun, Lewis F.
Powell Jr. and William H. Rehnquist.

Associate Justice John Paul Stevens filed a dissenting opinion that was joined
by Associate Justices William J. Brennan Jr. and Thurgood Marshall. He said that
in passing the 1909 law, Congress did not intend to prohibit re-entry to a base
to which the public at large was invited.

''At some point,'' Justice Stevens said, ''common sense must temper the excesses
of statutory literalism.''

Other developments at the Court today included the following: Veterans'
Preference The Court invalidated a New Mexico law that granted a special
property-tax exemption to veterans of the Vietnam War who were residents of New
Mexico before May 8, 1976. In an opinion by Chief Justice Burger, the Court
ruled 5 to 3 that by drawing distinctions between veterans based on length of
residency, the law violated the 14th Amendment's guarantee of equal protection
of the laws.

The decision overturned a ruling by the New Mexico Court of Appeals. The state
court had rejected a challenge to the law brought by a veteran who moved to New
Mexico in 1981.

Chief Justice Burger stressed that veterans preferences in general are
permissible ways of rewarding veterans for their sacrifices. But the 1976 cutoff
date, he said, was not ''rationally related'' to that valid goal. The law
provided a yearly $2,000 exemption from the taxable value of a veteran's home.

Justice Stevens filed a dissenting opinion that Justices Rehnquist and O'Connor
joined. They said budget limitations provided a valid reason for setting a limit
on eligibility.

A New York State law that gives veterans preference on state civil service exams
is limited to those who were New York residents at the time they joined the
military. That law was recently struck down by a Federal appeals court in a New
York City case, and the city's appeal before the Supreme Court is pending.
(Hooper v. Bernalillo County, No. 84-231.) Libel Proof The Court agreed to
decide which side in a libel case has the burden of proving the truth or falsity
of the publication. The case is a challenge to a Pennsylvania state law under
which the libel defendant is required to prove that the publication was true.

The Pennsylvania Supreme Court upheld the law, rejecting an argument by the
publisher of the Philadelphia Inquirer that the First Amendment requires that
the libel plaintiff prove that the publication was false.

The issue concerns so-called ''private figure'' libel cases, which under Supreme
Court precedent are left largely to state law. When the libel plaintiff is a
public figure, strict Supreme Court rules apply, and the plaintiff must prove
not only falsity, but falsity published knowingly or with ''reckless
disregard.'' (Phila. Newspapers v. Hepps, No. 84-1491.) Law and Order The Court
agreed to decide whether the presence of armed state police officers in a
courtroom during a trial violates a defendant's right to a fair trial. The case
is an appeal by the State of Rhode Island from a ruling by the United States
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.

Four state troopers had remained seated in the spectator section during the
four-month trial in a highly publicized armed-robbery case. The Court of Appeals
reversed the conviction on the ground that their presence detracted from the
constitutional presumption of innocence. (Holbrook v. Flynn, No. 84-1606.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              409 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 26, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

21 DIE AS FIREWORKS BLASTS DESTROY PLANT IN OKLAHOMA

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 777 words

DATELINE: HALLETT, Okla., June 25


At least 21 people were killed this morning in a series of explosions that
leveled a fireworks plant near this rural village of about 200.

Bodies were hurled into the surrounding brush by the force of the explosions,
which were so powerful they rattled windows in the Cleveland fire department, 13
miles from here.

At least five survivors of the accident, the second to hit the the Aerlex
Corporation fireworks plant in six years, were taken to surrounding hospitals.
Rescue workers with heavy equipment dug through brush in search of workers still
missing from the plant's force of about 31 people.

Four of the bodies were found on a hill about 200 yards from the demolished
plant, according to Lieut. Jim King of the Oklahoma Highway Patrol.

Extra Staff for Holiday

Among the survivors were Alan Johnson, owner of the 12-year-old manufacturing
plant for aerial fireworks displays, which had been staffed by extra workers in
the rush to complete orders for Fourth of July celebrations.

Mr. Johnson was listed in fair condition at a nearby hospital, but he has been
unavailable to reporters since this morning's accident.

Also among the injured was Jeff Fountain, the 42-year-old Mayor of the nearby
town of Jennings, whose condition was listed as critical. Few others have been
identified, and the names of those who have were being withheld by the police.

Late today the state authorities said they were checking reports that workers
under the legal age of 18 for working at such plants had been employed in the
rush to complete holiday orders, but none among the victims and survivors
identified so far apparently were teen-agers, rescue aworkers said.

Surrounding Homes Jolted

The explosions rocked surrounding homes, and dense smoke poured from the site as
families and neighbors converged on the scene or gathered in nearby churches, a
look of shock and disbelief on their faces, to await word on possible survivors.

Mr. Johnson was identified as one of those by a neighbor, Mary Lewis, who had
driven him to the hospital.

''He was tearing off his clothes and screaming,'' said Mrs. Lewis, who lives in
a nearby mobile home.

A more distant neighbor, Carl Ames Jr., who lives three miles from the site,
said he heard three explosions, and they ''lifted our house.''

The cause of today's explosion has not yet been determined, but the authorities
were said to be checking reports that a truck might have struck the building,
setting of sparks that could have ignited combustible materials inside.

Explosion Six Years Ago

The previous explosion, six years ago, was attributed to reflections of sunlight
from an automobile mirror, which investigators said ignited a fire.

No one was injured in that accident, though it leveled the two buildings then on
the site. In that instance workers had warning enough to escape after the
initial alarm.

That accident was described as a crushing blow, however, to Mr. Johnson, a
Vietnam War veteran who had started the manufacturing business, he said later,
''on a shoestring.''

But within a short time after that blast, he began rebuilding the plant that
became the scene of today's deaths.

Hours after the explosion, smoke continued to pour from the site, where several
automobiles had also been set afire, and firemen continued to douse it with
streams of water to permit the search for possible additional victims to
continue.

''Relatives of the victims have been calling in all day to let us know that
their sons or daughters were working at the plant,'' said Gene Black of the
Chapman-Black Funeral Home.

Problem of Identifications

''That is the only way we know right now who was at the plant,'' he said,
explaining that most of the victims had been burned beyond recognition.

The bodies were being transferred to Tulsa, he said, so the medical examiner
there could begin identification.

Billie Hyatt, a resident of Cleveland, was using a telephone at a gas station
there when the explosions occurred.

''The oil cans in the station began to shake on the shelves, and you could feel
the ground rumbling and shaking,'' she said.

Several of the workers at the plant were Cleveland residents, and they included
recent high school graduates, she said.

''I still don't think that all of this has hit me,'' she said. ''I have friends
who work in the plant and we haven't heard any word on them. It just hasn't sunk
in yet.''

''I can't believe this has happened,'' said another Cleveland resident, who
refused to give his name. His brother had been working at the plant, he said,
''and we haven't heard whether he died or not.''

''I'm expecting the worst,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Oklahoma highlighting Hallett; photo of scene at site of
explosion (UPI)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              410 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 26, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HOOPES TO QUIT PUBLISHER POST

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 188 words


Townsend Hoopes, president of the Association of American Publishers, has
announced that he will retire in the late summer of 1986. Mr. Hoopes has been
head of the 15-year-old association since 1973.

In a letter to Jeremiah Kaplan, chairman of the 350-member association, Mr.
Hoopes, who is 63 years old, said, ''It becomes evident that a host of new
problems - as well as new dimensions of old problems, should be addressed by
someone who can bring to the task new vigor and fresh insights over an extended
period of time.''

Brooks Thomas, president of Harper & Row, will serve as chairman of a committee
to search for a successor to Mr. Hoopes.

Mr. Hoopes was Under Secretary of the Air Force under President Lyndon B.
Johnson, from 1967 through 1969, and before that was an assistant secretary of
defense for international security affairs.

His book on Vietnam, ''The Limits of Intervention,'' published in 1969, was
nominated for a National Bood Award. His 1973 biography, ''The Devil and John
Foster Dulles,'' was also nominated for a National Book Award and won the
Bancroft history prize from Columbia University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              411 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 26, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GEN. CHUCK YEAGER LOGS HIS LIFE IN A BOOK

BYLINE: By ESTHER B. FEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 994 words


Chuck Yeager came to New York the other day on a regular commercial airplane, a
standard American Airlines number that left Sacramento Airport at 9:30 in the
morning and arrived at La Guardia Airport six and a half hours later. He even
had to stop over in Chicago for a connecting plane. Imagine: Chuck Yeager
jostling through O'Hare Airport like some regular businessman or student going
home for summer vacation.

''Beats the hell out of driving,'' said the 62-year-old World War II hero and
former test pilot, who in 1947 became the first man to fly faster than the speed
of sound.

When he was invited to the White House in May to receive the Presidential Medal
of Freedom, the retired Air Force General piloted a Piper Cheyenne 400LS and
broke a speed distance record from Los Angeles to Washington. But this time was
the beginning of a publicity tour for his autobiography, ''Yeager,'' and even
though his publisher, Bantam, has increased the size of its first printing to
235,000 copies to fill orders, the author was being cautious about expenses.

''It's cheaper to fly commercial, and I'm a pretty frugal guy,'' said General
Yeager, who co-wrote the book with Leo Janos, a former Time magazine
correspondent. ''I don't get that Piper all the time, and the only plane I own
is an ultralight craft. It'd be a week before I'd get here in that.''

Will Go Hiking

But General Yeager is not destined to spend the entire publicity tour like most
authors on the promotion circuit, checking in at baggage counters and eating out
of little plastic cups and plates. When the full-scale tour gets under way in
August - ''After I go hiking and fishing in the High Sierras for a couple
weeks'' - he will commandeer the Piper again.

Then the only records he's looking to set are for sales of his book, and also
maybe for having a good time. ''Like I say in the book,'' General Yeager noted,
''I never let the opportunity to have fun pass me by.''

Most of the fun over the years, he relates in the book, has come in the form of
airplanes: the P-51 Mustangs he flew in World War II when he shot down five
Messerschmitts in one day and in which he was shot down by a Nazi bomber and
escaped across the Pyrenees; the X-1 he flew in 1947 when he broke the sound
barrier; the X-1A that plummeted 51,000 feet in 51 seconds when he was trying to
set a new record in 1953; the squadrons of B-57 Canberra bombers he commanded in
Southeast Asia during the Vietnam war.

''A fighter pilot,'' he writes in a chapter titled ''What Goes Up Must Come
Down,'' ''doesn't care where in the world he is stationed, as long as the flying
is good.''

Airsick the First Time

This from a man who confesses that the first time he flew in a plane as an
18-year-old Army private, he threw up. ''Actually,'' he said, without a hint of
embarrassment, ''I got sick the first three or four times. Most people do. No
such thing as a natural-born pilot.''

Perhaps, but General Yeager was certainly helped by his extraordinary 20/10
vision and his meticulous, almost fanatic attention to detail. ''You can't be a
sloppy pilot. Otherwise, you're apt to kill yourself,'' he said in the voice
that Tom Wolfe described in his book ''The Right Stuff'' as the ''poker hollow
West Virginia drawl.''

Even today, General Yeager's murky blue eyes do not need glasses, and they still
fix very well on details. Within 20 minutes he noticed that the soles of his
public relations man's shoes needed repair, that another young man's hair needed
trimming, and that a photographer favored his left eye while shooting the
General's portrait.

''When we were writing the book,'' said General Yeager, ''I would describe
things down to the smallest detail, and Leo kept telling me that I had to ease
up or it wouldn't be palatable.''

Material for Air Force Archives

The main material for the book was actually collected about 10 years ago, when
General Yeager retired from active duty and the Air Force asked him to record
his experiences on tape for its archives. Ian Ballantine, an editor at Bantam,
discovered the manuscripts of the tapes after trying to persuade General Yeager
to write his memoir.

''He took one look at those manuscripts,'' the General recalled, ''and said,
'Hell, we got enough poop here for two or three books.' ''

One book using that material has already preceeded General Yeager's official
memoirs. Mr. Wolfe's book tells the story of America's first astronauts and
follows General Yeager's career as a test pilot - which never culminated in a
space flight.

General Yeager said that he liked Mr. Wolfe and his book, but that he liked even
more the movie adaptation. ''You get to see the hardware,'' he explained.

But although he was immortalized by the book, and by Sam Shepard's elegant
portrayal of him in the 1983 movie, General Yeager said he decided to write his
memoirs so that he could ''get out all the facts.''

'Sense of Dedication'

''Things are pretty factual to guys like me, who are trained the way fighter and
test pilots are trained,'' said General Yeager. ''Nothing was wrong with Mr.
Wolfe's book, although he did take a lot of liberties in describing how we felt
and what we thought, and I wanted people to understand, from me, that sense of
dedication and loyalty. A lot's been written before about the X-1 and the X-1A,
but none told it exactly the way it was because none were written by me.''

Never one to allow modesty to interfere, General Yeager said he thought the book
was ''damn interesting,'' especially the third-person sections written by his
colleagues and his wife, Glennis.

But ordinarily, General Yeager said, autobiographies are not his choice of
reading material. He prefers technical manuals about space, or adventure novels
''with no hidden message'' in which ''the white hats win and the black hats
lose.''

''It's good stuff to read,'' he said, ''when you're sitting in your seat and
someone else is flying the bird.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Chuck Yeager (NYT/Jack Manning)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              412 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 27, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
IF THE PRESS WERE TAME

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


What would it be like if the press in this country, as in so many others, were
an official mouthpiece? If its role were to be a cheerleader instead of a
skeptic?

We get a vision of that kind of press - an inadvertent vision - in an unusual
television program now being aired. An extreme right-wing group made a one-hour
film denouncing the Public Broadcasting System's documentary series on Vietnam,
and public stations are showing the film. It is propaganda dressed up as
journalism.

The 13-part PBS series, first shown in 1983, was an extraordinarily careful,
meticulous television examination of a divisive subject. Scholars worked on it
over a period of years. It won the highest awards in television.

The rebuttal film denounces the series as insufficiently pro-American. One
commentator, Douglas Pike, says it did not ''produce anything on the screen that
an American could be proud of'' - a notion reminiscent of Spiro Agnew's demand
that newspapers print good news.

It is all so heavy-handed that it would be funny if it were not serious. But it
is serious. The fact that public television broadcast a doctrinaire harangue
posing as a news documentary raises worrying questions about political pressure
and public television's will to resist it.

Much of the criticism offered in the rebuttal is demonstrably mistaken. Mr. Pike
says the PBS series showed ''contempt'' for the South Vietnamese by minimizing
their Government's role in the 1973 Paris cease-fire agreement. But any contempt
was shown by Henry Kissinger, who largely excluded Saigon from those
negotiations - with the well-known result that South Vietnam at first blocked
the agreement.

Charlton Heston, who narrates the film, says it was ''objectionable'' for the
PBS series to state that many American veterans of Vietnam ''are still haunted
by the experience.'' Mr. Heston and his supporters do not want the press to
speak even the most obvious truth if it is unpleasant.

The real point of the film is to blame the press for America's loss in Vietnam.
Mr. Heston says: ''In the end, words - disinformation, deception - were the
deciding factors in the Vietnam War.''

There it is: the paranoid style in American politics, as Richard Hofstadter
called it. When things go wrong, there must be a conspiracy.

To think that way is to miss the purpose of history, which is to show the
painful, complicated realities that determine events. In the particular case of
Vietnam, it is to miss the reality that Communist leaders were able to rally
their people to withstand suffering beyond our imagination. They beat a
sophisticated French Army. And no serious American military analyst ever thought
they were about to give up.

Of course there were flaws in the PBS series: That is journalism; that is life.
But the series tried hard to show the complexities. It showed the Communists as
ruthless, and also as superb tacticians. Should we hide from those realities?

The worrying part is how such a film got the sponsorship of PBS. The National
Endowment for the Humanities gave it a big leg up with a grant of $30,000. After
that PBS apparently decided it would look worse to turn the film down - worse
especially to the conservative zealots who now run the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting.

Defenders of this affair say it is a precedent for opening up television so any
critics can get a counter-program on the air, not just right-wingers. That
presumably means we can expect to see ''documentaries'' produced by the Islamic
Party of God and the Communist Party.

The press needs more criticism, broadcasting not least. Opening up television
time for the equivalent of Op-Ed columns or letters to the editor is fine. But
it is another thing to broadcast outside criticism that is made to look like a
documentary: as if The New York Times were to let outsiders write bits of page
one. It helped a little, but not enough, when PBS wrapped a professional
framework around the propaganda piece.

When the Vietnam series ran in 1983, a woman in Texas wrote the producers that
it had enabled her husband to talk about his experience in Vietnam for the first
time. For there it all was on the screen: ''taking a hill one day and losing it
the next, seeing regiments of Vietcong almost completely wiped out, only to see
them completely refurbished in a few months. . . .

''I want to thank you most sincerely for producing this series,'' she wrote,
''because it has made such a tremendous difference to these two tired, old
broken hearts.'' There wrote an American: a believer in reality, not in good
news by the number.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              413 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 27, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SIKH SUSPECT TOOK EXPLOSIVES COURSE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: BIRMINGHAM, Ala., June 26


One of two Sikhs being sought for questioning in the crash of the Air-India
jumbo jet off Ireland and an airline baggage explosion in Japan took a course in
explosives at a private school for mercenaries near here, according to the
school's director.

The Sikh, Lal Singh, is suspected by the authorities to be the L. Singh whose
name was on the passenger manifest of a CP Air flight from Vancouver to Tokyo
but who did not board the plane. Baggage from the flight exploded after being
unloaded, killing two people.

The second suspect, Ammand Singh, flew to Toronto before the ill-fated
Bombay-bound Air-India jumbo jet left that city, according to reports from
Canada. The plane crashed into the sea, possibly because of a bomb, and all 329
aboard were killed.

Earlier, the Federal Bureau of Investigation was said to have begun a search for
the two men for questioning in connection with a purported plot to assassinate
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India while he was in the United States this
month. Three other Sikhs who were said to have attended the mercenary school
with Lal Singh in November were taken into custody for questioning by the F.B.I.
in connection with the purported plot.

'Never Seemed Bloodthirsty'

''Lal Singh never seemed like a bloodthirsty person,'' said the school's
director, Joseph Franklin Camper Jr., a 38-year-old veteran of the Vietnam War.
''He was just a good student that did what we told him to do.''

He said Lal Singh had taken part in the school's explosive ordance demolitions
training, which teaches the handling of mines and grenades.

But, Mr. Camper said, ''we have never taught anyone how to build a time bomb.''

''We have mercenaries in Africa, the Middle East, all over the world,'' he said
at the school. ''What they do after they leave here is a different story.''

Mr. Camper operates the school with his wife, Mavis Louise Camper, 38, but
handles all the instruction himself.

They lease 77 acres in Dolomite, a Birmingham suburb, ''in a rugged setting just
like you'd find in warlike conditions,'' Mrs. Camper said.

''The one thing Frank hates is terrorism, and to think that someone who went
through the school would be responsible for that is naturally very upsetting to
the both of us,'' she said.

Two-Week Course Costs $350

The Campers' two-week course costs $350. Since they began training people in
military tactics four years ago, they have had 22 classes.

Mrs. Camper said that of an average class of 15 students ''only four or five
will graduate.''

''We've had doctors, lawyers, plumbers, painters, policemen, investigators and
even reporters,'' she said.

While she considers most students ''just average people,'' she said ''about one
in every 500 is a funny bunny.''

One former student was convicted last year of trying to smuggle guns he bought
from Mr. Camper into Nigeria. Another, who was arrested while traveling with Mr.
Camper, was convicted of possessing a bomb intended to kill a dealer in a Miami
drug war.

Mr. Camper and a dozen fatigue-clad students were arrested in 1981 when they
were found trespassing near the Crystal River Nuclear Plant in Citrus County,
Fla. They were carrying Soviet, Israeli and Japanese-made automatic weapons at
the time.

Of the people who come to the school, Mrs. Camper said, ''We don't know what
their intentions are if they don't tell us.''

''The Sikhs that were here seemed like average people except for the fact they
wore three-piece suits with turbans and tennis shoes,'' she said. ''They didn't
holler and scream and chant and weren't uptight, abrupt and edgy, like you see
on television of these terrorists that took the American hostages in Beirut.''

'We Don't Like Communism'

Mrs. Camper said she and her husband started the courses ''because we don't like
Communism.''

''Americans are very naive when it comes to what's going on,'' she said. ''Most
have no idea Communists are moving into Mexico, and a lot don't realize what's
north of Mexico.''

Students sign up for the course ''for many different reasons,'' she said. For
those who last the two weeks it is a ''toughening up'' experience and a course
in the basics of surviving and killing in jungle-like conditions.

Since Mr. Camper has Federal approval to own automatic weapons, ''we fire a few
rounds for the students,'' his wife said.

For Mr. Camper the basics include the way to kill a person with a knife. ''Many
people don't know that,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              414 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 27, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'TELEVISION'S VIETNAM: THE REAL STORY,' ON PBS

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 969 words


THE most interesting thing about ''Television's Vietnam:

The Real Story'' is not the program itself; it is the controversy surrounding
it. Should public television show the program or not? Moral indignation has
fattened over this; piousness has flourished. One part of the political culture
wants to lock out another.

Nonetheless, the program will be seen, carefully packaged, on Channel 13 at 10
tonight. ''Television's Vietnam: The Real Story,'' 57 minutes long, is being
presented as part of a two-hour production of ''Inside Story,'' the intermittent
series that examines the press. Congratulate the Public Broadcasting Service for
performing an important service.

It is important because it addresses a persistent problem in television: How can
the medium present grievances against itself? Print journalism has op-ed pages,
letters to the editor and other devices for this. With few exceptions - ABC's
''Viewpoint,'' for one - television has none.

Hence the value of tonight's program: ''Television's Vietnam: The Real Story''
was conceived as a rebuttal to ''Vietnam: A Television History,'' the 13-part
series that public television presented in 1983. Say right off, meanwhile, that
it is not a particularly effective rebuttal, even if it is narrated by Charlton
Heston. It is a polemic, interested mostly in its own point of view.

Thus it tells us that communism is wicked, which, considering 20th century
history, ought not to be a terribly controversial position. On the other hand,
the rebuttal is being presented by Accuracy in Media, or AIM, the conservative
group that monitors the press. Clearly, there is controversy in that.

This is apparent at the start of tonight's broadcast. Martin Smith, a producer
of the Vietnam series, says he is being demeaned. ''And as far as I'm
concerned,'' he says, speaking to an off-screen presence that presumably
questioned him about the series, ''you can take a running jump.''

A moment later, Arthur Miller of the Harvard Law School, the host for ''Inside
Story,'' says portentiously that ''respect for the series is so high, and
Accuracy for Media so controversial, that this program - the one you are
watching - has itself become the object of intense interest in the press.''

And indeed it has; we see a montage of newspaper stories that prove it. Then
Richard Ellison, the executive producer of ''Vietnam: A Television History,''
and Peter McGhee of WGBH in Boston, the station that originated it, tell us how
conscientious they were in preparing the series.

Nonetheless, during the two-hour program - both in the rebuttal produced by AIM
and in the segments done by ''Inside Story'' - intelligent criticisms are
offered: The series makes Ho Chi Minh into a nationalist rather than a
Communist; it ignores the role of the South Vietnamese Army; it minimizes the
brutal treatment of American prisoners of war; it slights the actual conduct of
military operations. At no point, however, do the producers of ''Vietnam: A
Television History'' give an inch. They confuse their series with Holy Writ.

In 1983, this critic called the Vietnam series ''a landmark in television
journalism,'' a judgment I still hold. Its great strength was that it offered
room for many points of view. The paradox now is that the members of the public
television community who deplore the AIM rebuttal rule out all points of view
except their own.

Or, as one of them says on the program tonight, the only reason to broadcast the
rebuttal is ''to show people what bad propaganda is like.'' He misses the point;
actually, he misses all the points. For one, the rebuttal is not bad propaganda.

This becomes evident at the conclusion of the program. Vietnam experts and other
interested parties, including Reed Irvine, the chairman of Accuracy in Media,
debate the merits of the rebuttal. No one, in fact, can find much wrong with it.
Then Professor Miller, trying to whip things up, says to Mr. Irvine: ''It seems
to me that what you're doing is projecting your opinion.''

And, of course, that's exactly what Mr. Irvine and AIM are doing. They are
expressing their opinion on what are essentially political questions. The
dispute between Gen. William C. Westmoreland and CBS ostensibly dealt with
journalistic matters, but in reality these were political questions, too. The
libel trial would have been avoided if the network had made available to the
general the same kind of program that PBS has made available to Mr. Irvine.

Coincidentally, Channel 13 is also offering another program on Vietnam tonight:
''Vietnam Rewritten'' at 8. The program, part of the ''Current'' series, deals
with Vietnam revisionism. Is the history of the war being rewritten?

The program never answers this. On the other hand, it does suggest that Vietnam
history will not be so much rewritten as it will be reinterpreted. It also
suggests, even if it doesn't quite mean to, that partisans of one side or
another will resist the new interpretations. Marty Goldensohn, the host of the
show, asks Frances Fitzgerald, who won a Pulitzer Prize for ''Fire in the
Lake,'' if ''left-of-center historians'' have now revised their views on
Southeast Asia. He mentions the boat people who fled Vietnam and the mass
killings that struck Cambodia.

''It does seem to me,'' Miss Fitzgerald replies slowly, ''that the disasters
perpetrated by the Vietnamese regime have disappointed many people on the
left.''

This no answer at all, although it does suggest that Miss Fitzgerald is clinging
to an old, now frozen, position. No new interpretation of history is allowed.
The opposition to broadcasting the AIM program suggests that the producers of
the Vietnam series and their supporters feel this way about history too. It
cannot be reinterpreted unless the reinterpretation has their approval.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Arthur Miller

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              415 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 27, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Visits Moscow

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 32 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 26


The Vietnamese Communist Party leader, Le Duan, traveled to the Soviet Union
with a delegation today for an official visit, the Hanoi radio announced in a
broadcast monitored in Bangkok.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              416 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 27, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Felix Greene, Reporter, Dies; Visited North Vietnam in 60's

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 93 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, June 26


Felix Greene, a foreign correspondent who was one of the first Western reporters
to visit North Vietnam when he traveled there for The San Francisco Chronicle in
the 1960's, died in Mexico of cancer June 15. He was 76 years old.

Mr. Greene, a cousin of the author Graham Greene, lived in the Bay area for two
decades.

Born in England in 1909, Mr. Greene became an expert on China, a country he
first visited in 1957 when he was with the BBC.

He returned many times to China and produced film documentaries, including ''One
Man's China'' and ''Tibet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              417 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE RESTRICTS SENDING OF G.I.'S INTO NICARAGUA

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 27


The House voted today to limit any move to use United States combat troops in
Nicaragua, but only after the measure had been weakened by a battery of
Republican-sponsored amendments.

Sponsors said afterward that the vote, 312 to 111, sent a message of caution to
the Administration on military involvement in Central America.

The Democratic whip, Thomas S. Foley of Washington, the sponsor of the measure,
said that while the amended version would ''technically'' not hamper the
President, it was a signal that Congress did not want military action without
being consulted first.

Measure Called a Retreat

But many members on both sides of the issue said the diluted measure was a
retreat from past House declarations on the use of force.

The votes came as the House rushed to complete work, before its holiday recess,
on a bill authorizing military programs for the fiscal year beginning next
October.

Members said Congress was reluctant to limit the President's options when
American hostages had been taken in the Middle East and four Marines had been
gunned down in El Salvador.

'A Dangerous Blueprint'

The final version of the measure approved today would leave the President free
to send troops to Nicaragua if sophisticated jet fighter planes or nuclear
weapons were introduced there, to respond to hijacking or other acts of
terrorism, to protect American citizens or to counter ''a clear and present
danger of attack'' on the United States or its allies.

Some liberals who initially favored the measure ended up voting against it,
saying that the various amendments had given the President, in the words of Ted
Weiss, Democrat of New York, ''a dangerous blueprint for American involvement''
similar to the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin resolution that legitimized American military
involvement in Vietnam.

''It could be read as affirmative go signals for the Administration,'' said
Representative Les AuCoin, Democrat of Oregon.

Viewed as Slap at Reagan

Republican leaders said the restrictions in the measure, though watered down,
were a slap at the President at a time of crisis.

''They're trampling the American flag in Beirut, they're killing American
marines in El Salvador,'' said Representative Duncan L. Hunter, Republican of
California. ''And what do we say to our President? We say, 'We don't trust you.'
''

Still, the vote was also described as the latest signal that mistrust of the
Sandinista Government of Nicaragua has grown in the House. Two weeks ago, the
House reversed a long-held position and voted $27 million in nonmilitary aid to
rebels battling the Nicaraguan Government.

In the closing days of the two-week debate, the House used the military bill to
lash out at a variety of targets, including fraudulent military contractors,
spies and drug smugglers.

Reacting to recent disclosures of a Navy spy ring, the House voted today to
establish a peacetime death penalty for military spies convicted under the
military court-martial system. On Wednesday night the House approved widespread
use of polygraphs to screen Pentagon employees and contractors with access to
secret information.

The measure, which must be reconciled with a more generous Senate-passed bill,
also included limits on future deployment of the MX missile, authority to begin
production of new chemical weapons, and a $2.5 billion installment for the
President's ''Star Wars'' research program.

More Conservative Sentiment

Democrats and Republicans said the military bill, with the vote for new chemical
weapons and today's mixed signals on Nicaragua, reflected a more conservative
sentiment in the House than a year ago. Leon E. Panetta, Democrat of California,
attributed that to the terrorism in Lebanon and El Salvador, coupled with a fear
among Democrats that the public considers them anti-defense.

The House has approved a $292 billion budget for the military, most of which is
authorized by the bill passed tonight. The Senate has approved $302 billion in
military programs.

Supporters of Mr. Foley's amendment on Nicaragua said it was a response to
widespread public fears that the Administration may secretly contemplate an
invasion.

It declared that no money in the military bill could be used to send combat
troops to Nicaragua except to defend against a clear danger to the United States
or to honor treaties with Nicaragua's neighbors.

The House approved a similar amendment a year ago, including El Salvador as well
as Nicaragua, but the Senate opposed it and the two sides compromised on a
nonbinding resolution urging the President to avoid force in the region.

Mr. Foley said the amendment, in response to public anxiety, simply put into law
President Reagan's repeated declaration that he has no intention to send combat
troops to Central America.

Amendment Called Defanged

Republicans successfully offered a series of amendment that gave the President
greater freedom.

The closest vote came on a proposal by Dan L. Burton of Indiana to let the
President send troops if he determined that Nicaragua was ''directly or
indirectly'' supporting armed action against any of its neighbors. Democrats
protested that such conditions might already apply because of Nicaraguan aid for
insurgents in El Salvador, and the measure failed 186 to 235.

With all of the changes, the Republican Whip, Trent Lott of Mississippi, said
afterward, ''The Foley amendment has been defanged, completely denuded.''

Mr. Foley predicted after today's vote that his amendment would be further
compromised in a meeting with the Senate, probably transforming it into another
nonbinding resolution.

The Senate earlier this month rejected a similar proposal, offered as an
amendment to the State Department's budget authorization.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              418 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV WEEKEND;
FINAL EPISODE OF 'CALL TO GLORY: JFK'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 816 words


A ONCE-PROMISING weekly series comes to a close Sunday in the form of a
television movie. ''Call to Glory: JFK'' will be broadcast on Channel 7 at 9
P.M. In a way, the conclusion demonstrates what went wrong with the Tisch/Avnet
Production.

''Call to Glory'' was launched last year with headlines proclaiming the
''season's first big hit.'' Heavily advertised during the network's Olympic
Games coverage, the premiere episode, also in the form of a television movie,
got blockbuster ratings. There was talk, much of it misguided, about the show's
patriotic gloss and emphasis on family values reflecting the more conservative
Reagan era. In fact, that first program, like the last, was nothing less than a
ringing endorsement of John F. Kennedy.

Using the Cuban missile crisis for background reality, the premiere skillfully
introduced the fictional characters Col. Raynor Sarnac of the Air Force (Craig
T. Nelson), his wife Vanessa (Cindy Pickett), his daughter Jackie (Elisabeth
Shue) and his sons Wesley (David Hollander) and little RH (Gabriel Damon). The
colonel's father, Carl, a veteran pilot, is played by Keenan Wynn. As the United
States confrontation with Fidel Castro unfolded, the family's strengths and
weaknesses were established with an encouraging mixture of sharp insight and
sympathy. But the initial ratings strength quickly began to erode and stories
started to circulate about behind-the-scenes production troubles. ''Call to
Glory'' lived up to its high expectations only spasmodically.

In ''Call to Glory: JFK,'' the producers have resorted to what can only be
described as a desperation ploy. If the Kennedy image worked well for the first
episode, why not try it again? The problem is that the script, written by Carol
Schreder, never earns the right to use archival footage from a tragic event that
is still vividly embedded in the national psyche. The result is to make the
Raynors look more puny than ever as the days immediately preceding and following
the assassination of President Kennedy are reviewed in considerable detail
through the use of television and film footage. The exploitation is so obvious
as to be reprehensible.

The Sarnacs, who once gave some indication of being more than cardboard figures
on the artifical television landscape, are now reduced to almost
incomprehensible stereotypes. Dad is returning from a tour of duty in Vietnam
that has left him moody and withdrawn. Mom is upset, not so much about her
husband as about her own inability to settle on a future course. She has decided
to leave her family, but then again she might stay on. Meanwhile, Jackie decides
to ''go all the way'' with a young roustabout she has no intention of marrying.
Wesley is undergoing the trials of puppy love. And adorable RH, when he isn't
collecting ants, is waiting for an answer to a letter he wrote to President
Kennedy.

As the black-and-white images recount the story of the assassination, the
contrived concerns of the Sarnacs, directed by Peter Levin, become silly
intrusions on an event that remains powerfully moving. Resorting to empty
formula, ''Call to Glory'' ends its days as just another television show lacking
the courage of its original convictions. Something was lost and sadly wasted. A
'Wind in the Willows'

With an Endearing Toad

The glory of ''The Wind in the Willows'' is that irrepressible crackpot, Toad of
Toad Hall. Any adaptation of this beloved bedtime book must capture not only
Toad's magnificent and destructive passion for the motorcar, but also the
essential lovableness of this feckless sprig of amphibian nobility.

The animated version of Kenneth Grahame's classic, to be shown on Channel 7 on
Sunday at 7 P.M., succeeds in this respect, at least: the producers, Arthur
Rankin Jr. and Jules Bass, have presented an endearing Toad, charmingly
vocalized by the actor Charles Nelson Reilly. In fact, characterization is the
strong suit of this production: Roddy McDowall as Rat, Jose Ferrer as Badger and
Eddie Bracken as Mole seem to be enjoying themselves as they give voice to their
characters' woodsy adventuring, their dodging of motorcars and their rescue of
poor Mr. Toad while resolving the tale's central drama: the retaking of Toad
Hall from usurping stoats and weasels.

Though it is marred by a plodding score and a cloying theme song sung by Judy
Collins, this production nicely captures the pace of life on the river and the
menace of the Wild Wood. It lacks the winsome boisterousness of the 1949 Walt
Disney version, and the subtlety of the superbly animated new English adaptation
of ''The Wind in the Willows,'' produced by Mark Hall and Brian Cosgrove, which
recently became available on video cassette in the United States.

Nevertheless, both parents and children are likely to enjoy this production.
After all, with a superstar like Toad, how could it fail to delight?

Glenn Collins

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Craig T. Nelson

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              419 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words


THINGS are humming in the offices of Lewis Allen, who co-produced ''Annie'' and
the current ''I'm Not Rappaport.'' Mr. Allen, who recently announced that he
will be bringing the Jason Robards-Jose Quintero revival of Eugene O'Neill's
''Iceman Cometh'' to Broadway and Sam Shepard's new play, ''A Lie of Mind,'' to
the Promenade Theater this fall, has another project in the works.

This one is called ''Jump,'' a name derived from the Van Dyke Parks record
album. The show, budgeted at $3 million, was developed by Mr. Parks from Joel
Chandler Harris's Uncle Remus stories, and celebrates the career of the
resourceful Br'er Rabbit as he outwits such predators as Br'er Fox, Br'er Bear
and Mr. Man to win the heart of glamorous Miss Molly Cottontail.

Both Mr. Allen and Mr. Parks insist that a backwoods bunny as a modern folk hero
will not make this a kiddie musical. The preferred description is ''a musical
for grown-ups that can also be enjoyed by youngsters.''

The songs will include some already in the album and some being written
especially for the production. The director will be Timothy S. Mayer, who wrote
the book for ''My One and Only'' and who is also co-author of ''Jump'' with
Michael O'Donohue, an original ''Saturday Night Live'' writer and performer.

Current plans call for a workshop production early next year, a possible
out-of-town engagement and a Broadway opening by spring.

If at first you succeed, it seems only logical to try again - and that's just
what's happening with the creators of ''Three Guys Naked From the Waist Down.''
They've come up with a new contemporary musical called ''Mail,'' this one with
six characters, and the plan at the moment is to take it out of town early next
year, perhaps to the Playmaker Repertory Company in Chapel Hill, N.C., and put
it in a small Broadway house in the spring. All this is expected to require $1.2
million.

''Mail'' is the story of a man who disappears for six months and returns home to
set in order the chaos he left behind. It has book and lyrics by Jerry Colker
and music by Michael Rupert. Andrew Cadiff will direct and Steve Wells is
producing, and every one of these names is also on the list of credits for
''Three Guys,'' which, incidentally, closes this weekend.

Everyone has been told at one time or another that a wish come true doesn't
necessarily bring happiness. That, apparently, is the premise of ''Memories of
Riding With Joe Cool,'' by Christopher Gerard and Bill Hooey, the story of a man
who uses every possible means to become successful and is miserable when he
achieves his wish. The show, directed by Mr. Gerard and produced by Jay Poynor,
has Richard Voss, late of the Nederlander Organization, as production
consultant. Either P. J. Benjamin or Keith Carradine may get the leading role.
The opening is scheduled for Aug. 27 at the River West Theater, 155 Bank Street.

The name - The Watery Star Theater - doesn't seem so far out when you know that
the people behind it are committed to the revitalization of the Rotunda Pavilion
at the 79th Street marina. As of July 6, and throughout the month, Philip R.
Bratnober, the artistic director, will stage ''Hamlet,'' Tuesdays through
Sundays at 7:30 P.M. There is no admission charge and a call to 279-4200 will
get you reservations and information.

The relationship of two American nurses who meet at an Army hospital in Japan,
where one arrives as a burn patient from Vietnam, is explored in ''Walking
Through,'' which opens tonight at the Interart Theater (246-1050). Written by
Bernett Belgraier and directed by Melody Brooks, the play is being presented
under the auspices of the Women's Interart Center Developing Artists series.
Connie Schulman, Maud Winchester and Kim Yancey make up the cast. The theater is
at 549 West 52d Street.

Rex Harrison and Claudette Colbert were at a dinner party when he first
mentioned the possibility of doing Frederick Lonsdale's ''Aren't We All.''

''I thought the play was charming, but I couldn't see today's audiences going
for it,'' said Miss Colbert, who was surrounded by a turquoise aura, from the
color of her dressing gown to the pastel tint on the walls of her dressing room.
''But I wasn't doing anything and I thought it would be fun to go to London.
When you get to be my age, offers to do a play don't exactly come from all
directions.''

Miss Colbert, who looks as glamorous in person as she does on stage, said she is
81 years old, and has never made a secret of her age.

''The only time I ever felt age happening was when I hit 40 - I suddenly had a
funny feeling,'' she said. ''Fifty didn't bother me, and 60 bothered me even
less, and then I got to the point where I was rather pleased with my age.''

Miss Colbert, who will vacation at her Barbados home after the play closes late
next month, will then tour with it for 14 weeks in San Francisco, Los Angeles
and Washington. She said that she was delighted, and still surprised, at the
audience reaction, particularly the younger audience.

''I thought: How could they be interested in a man kissing a girl these days,
but they seem to love it?'' she said.

''Do you know that when Clark Gable and I made 'It Happened One Night,' in 1934,
there was never a clinch?'' She paused for a moment, began to smile and added,
''Much to my sorrow.''

New Yorkers visiting the National Theater in London this summer should feel
right at home. The theater's exhibitions will include a three-week display of 50
drawings by Al Hirschfeld, a man the National describes as ''the doyen of
theatrical cartoonists.'' The exhibit, which will run from July 15 to Aug. 3,
will range from British playwrights (Harold Pinter, Tom Stoppard, etc.) at work,
to Marlene Dietrich, Sir Alec Guinness and Franz Kafka.

It's always nice when the life of a play is extended, and that's just what's
happening to Sam Shepard's ''Curse of the Starving Class.'' It's closing at the
Intar Theater, 420 West 42d Street, July 7 but will reopen July 30 at the
Promenade Theater at Broadway and 76th Street, with Kathy Bates, Eddie Jones,
Bill Pullman and Karen Tull.

On the other hand, not as pleasant is the news that ''Childhood'' and ''Lies and
Legends'' both close this weekend.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              420 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

30 IDEAS FOR THE SUMMER CALENDAR

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 4096 words


NEW YORK is a summer festival, it seems, with the parks full of theater, dance
and music, the galleries offering exhibitions with odd and inventive themes, and
movie houses bristling with special film series. Familiar institutions suddenly
become a place to find the unfamiliar, and the brave new, shoestring efforts
that were expected to last a summer or two wake up one June morning to find
themselves an enduring feature of the season. 1. One of those familiar
institutions, Shakespeare in the Park, has grown considerably more sophisticated
as the seasons go by - this is the 30th - but the trees, night sky and easy
ambience all add immeasurably to the inventive productions. ''Measure for
Measure,'' Shakespeare's dark comedy about love, lust and loyalty, is the
current offering at the free Central Park series. Directed by Joseph Papp, head
of the New York Shakespeare Festival, this staging is set in Vienna in 1910. Now
in preview, it opens officially Sunday and runs through July 21.

Wilford Leach's zany-sounding musical production of ''The Mystery of Edwin
Drood,'' adapted by Rupert Holmes from Charles Dickens's novel, begins previews
on Aug. 2 and runs through Sept. 1. It's set in a 19th-century English music
hall. And the audience gets to vote on how the play will end at that
performance. Performances are Tuesday through Sunday at 8 P.M. Tickets are
distributed on the day of the performance, beginning at 6:15 at the Delacort
Theater; entrances are at Central Park West at 81st Street and at 5th Avenue at
79th Street. Those who contribute $50 or more to the Shakespeare Festival can
receive reserved tickets. For information: 861-PAPP. 2. The Celebrate Brooklyn
Festival, now in its seventh year, has sprawled out to 43 free performances and
run through Sept. 22. All performances begin at 8 P.M. at the Prospect Park
bandshell near Prospect Park West and Ninth Street. Conceived and directed by
Burl Hash, Celebrate Brooklyn started as a music series, and this weekend it
pays homage to music once more in a salute to the Kool Jazz Festival.

The World Saxophone Quartet with Daniella and Trio perform tonight. Tomorrow,
it's Olu Dara and the Okra Orchestra with Mister Spats, and Sunday's Jazz
Trumpet Spectacular features Jimmy Owens, Hannibal Peterson, Mark Gould, Wilmer
Wise and the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra, conducted by David Amram. Still to
come are three dance series, two pop music series, programs of Latin, Caribbean
and African music, music from Latin, rock and classical music programs, and
September performances of Shakespeare's ''Much Ado About Nothing.'' Information:
(718) 768-0699. 3. Sunday's performance by the Brooklyn Philharmonic opens the
orchestra's free summer concerts in Brooklyn parks, through July 25. Highlights
include Nina Simone with the Jazz Trumpet Gala on July 1 at 7:30 P.M. at the
former Boys High Athletic Field, Troy Avenue and Rutland Road, four Zarzuela
Nights, the first at 8 P.M. at the Prospect Park Bandshell, and Herman
Johnston's Fantastic Symphonic Steel Orchestra from Trinidad, also at the
bandshell, on July 13 at 8 P.M. Ever heard Strauss's ''Voices from Spring''
played on steel drums? Information: (718) 636-4120. 4. JungleWorld has just
opened at the Bronx Zoo, Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road, with a
re-creation of a Southeast Asian rain forest, mangrove swamp and scrub forest
that manages to simulate perfectly an outdoors environment. Animals of the
habitat range from a 750-pound Malayan tapir to a two-gram rhinoceros beetle
from Malaysia. The zoo is open from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. on weekdays and 5:30 on
Sundays and holidays. Admission to the zoo Friday through Monday is $3 for
adults and $1.25 for children; admission to JungleWorld is an extra 25 cents.
Zoo admission is free Tuesday through Thursday, when admission to JungleWorld is
50 cents. Information: 367-1010. 5. The 1985 Miller Music at Jones Beach series
opens tomorrow with Dan Fogelberg and the Chris Hillman Band, and closes on
Sept. 1 with the Pointer Sisters. Among the performers are Santana, the Beach
Boys, Liza Minnelli, Tina Turner, Bill Cosby, Engelbert Humperdinck and Crosby,
Stills and Nash. There will also be two golden oldies rock concerts. Shows are
at the Jones Beach Theater at 8 each night, except for the 7:30 curtain on July
7 when Leonard Bernstein conducts the National Symphony Orchestra. The doors
open an hour before a performance, and there are postperformance dance parties
and occasional firework displays. Ticket prices vary according to the concert,
but the range is $14.75 to $25. Information: (516) 221-1000. 6. The 1985 Miller
Music on Pier 84, at 45th Street and the Hudson River, begins the weekend with a
concert tonight by Howard Jones and Animotion and closes Sept. 14 with Folk
City's 25th Anniversary Concert. Other performers in the series are the Pat
Metheny Group and Ashford and Simpson. Concerts are at 7:30 P.M. Ticket prices
range from $10 to $12.50 in advance, $11.50 to $14 at the door. Information:
249-8870. 7. The WQXR Free Concert Series opens today at Damrosch Park at
Lincoln Center with a guitar recital by Liona Boyd, and continues with five
recitals - piano, brass, flute, cornet and sacbut - all on Fridays at noon at
Damrosch. Information: 245-4771. 8. The New York Botanical Garden has just
opened its free ''Victorian Pavilions'' display of plants and flowers at the
Channel Gardens of Rockefeller Center. On view are latticework greenhouses,
accented with Tivoli lights, that house ferns, aloe plants, tropical varieties
that grow as high as nine feet and three foot-wide cactuses. Information:
489-2862. 9. Renovation work precludes a visit to the the Statue of Liberty this
summer (though you can get a good view from the Staten Island Ferry), but there
is a new monument of interest in the city - the Vietnam Memorial at 55 Water
Street in Lower Manhattan. A glass block 69 by 16 feet, it is etched with 83
excerpts from letters home and to the front, and their impact is unforgettable.
10. For those who like to spend their summers in air-conditioned darkness, a
variety of film events are on tap. The Janus Summer Film Festival, which runs
through Aug. 24, has started at the Carnegie Hall Cinema, Seventh Avenue and
56th Street, with uncut films by six noted Japanese film makers. ''Goyokin,'' a
Samurai epic by Hideo Gosha, may be seen today and tomorrow, with Shohei
Imamura's ''Vengeance is Mine'' moving in on Sunday.

The ''European masters'' segment of the festival, from July 7 through Aug. 10,
includes both familiar and seldom-seen films by such directors as Rossellini, de
Sica, Bergman, Hitchcock and Fellini, with new prints of Renoir's ''Rules of the
Game'' and eight great British comedies, the original version of Lang's 1926
''Metropolis,'' and recent film from Turkey. The festival closes with
''Slapstick,'' a two-week series of comedy silents that starts on Aug. 11 with
Laurel and Hardy and closes on Aug. 23 with Harold Lloyd. Tickets are $5.
Information: 757-2131. 11. Film and stage presentation are combined in ''Disney
Summer Magic,'' at Radio City Music Hall through Aug. 29. Participating in ''The
Magical World of Disney,'' are 82 performers, including Mickey Mouse and other
Disney characters as well as the Rockettes. The accompanying films are ''Return
to Oz,'' through July 25, to be followed by the animated feature ''The Black
Cauldron,'' the heroic tale of young Taran who must defeat the evil Horned King.
Tickets are $12 and $14. Information: 757-3100. 12. Outer space is the subject
of three films now at the American Museum of Natural History, 81st Street and
Central Park West. At the museum's Naturemax Theater, ''The Dream Alive'' takes
the viewer on a shuttle flight that includes footage shot in space during three
missions last year and shown on the city's largest screen - four stories high
and 66 feet wide. The 37-minute film runs continously, except on weekends, when
it is scheduled with two other Naturemax films. Admission to the museum is a
donation ($3 for adults, $1.50 for children recommended) and tickets to the
weekend showing of the three films are $4.50 for adults and $3 for children and
the elderly; weekday film tickets, for ''The Dream Alive'' only, are $3 for
adults and $1.50 for children. Schedule information: 496-0900.

At the American Museum-Hayden Planetarium, the Sky Show double feature is
''Halley's Comet: Once in a Lifetime'' and ''Hayden: The Golden Years.'' The
first film prepares the viewer for the comet, which arrives in our skies in
January and won't be back until 2061. The second chronicles technological
advances in space study. Both shows can be seen today at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M., and
tomorrow on the hour from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday on the hour from 1 to 5
P.M. Starting July 1, the hours are weekdays, 1:30 and 3:30, and Saturdays and
Sundays on the hour from 1 to 4. Admission to the film is by admission to the
planetarium, which is $3.75 for adults, $2 for children and $2.75 for students
and the elderly. 13. The Museum of Modern Art's ambitious five-show series on
architecture, which examines current developments in the field, has just opened
with an exhibition on the work of Ricardo Bofill and Leon Krier. Mr. Bofill and
Mr. Krier are known for their rejection of Modernism and their belief in the
importance of Western architectural traditions to the renewal of cities.

In 1962, Mr. Bofill, a Spanish architect, founded Taller De Arquitectural to
explore the relationships between social reality and urban and architectural
forms and create ''a new typology of urban tissue based on the ambience of the
Medieval, Renaissance and Baroque examples of street, square and open space.''
He uses modern construction techniques, particularly precast concrete, while
rejecting the vernacular.

Born in Luxembourg, Mr. Krier designs but, unlike Bofill, does not build. He has
repudiated modern technology in favor of an architecture that is small and
emphasizes craft.

On view are new projects from both young architects, including Mr. Krier's
''correction and improvement of Washington'' and Mr. Bofill's classical tower
for residential use and his Arch of Triumph for office use in New York City.

The show, which runs through Sept. 3, is open museum hours - 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Mondays and Tuesdays, and Fridays through Sundays; Thursdays, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Admission to the museum covers admission to the show - $4.50 for adults, $3 for
students, and $2 for the elderly. Admission is by contribution on Thursday
evenings from 5 to 9. Information: 708-9480. 14. Until 50 years ago, harbor
crossings were a regular part of everyday life in New York. ''Metropolitan
Ferries: the Coming Crossroads,'' sponsored by the Municipal Art Society at the
Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue between 50th and 51st Streets, is a free
historical and educational exhibition that documents the decline of water
transportation and what plans there are for its future in the city. An overview
of the great Victorian-style ferry terminals is included. The gallery is open
Mondays through Saturdays from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Information: 935-3960. 15.
Remember the Nairobi Trio? Ernie Kovacs, its inspired creator, will be featured
at the Museum of Broadcasting, 1 East 53d Street, in ''Highlights From the
Collection,'' on view through Aug. 10. Culled from the museum's holdings, the
highlights also include screenings of such programs as the ''Desilu Playhouse,''
the ''Woody Allen Special,'' ''The Monkees'' and ''Car 54, Where Are You?'' Also
on view at the museum, through Sept. 26, is ''Discovery: Lost Honeymooners,''
newly discovered ''lost'' sketches from ''The Jackie Gleason Show.'' The museum
is open Wednesdays through Saturdays from noon to 5 P.M. and on Tuesdays from
noon to 8. Suggested contributions are $3 for adults, $2 for students, and $1.50
for the elderly and children under 13. Information: 752-7684. 16. The philosophy
of the free, sixth annual South Bronx Show, presented by the Bronx Council on
the Arts, is that art can happen anywhere. Everything from street arts to works
created in the studio by professionals are on view at three Bronx galleries
through July 17. Fashion Moda, 2803 Third Avenue at 149th Street, is open
Tuesdays through Saturdays from 2 to 7 P.M. Information: 585-0135. The Bronx
River Gallery, 1087 East Tremont Avenue, is open Wednesdays through Saturdays
from 1 to 6. Information: 589-5819. And the Longwood Arts Gallery, 965 Longwood
Avenue, second floor, is open Mondays through Fridays from 10 A. M. to 4 P.M.
Information: 842-5659. Information can also be obtained from the Bronx Council
at 931-9500. 17. The billion-dollar New York World's Fair, held in Flushing
Meadows Park 20 years ago, is the subject of ''The Mighty Fair,'' a free
exhibition sponsored by the Flushing Council on Culture and the Arts at the
Flushing Gallery, 136-73 41st Avenue. The show, which runs through Aug. 10,
includes photographs, models, souvenirs, posters, memorabilia, music and film
from the fair, which drew participation from 65 nations and 23 states. The
gallery is open Wednesdays through Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sundays
from 1 to 5. Information: (718) 463-7700. 18. ''New World Voyages'' traces the
daring explorations of uncharted lands by Sir Walter Raleigh and his fellow sea
dogs in a show that marks the 400th anniversary of Raleigh's Roanoke voyages.
First shown at the British Library in April 1984, ''New World Voyages'' is on
exhibition through Aug. 20 in the Gottesman Exhibition Hall of the New York
Public Library at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street. Among the 150 items on display -
maps, prints, drawings, engravings and documents - are 18 watercolors by John
White of the Indians and their environment, made in 1585 during the first
Raleigh voyage. The hall is open Mondays through Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 6
P.M. Information: 340-0489.

Dance history is the subject of ''Made in America: Modern Dance Then and Now,''
an exhibiton of photographs being shown through Sept. 14 at the Main Gallery of
the New York Public Library at Lincoln Center. The free show covers 90 years of
modern dance, and was organized by the American Dance Festival. Gallery hours
are Mondays and Thursdays, 10 A.M. to 7:45 P.M., Tuesdays, 10 to 5:45, and
Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, noon to 5:45, except tomorrow when the
gallery opens at 10 A.M. Information: 870-1630. 19. Dance and music also take to
the hills during the summer, and one of the most noted of the season's dance
events is the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival in Becket, Mass. The variety offered
by this venerable but innovative festival is remarkable. Tonight at 8 and
tomorrow at 2 and 8:30, for instance, Garth Fagan's Bucket Dance Theater
performs in the festival's rustic Ted Shawn Theater in the midst of the
Berkshire Hills, It's quite a leap from the Bucket's vibrant, stylish mixture of
ethnic and modern dance to the Festival Dance Theater's production of the
classic, ''Sleeping Beauty,'' which will play from Tuesday through next Saturday
and star Merrill Ashley and John Meehan.

Among the performers scheduled to appear at the 10-week festival are the Paul
Taylor Dance Company, the American Ballroom Theater, Pilobolus, the Clive
Thompson Dance company and Liz Lerman, a leading political dancemaker, with the
avant-garde represented by such groups as the Toronto-based Desrosiers Dance
Theater and Molissa Fenley and Dancers. There's also jazz at the Pillow. Ticket
prices range from $13 to $18.50. Information: (413) 243-0745.

In nearby Pittsfield, Mass., the Berkshire Ballet offers its productions of
''Graduation Ballet'' and ''Cinderella,'' beginning July 13 and ending Aug. 19.
Performances are at the Koussevitzky Arts Center of the Berkshire Community
College. Tickets are $10 and $12 for adults, $9 and $11 for children and the
elderly, and $5.50 for matinee performances. Information: (413) 442-1307. 20.
The 1985 Waterloo Music Festival opens tomorrow at 8:30 P.M. at the pretty,
historic Waterloo Village in Stanhope, N.J., with a gala performance featuring
the cellist Janos Starker in a program that includes the American premiere of
Franz Liszt's ''Legends.'' The series closes Sept. 1 with its annual folk
festival. ''Salute to Sousa'' will boom out on July 4, the Ninth Annual
Bluegrass Festival takes place Aug. 23-25, and Arlo Guthrie and Pete Seeger will
appear on Aug. 31, with a folk festival the following day. Ticket prices range
from $7.50 to $17.50, with discounts for chldren and the elderly. Information:
(201) 347-0900. 21. And then there's the green and spacious Tanglewood, likely
the most renowned music festival on the East Coast, which runs through Aug. 27
at the Tanglewood complex just outside Lenox, Mass. Tonight, the cellist Lynn
Harrell offers a prelude recital at 7, followed at 9 by the Boston Symphony
Orchestra, with Andre Watts as piano soloist. The orchestra performs again
tomorrow and Sunday in concerts conducted by Seiji Ozawa and Kent Nagano. The
festival will include 19 soloists, 4 chamber groups, 11 vocal ensembles and
soloists and 11 conductors. Another festival feature will be a contemporary
music series Aug. 1-7. Tanglewood ticket prices range from $5 to $50.
Information: (413) 637-1940.

New York has its own luxuriant outdoor music scene. It's at Planting Fields
Arboretum, in Oyster Bay, where the Friends of the Arts' 1985 Summer Festival
opens tomorrow night at 8 with an all-Vivaldi program peformed by the
Philharmonia Virtuosi, conducted by Richard Kapp. In the afternoon, at 3, Mr.
Kapp will give a lecture-demonstration on Vivaldi at the arboretum's Coe Hall.
The festival, which runs through Sept. 8, has a strong jazz accent this year,
with performances by Dave Brubeck, Claude Bolling, Dizzy Gillespie and His
Friends, and the Preservation Hall Jazz Band. Also scheduled are are the Mostly
Mozart Festival Orchestra, the Klezmer Conservatory Band, a Baroque Birthday
Bash and a Beethoven Festival. Ticket prices for the concerts range from $7.50
to $15. Information: (516) 922-0061. 22. In New Jersey, the June Opera Festival
of New Jersey is on through July 7, with concerts and productions of Mozart's
''Don Giovanni'' and Benjamin Britten's ''Albert Herring,'' performed at the
Lawrenceville School. Lawrenceville is off Route 26, five miles south of
Princeton. A ''Schubertiad'' will be presented tonight, with selections from
Rossini's ''Sins of Old Age'' to be performed on July 5. Both of these
performances are at 9 P.M. in the school's Abbott Dining Hall. Tickets are $5.
Modeled after England's Glyndeborne Festival, the series features ensemble
singing with the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra, in an intimate opera house, with
picnic grounds for the audience. ''Don Giovanni,'' in English, will be sung
tomorrow, July 3 and July 7. ''Albert Herring,'' a gentle comedy about a
grocer's boy who is crowned King of the May, will be presented on Sunday and
July 6. The opera performances are at 7:30 P.M. Tickets to the operas, which
will be performed at the School's Kirby Arts Center, are $15, $20 and $25, with
discounts available. Information: (609) 683-5468. 23. In Woodstock, N.Y.,
Maverick Concerts is celebrating its 70th season with Sunday afternoon concerts,
opening this weekend at 3 and running through Sept. 1. The setting is a rustic
350-seat hall in the woods, where such musicians as the Mendelssohn Quintet,
Jaime Laredo and the Mirecourt Piano Trio will perform, the trio in a tribute to
Henry Cowell. Tickets are $6 ($3 for students.) Information: (914) 679-8746 or
7558.

Another Woodstock attraction is the Woodstock Dance Festival at Woodstock
Playhouse. Martine van Hamel and the New Amsterdam Ballet, featuring Kevin
McKenzie, Daniel Duell and the Stars of New York City Ballet, the Erick Hawkins
Dance Company and Washington Ballet will perform, from July 8 through Oct. 12.
Tickets range from $9 to $14. The playhouse is off Route 375, at the start of
Route 212. Information: (914) 679-2436. 24. Eric Clapton will perform with
Graham Parker and the Shot tonight at 7:30 at the Garden State Arts Center's
Superstars 85 festival. Wayne Newton sings tomorrow at 8:30, with Freddie Roman
opening the show. Johnny Mathis closes the festival on Sept. 3-4. But there's
more than pop music to this series, held in a sprawling outdoor theater in
Holmdel, N.J. Classical music will be represented by the London Symphony and
Grace Bumbry and Shirley Verrett of the Metropolitan Opera, among others. Peter
Paul and Mary will hold the fort for folk music, and Mikhail Baryshnikov and
Company will add ballet to the bill. Ticket prices range from $10 to $27.50.
Information: (201) 442-9200.

And some of New York's best summer entertainment is yet to come. 25. The sixth
PepsiCo Summerfare festival is one of the most varied of the season's events.
Running from July 4 through July 28 at the Performing Arts Center of the State
University of New York at Purchase, this year's festival includes music, theater
and dance. Heading the theater attractions are Collettivo di Parma and Theatre
de la Tempete-Cartoucherie, two of Europe's most controversial avant-garde
companies. The musical features will include a Handel Opera Festival, a musical
homage to Alban Berg and Johann Christian Bach, and vocal and cabaret artists.
Among the companies performing in the dance segment are those of Bella Lewitzky
of Los Angeles, Mark Morris of Seattle, and Pauline Daniels of the Netherlands.
There will be a shuttle service from Lincoln Center to the campus, and between
the campus and the Rye train station. Ticket prices range from $6 to $28.
Information: (914) 253-5949. 26. This is the last summer for Creative Time's Art
on the Beach performing series, which opens on July 7 at the Battery Park City
landfill at Chambers Street and the Hudson River. Soon construction will begin
on the site, ending one of the city's most imaginative ventures. Art on the
Beach has offered wide-ranging collaborations between experimentalist musicians,
dancers and artists that take full advantage of the sand, river and
skyscraper-framed expanse of sky. The opening performance is a concert of music
by Gretchen Langheld, performed in an environment created by TODT , who bill
themselves as ''installation artists.'' .

Altogether there are 37 collaborators in the series, among them Ann Magnuson and
Lenora Champagne, performance artists; Glen Velez, the composer; Yoshiko Chuma
and the School of Hard Knocks, a dance company; Butch Morris, the jazz musician,
and the Henry Threadgill Marching Band. Performances are on Wednesdays and
Sundays at 6:30 P.M., with a closing performance on Saturday, Sept. 7. Admission
is $6; $3 for children and the elderly; Theater Development Fund vouchers
accepted. The free outdoor art exhibition is open from July 2 though Sept. 13,
Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5:30. Information: 619-1955. 27. The
second week of July brings two familiar summer rituals. Mostly Mozart opens its
19th season at Avery Fisher Hall on July 8, presenting a slew of star performers
in recitals and concerts of chamber and orchestral music. The festival runs
through Aug. 24. Ticket prices range from $8 to $13. Information: 874-2424. 28.
And Summergarden opens on July 12 in the garden of the Museum of Modern Art, 11
West 53d Street. Among the performers in the free series, which runs through
Aug. 23, are Jennifer Mueller-The Works, Eya Arania and her yoruba music and
movement ensemble, and Pooh Kaye and the Eccentric Motions. Information:
708-9850. 29. Dancemobile takes dance to the streets in roving free concerts
Mondays through Fridays throughout the city, starting on July 22 with the
Calabash Dance Company and ending with the Walter Nicks Dance Company on Aug.
23. Information: 860-8640.

And Dance Theater Workshop will present its seventh annual summer series, this
year called ''Out-of-Towners and Others,'' from Aug. 8 through Sept. 8. There
will performers from San Francisco, Minneapolis and Seattle, with David Parsons,
a choreographer-dancer with the Paul Taylor Dance Company, representing the
''others.'' The series is at the workshop's Bessie Schonberg Theater, 219 West
19th Street. Information: 924-0077. 30. On Aug. 6, Lincoln Center becomes one
vast performing area with the free Lincoln Center Out-of-Doors festival. Chamber
musicians, clowns, dancers and bands will perform through Sept. 2, among them
CoDanceCo, Ballet Hispanico and the foot-tapping Reel World String Band.
Information: 877-2011.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of summer events in and around the city

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              421 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 29, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GOTBACHEV URGES PEKING TO IMPROVE MOSCOW AND HANOI TIES

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 28


Mikhail S. Gorbachev, speaking at a dinner for the head of Vietnam's Communist
Party, called on China today to improve relations with both Moscow and Hanoi.

The Soviet leader said Moscow would do what it could to help an improvement in
relations between the Indochinese nations and their non-Communist neighbors, but
blamed the United States for obstructing the peaceful settlement of regional
problems.

Mr. Gorbachev said the Soviet Union stood for ''the prevention of hegemonism in
any form,'' presumably an allusion to the Soviet belief that Peking is seeking
influence in the region.

His remarks at the dinner for the Vietnamese Communist Party head, Le Duan, came
on the eve of a visit to Moscow by a Chinese Deputy Prime Minister, Yao Yilin,
who is expected to sign a five-year trade agreement with Moscow, in a further
sign of improving relations between China and the Soviet Union.

Superficial Improvements

Western diplomats here said, however, that any Chinese-Soviet thaw was taking
place slowly and that although superficial improvements in relations were being
made, the underlying problems dividing the two nations had not been tackled.

China lists the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, the heavy Soviet troop
presence on the Chinese-Soviet border and the Soviet troops in Afghanistan as
the main obstacles to better ties.

In his speech, Mr. Gorbachev accused the United States of fostering instability
in Asia, particularly in Vietnam, Cambodia and Afghanistan. He said some nations
in the region were forced to take ''countermeasures,'' apparently a reference to
Vietnam's continued troop presence in Cambodia.

''Normalizing the relations of the Soviet Union and Vietnam with the People's
Republic of China would undoubtedly help fortify the foundations of peace in
Asia and beyond it,'' he said.

''Both the Soviet Government and the Vietnamese Government,'' he said, ''have
already made constructive proposals on this score. A positive response to them
could help tear down many of the real obstacles standing in the way of
good-neighborly and mutually beneficial relations in the region.''

Negotiating Border Battles

In what appeared to be a reference to Vietnam's continuing battles along the
Thai-Cambodian border, Mr. Gorbachev said, ''The Soviet Union believes, as
before, that in Southeast Asia there are no problems that cannot be settled
politically at the negotiating table.''

Vietnam has sought to move the Cambodian conflict from the battlefield to the
negotiating table in a format that would grant authority to the Heng Samrin
Government that it installed in Phnom Penh in 1979.

Meanwhile, Mr. Gorbachev said, ''Washington is busy trying to enlist the
countries of the region in furthering its global military-political plans.'' The
United States has stepped up military preparations in the region, he said.

Vietnam, linked with the Soviet Union by a 1978 friendship treaty, receives
extensive Soviet aid and lets the Russians use the American-built naval base at
Cam Ranh Bay.

According to the official press agency Tass, the Vietnamese Communist Party
Leader expressed gratitude to Moscow for ''the large-scale and effective
assistance in building socialism and defending their homeland.''

At a news conference today, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Vladimir B. Lomeiko,
said the two leaders ''discussed the question of the further program of economic
aid to Vietnam.'' He gave no details. Mr. Gorbachev spoke of long-term economic
and technical cooperation and of the need to coordinate the two nations'
five-year development programs. ''The problems of scientific and technological
progress occupied an important place at the negotiations,'' he said.

The Soviet leader characterized the talks as ''thorough and intense'' and said
they took place in a ''cordial, truly comradely atmosphere.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              422 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 29, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SANDINISTA ASSAILS CONGRESS ON VOTE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 459 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, June 28


Nicaragua's Interior Minister accused Congress today of making an ''an extremely
dangerous decision'' by authorizing President Reagan to send United States
troops to Nicaragua under certain conditions.

''Perhaps only the American people could halt this savage iron fist against
Nicaragua,'' said the official, Tomas Borge, at the end of a conference in
Managua of ethnic leaders from the Caribbean coast.

''We could be immolated,'' he said, ''but no one will ever say we have been
conquered.''

On Thursday, the House of Representatives voted to limit any move to use United
States combat troops in Nicaragua. It said it would authorize the President to
use the troops if Nicaragua acquired advanced jet fighter planes, allowed the
introduction of nuclear weapons, was involved in a hijacking to which the United
States felt it was necessary to respond, or to protect American citizens or to
counter what was termed a ''clear and present danger of attack'' against the
United States or its allies.

'Extremely Dangerous Decision'

The measure, which passed by a vote of 312 to 111, came two weeks after Congress
voted to send an additional $27 million in humanitarian aid to rebels supported
by the United States who are trying to overthrow the Government. The war has
taken about 8,000 lives since 1981.

''It is an extremely dangerous decision against Nicaragua that brings the plans
of invasion closer, that legalizes the illegal and violates all international
norms,'' Mr. Borge said.

He said Congress had ''allowed itself to be pressured by the Reagan
Administration, which drew a royal flush with this decision.''

''It is a further step,'' he said, ''an extremely irresponsible and dangerous
step, of the aggressive plans of the United States.''

The House Democratic whip, Thomas S. Foley of Washington, said that although the
measure would not ''technically'' hamper the President from sending combat
troops, it was a signal that Congress did not want any military action without
being consulted.

American Cites Grenada

But opponents said the House had given Mr. Reagan, in the words of
Representative Ted Weiss, Democrat of Manhattan, ''a dangerous blueprint for
American involvement'' reminiscent of the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin resolution, under
which President Lyndon B. Johnson stepped up American involvement in Vietnam.

A group of Americans living in Nicaragua also criticized the action.

''President Reagan used the excuse of rescuing American citizens to invade
Grenada,'' said Laura Enriquez, spokesman for the Committee of U.S. Citizens
Living in Nicaragua. ''I don't think the excuse was true in Grenada, and it is
absolutely not true here,'' she said. ''We have said time and time again we do
not want to be rescued.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              423 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 29, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE APPROVES MILITARY FREEZE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 377 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 28


The House voted late Thursday to freeze military spending. In approving the
legislation, it set up a confrontation with the Senate over a variety of issues,
including whether to permit United States forces to fight in Nicaragua.

The House approved the bill authorizing military programs for the coming fiscal
year by a vote of 278 to 106 before leaving, along with the Senate, for a
weeklong Fourth of July recess.

When the two chambers return July 8, they will set up a conference committee to
iron out differences between the two measures.

The bill passed earlier this month by the Republican-controlled Senate proposes
Pentagon programs costing up to $302 billion in the fiscal year 1986, which
would permit the military budget to rise at the expected rate of inflation,
about 3 percent. $292 Billion Proposal The Democratic-controlled House approved
a military bill costing up to $292 billion, which essentially freezes spending
at current levels. President Reagan has endorsed the Senate version, although he
originally sought a 5.9 percent increase in addition to what it would take to
make up for inflation.

One of the key differences between the measures arose Thursday, when the House
voted, 312 to 111, to ban the use of United States troops against the leftist
Government of Nicaragua. No such ban was part of the Senate bill.

The ban was adopted after four hours of often angry debate in which the specter
of the Vietnam War was raised by both sides.

However, the measure was qualified by the addition of provisions permitting Mr.
Reagan to send troops if Nicaragua introduced advanced Soviet warplanes or if
United States citizens or possessions were threatened.

The House Democratic whip, Thomas S. Foley of Washington, the sponsor of the
proposal, said it was only writing into law what Mr. Reagan had said, that he
did not plan to use United States combat forces in Nicaragua.

The United States is supporting a rebel army of 12,000 to 15,000 rebels who are
fighting the Nicaraguan Government.

Proponents of the ban said they wanted to make sure Mr. Reagan did not involve
the United States in another undeclared war, while opponents argued the measure
was an unconstitutional limit on the President's powers as Commander in Chief.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              424 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 29, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

$10 CEILING ON LEGAL FEES IS UPHELD IN SUITS CONTESTING VETERAN BENEFITS

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1051 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 28


The Supreme Court today upheld a law from the Civil War era that prohibits
veterans from paying lawyers more than $10 for representing them in disputes
over veterans' benefits.

The $10 limit effectively bars any legal representation before the Veterans
Administration, which handles 800,000 claims a year for pensions, disabilility
pay and death benefits.

The 6-to-3 decision overturned a ruling by a Federal District Court in
California. That court, in a suit brought by several veterans' organizations and
individual veterans, barred the Government from enforcing the law on the ground
that the $10 limit was ''fundamentally unfair'' and probably unconstitutional.

Congress adopted the $10 limit in 1864 to prevent unscrupulous lawyers from
exploiting Civil War veterans by charging exorbitant fees to file simple pension
forms. About 2 percent of veterans who appear before the Veterans Administration
are represented by lawyers, who presumably make their services available without
charge.

Critical of Lower Court

Writing for the Court today, Associate Justice William H. Rehnquist said the
lower court ''went seriously awry'' in striking down the statute. A law that has
been in effect over 120 years, he said, is entitled to more than the deference
that judges should accord to the ''duly enacted and carefully considered
decision of a coequal and representative branch of our Government.''

Justice Rehnquist said that only ''an extraordinarily strong showing of
probability of error under the present system'' could justify the conclusion
that the $10 limit denies veterans their right to due process of law.

He said the record in the case did not prove the inadequacy of the current
system, under which most veterans are assisted by unpaid ''service
representatives'' provided by national veterans organizations. He said the
Government had a valid interest in keeping proceedings before the Veterans
Administration ''as informal and nonadversarial as possible'' and that the
presence of lawyers ''would be quite unlikely to further this goal.''

While finding the law constitutional on its face, the Court left open the
possibility that individual veterans, in particular cases, might be able to show
their constitutional rights were violated by lack of legal assistance.

Further Actions Possible

Justice Rehnquist did not allude to this possibility in his majority opinion.
But Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, in a concurring opinion, said ''it is
my understanding'' that individual veterans would be free to try to prove that
the law as applied to them was unconstitutional.

Citing the trial record, she provided several examples of possibly meritorious
cases, including that of a veteran whose ''service representative'' retired and
dropped his case without notifying him. Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun
joined Justice O'Connor's concurring opinion.

The Veterans Administration provides several levels of administrative appeals,
but veterans are barred by law from appealing the agency's final decision to the
Federal courts.

The $10 limit has been disputed for years, and Congress has rejected several
recent efforts to abolish it. A bill has passed the Senate three times, most
recently last year, but has died each time in the House Committee on Veterans'
Affairs.

Criticism of Decision

Robert Muller, president of the Vietnam Veterans of America, said that the
Court's decision ''gives legal sanction to the treatment of veterans as
second-class citizens.'' He said his organization would try once again to
persuade Congress to change the law.

Associate Justices William J. Brennan Jr., Thurgood Marshall and John Paul
Stevens dissented, with both Justices Brennan and Stevens filing dissenting
opinions.

In his dissent, Justice Stevens said, ''If the Government, in the guise of a
paternalistic interest in protecting the citizen from his own improvidence, can
deny him access to independent counsel of his choice, it can change the
character of our free society.''

Justice Stevens said the age of the statute ''cuts against, not in favor of, its
validity.'' In 1864, he said, the $10 limit guarded against excessive lawyers'
fees but still permitted a veteran to hire a lawyer. He said that, based on
today's average military base pay of $13,400 a year, as against $231 a year in
1865, the $10 limit was the equivalent of a $580 fee today.

Justice Stevens also noted that ''the number of claims presenting complex issues
of law or fact has greatly increased'' since Civil War days. One of the
organizations that brought the suit, the National Association of Radiation
Survivors, is seeking compensation for veterans injured in atomic bomb tests.

The majority opinion, Walters v. Natl. Assoc., No. 84-571, was joined by Chief
Justice Warren E. Burger and Associate Justices Byron R. White and Lewis F.
Powell Jr., as well as Justices Rehnquist, O'Connor and Blackmun.

As the Court concluded a busy week, there were strong indications that the
1984-85 term will end next Tuesday. Twelve cases remain to be decided.  Suit
Against State Barred The Court also ruled today, 5 to 4, that a state may not be
sued for back pay or other monetary relief for violating the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973. That law prohibits discrimination against the handicapped in programs
receiving Federal financial assistance. The decision overturned a ruling by the
United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which permitted a suit by
a handicapped man who was rejected for employment by a state-run hospital in
California.

In an opinion by Justice Powell, the Court said the state was immune under the
11th Amendment, which generally prevents individuals from suing a state in
Federal court. The amendment is not an absolute bar. A state may consent to be
sued under some circumstances, or Congress in enacting a particular law may
override state immunity. But the Court, which has been divided on 11th Amendment
cases, concluded that neither circumstance applied to the Rehabilitation Act.

Justice Powell's opinion, Atascadero Hospital v. Scanlon, No. 84-351, was joined
by Chief Justice Burger and by Justices White, Rehnquist and O'Connor. Justices
Brennan, Blackmun and Stevens each wrote a dissenting opinion. Justice Marshall
also dissented.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              425 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 29, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT NEW YORK;
IN OZONE PARK, A BAROMETER OF PATRIOTISM

BYLINE: By William E. Geist

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words


Motorists passing by George Kanakaris's house in Ozone Park, Queens, are always
shouting patriotic slogans - not so much on the order of ''Give me liberty or
give me death!'' but rather the articulations of this day and age: ''U.S.A.!
U.S.A.!'' and ''Nuke the hijackers!''

Mr. Kanakaris says he can take the pulse of the nation just sitting on his
patio, which is about three feet from busy Woodhaven Boulevard and which moves
passers-by to these spontaneous outbursts of patriotism. Over the past three
decades, Mr. Kanakaris, ''a chef and a patriot,'' has painted his patio and his
adjacent two-car garage - and just about everything else in sight, from gutters
to garbage cans - red, white and blue.

He was born in Greece 72 years ago and speaks broken English, but he pronounced
loudly that he is ''100 percent American now,'' from the red, white and blue oil
tank in the basement to the red, white and blue rafters in his garage.

The entire two-story house, he said, would be red, white and blue except that he
rents the bottom floor as a hairdressing salon and the outside of the second
floor, where he lives, is covered with tarpaper siding that cannot be painted.

For years, Mr. Kanakaris has listened to the comments of pedestrians and
motorists as he sat in his red, white and blue patio furniture on his red, white
and blue concrete patio, among the red and white roses -''Are there blue
roses?,'' he asked. ''I'd love to know.'' Two tomatoes on plants in the patio
are green, but he promised they would soon be red.

He sat through the Vietnam War, when it seemed to him that there were a lot more
objections about his gaudy paint job from the neighbors and a good deal of
jeering from passers-by. Neighbors said that one of the first signs of ebbing
patriotism in the land is the withdrawal of support for George Kanakaris's
garage.

Some neighbors have suggested it might be nice if Mr. Kanakaris settled on just
one of the colors - white, perhaps - rather than patterns of all three.

''I don't care what she thinks,'' Mr. Kanakaris said of a neighbor who once made
critical remarks. ''I think she is jealous, and perhaps not as patriotic as she
might be.''

The woman should be thankful she did not live next door to Mr. Kanakaris when he
was still holding daily flag-raising ceremonies at 6 A.M., with his youngest
son, Jack, on trumpet. As Jack played the call to colors, the neighbors called
the police, who in turn called a halt to these ceremonies, as well as to the
flag-lowering at dusk.

''Sometimes I see people get out of their cars and take photographs of the
garage and patio,'' said Ted Bojnek, a neighbor. ''It is like a roadside
attraction.'' Another neighbor said someone had once asked him how much it cost
for admission.

A young man in a convertible - one of Lee Iacocca's ''Buy American'' Chryslers,
at that - snapped a salute this week as he passed the garage, paying his
respects to the old patio red, antique white and decorator blue - the colors Mr.
Kanakaris uses.

In recent years, the comments Mr. Kanakaris has heard have nearly all been
favorable, and since Shiites began holding Americans hostage, the patriotic
remarks have been coming more frequently and with considerably more fervor.

''This is to be expected,'' said a nonchalant neighbor. ''It happens every time
there are American hostages.''

Mr. Kanakaris also noted that nice comments about his patriotic paint job always
increase the week before the Fourth of July.

''It bothers me that patriotism goes in and out of fashion,'' he said. ''We
learned when we became citizens to always support the country. I took it
seriously.''

He believes he probably knows more about this country and its history than most
who were born here. To learn more, he has visited every state in the union
except Alaska and Hawaii.

The shirt he was wearing one day this week happened to be red with white and
blue stripes. Opening the blue and white door to the red and white garage
bearing paintings of the American and Greek flags, revealed a green car of all
things, for which he was apologetic. But he pointed out, ''It is an American
car, of course.'' The car bears an American flag sticker on the back, and to Mr.
Kanakaris's credit, he has painted the garage floor in a patriotic motif.

Mr. Kanakaris lives alone now. The older of his two sons, Peter, went on to West
Point, and Mr. Kanakaris has several photographs on display in his apartment of
Peter in his uniform, as well as a large oil painting in the living room of
Peter having his second lieutenant's bars pinned on. Jack served in the Army in
Vietnam.

Mr. Kanakaris is divorced and shrugs when asked if painting the garage and
raising the flag had anything to do with it.

Mr. Kanakaris, who describes his neighborhood as a very patriotic community,
lives just up the street from a shopping strip that includes a Fighting Oil
service station with American flags flying, the Americana Lanes bowling alley,
Colony Auto Body, Liberty Auto Wreckers and a movie theater where ''Rambo'' is
playing.

It is also a neighborhood with a high incidence of lawn decorations in the small
yards: plastic elves, squirrels, deer, swans and flamingos. Mr. Kanakaris
explained that he doesn't like flamingos and loves his country. Others in the
neighborhood have painted their flagstone walkways red, white and blue.

He just returned from a trip to Greece, which he found ''very disturbing because
of all the Communists there now.''

He said that he was scheduled to return on the very flight from Athens that was
hijacked, but canceled his reservation. ''When I walked into Kennedy Airport
here I kissed the ground,'' he said. ''But I always do.''

He offered no opinion on what this country should do about the hostages. ''I
hope we don't do any bombing,'' he said. ''Innocent people would be hurt.''

He added, however, that his patio patriotism readings are high enough to cause
him to worry that Americans might favor doing something rash. ''Although it is
nice to have my painting appreciated,'' he said, he thinks that passers-by on
Woodhaven Boulevard could stand to calm down a bit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of George Kanakaris loungin on patio in his home in Ozone Park
(NYT/Gary Guisinger)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              426 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 29, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

STOCKMAN SPEECH EXCERPTS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 37, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1661 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 28


Following are excerpts from an address before the board of the New York Stock
Exchange by David A. Stockman, director of the Office of Management and Budget,
in Washington on June 5:

The degree of political division and policy conflict within our governing
institutions has now reached such an extreme and intense state that it is nearly
impossible to see where the political will and consensus will come from that is
necessary to enact any plan big enough to balance the books - or even
substantially close the gap.

As a policy matter, it is obvious enough that to close this threatening $200
billion budget gap we must either massively cut spending or raise taxes by
large, unprecedented magnitudes - or, by the lights of some, enact a sweeping
mixture of both.

The basic fact is that we are violating badly, even wantonly, the cardinal rule
of sound public finance: Governments must extract from the people in taxes what
they dispense in benefits, services and protections. Perhaps not every year, but
certainly over any intermediate period of time.

Two Standards

In this regard, let me suggest two standards which apply equally to both sides
in this monumental debate:

First, there is a plausible case for both going-in positions - no tax
increases/no domestic spending cuts - but neither can be responsibly held unless
one is willing to spell out and be politically accountable for the consequences
on the other side of the budget ledger: No spending cuts mean drastic tax
increases, and vice versa.

Secondly, as the fiscal crisis has worsened and the political conflict
intensified, we have increasingly resorted to squaring the circle with
accounting gimmicks, evasions, half-truths and downright dishonesty in our
budget numbers, debate and advocacy. Indeed, if the S.E.C. had jurisdiction over
the executive and legislative branches, many of us would be in jail. So it is
incumbent on both sides to come clean with the numbers, and thereby the true
choices.

Starting with our side, the President's no-tax-increase position rests on a
solid historical precedent: For the entire period from the Korean War to 1980,
the average Federal tax take was 18.7 percent of G.N.P. From that we managed to
make ends meet while funding periods of military buildup like Vietnam and
domestic entitlement expansion like in the late 1960's and 1970's. Current tax
law -no matter how the code may be reshuffled within the envelope of revenue
neutral reform - generates more than that - 19 percent of G.N.P. -and will
continue to do so for the rest of the decade. So at least by the measure of 30
years of modern Federal Government, there has been no radical revenue depletion,
the repeated suggestion of Democratic orators like Jim Wright notwithstanding.
We are extracting from the people fully as much as before.

Spending Consequences

But until the April budget agreement with the Senate leadership, our side had
not come clean about the spending consequences of holding the line on taxes. But
those are now apparent and are threefold:

First, the second stage of the military buildup we had previously planned for
1986 to 1990 won't be possible. We had previously planned $325 billion for 1986,
$400 billion for 1988 and $500 billion for 1990. Just over the next three years,
that path will be scaled back dramatically by more than $150 billion, to a 2
percent average real growth rate. Recalibrating the program to fit that sharply
reduced path will be a difficult, risky process - but one that is compelled by
the fiscal stand we have chosen.

Secondly, the pledge to maintain full COLA's cannot be kept for one simple
reason. Baseline spending for Social Security and other pension programs amounts
to $250 billion - one-quarter of our entire trillion-dollar budget. Without COLA
limits or freezes, it is impossible to accumulate the savings needed to close
the budget gap.

Thirdly, no taxes mean profound and sweeping surgery is necessary in the rest of
the budget - domestic functions and programs must be pared to the core. And so
in the Administration/Senate plan we have: Medicare beneficiaries will have to
pay more out of pocket; the depressed agricultural sector will have to do
without $15 billion in price support and credit subsidies; roughly $10 billion
per year in revenue sharing and other grants to state and local governments will
be eliminated; Amtrak will be put on a budget which will starve it into
insolvency. Sacred cows like veterans' health care and Federal retirement
benefits are put on the chopping block.

Holding the Line

All of these steps are the necessary and responsible correlates to holding the
line on taxes. Together the big defense cutback, the COLA freezes and the
sweeping domestic surgery contained in the Senate budget and courageously
supported by 49 elected politicians will reduce the deficit by $300 billion over
the next three years, reduce Federal borrowing from 5 percent to 2 percent of
G.N.P., and offer prudent hope that our economy can pull out from under the
heavy load of deficit financing now weighing down upon it.

On the second standard - honesty in accounting, we have not come entirely clean.
The Senate budget is not riddled with gimmicks and phony savings like the House,
but it rests on some pretty optimistic assumptions about the path of the economy
over the next three years - namely 4 percent average real growth over the next
14 quarters, inflation where it is, and a steady descent of interest rates to
5.5 percent on the T-Bill by 1988.

For reference purposes, the latest blue chip consensus forecast is 2.9 percent
real growth over the next three years, moderately higher inflation and
significantly higher interest rates. Should the blue chip forecast materialize,
the Senate budget deficit would be $20 billion higher in 1986 and $70 billion
higher by 1988. It would mean nearly $200 billion deficits each year even with
the sweeping policy reductions I have just outlined.

So if the nation's 50 leading business forecasters are correct, for our side
there will be yet another altar call: Even more spending cuts or an
acknowledgement that a last-resort tax increase is in order. In due course, the
quarterly reckoning of the G.N.P. statistics will tell us which path we're on.

House Majority Position

Now let me turn to the opening position held by the House majority. And let me
assure you that my characterization of it as ''no domestic spending cuts'' is no
caricature.

Without any change in policy, 1986 domestic spending would total $594 billion.
The House budget explicitly exempts from even one dime of cuts the following
programs: Social Security, Federal pensions, veterans' health care and
compensation, all means-tested programs from food stamps to subsidized housing
and Medicaid, all student aid, all employment training and social service
programs, and much more. These items add up to $375 billion in baseline
spending, or two-thirds of the domestic budget - spared, exempted, sacred cows,
all.

Of the remaining $220 billion in baseline spending for everything from
agriculture to Medicare and the National Park Service, the House budget saves
$10 billion.

In short, out of nearly a $600 billion domestic budget, the House found $10
billion - or 1.6 percent to cut; 98.5 percent of the built-in domestic budget is
sancrosanct, beyond tampering with.

The question may occur to some, then, as to how the House produced $56 billion
in 1986 savings - the same number as the Senate - without raising taxes. The
answer is through egregious, shameless violation of standard No. 2 - honesty in
accounting.

'Exaggerated' Cuts

Aside from the $10 billion in valid domestic spending cuts I have acknowledged,
all the rest - $46 billion - consists of exaggerated defense cuts and purely
accounting gimmicks.

It proposes to freeze defense spending at last year's level - even though the
House Armed Services Committee has produced an overall defense budget identical
to the Senate total. This turns the Senate's $21 billion in defense outlay
savings into $28 billion in the House.

The House budget books four years' worth of already counted offshore oil lease
income into one year - perhaps they have been studying the S&L industry too
much. Anyway, it lowers the 1986 deficit by $4 billion - and raises it by an
equivalent amount in the out years.

In the allowance function, where we tuck away a few billion for pay raises and
emergencies, the House entered a $4 billion negative contingency savings for
reduced nondefense contracting without the slightest hint of where.

It saved $1.6 billion by shifting housing subsidies from the spending side to
tax-exempt securities - an equivalent drain on revenues over a different period
of time.

It decreed that the insurance reserves of Federal employee health carriers will
henceforth be counted in our budget, not theirs, for another $400 million
savings.

It sold Conrail for $1.2 billion, which is O.K. as a one-time asset sale, but
kept Amtrak intact, which is a real permanent spending drain.

True Message

Now my point is this: Reasonable people can say that $10 billion is all we wish
to take out of domestic spending and $20-25 billion is what we plan to take out
of defense. But responsible people must also acknowledge that $20-25 billion in
higher taxes are then necessary to hit the minimum deficit reduction that is
consistent with fiscal sanity; and that by 1988, those higher taxes must total
$50-75 billion to match the Senate plan. That's the true message behind the
House budget - that's the choice that the American people deserve to have
acknowledged.

The outlook for the budget conference is therefore not encouraging. One side has
put its cards down on the table - or at least most of them. The other side has
largely shuffled the pea pods. So we may yet need the services of a magician -
something that we in the bookkeepers' profession just don't believe in.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of leading indicators

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              427 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW BID WEIGHED ON VIETNAM M.I.A.'S

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 840 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, June 29


The United States and Vietnam appear willing to consider opening an American
technical office in Hanoi to hasten the process of accounting for American
servicemen missing since the Vietnam War, according to statements from both
countries.

The Reagan Administration, in a statement issued by the United States Embassy in
Bangkok, Thailand, made it clear that such a move would depend on a
''significantly'' higher level of Vietnamese cooperation in the search for
missing Americans.

The proposal has been discussed with both Hanoi and Washington by Indonesia's
Foreign Minister, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, who has been serving as go-between with
Vietnam for the non-Communist Association of Southeast Asian Nations in its
efforts to resolve the problem of Cambodia.

In an interview Friday, Mr. Mochtar said that although Washington was reluctant
to establish any presence in Hanoi that might be misconstrued as the beginning
of diplomatic recognition, the idea of a technical office was ''very much''
alive.

No Need Seen Now

The American statement issued in Bangkok said there appeared to be no necessity
at this time for a technical office. But it added:

''Were circumstances to change, and Vietnam's cooperation to increase
significantly in such a way as to require the more frequent or even continuous
deployment of technical personnel, we would give it serious consideration. This
would, of course, have no relation to the issue of diplomatic relations.''

Tran Ngoc Thach, a spokesman for the Vietnamese Embassy in Bangkok, confirmed
that the idea was under consideration but said it had not been directly
discussed between the two countries.

The United States, which has no official presence in Hanoi, says progress on the
issue of the missing Americans, along with the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops
from Cambodia, are prerequisites to better relations. A decade after the end of
the Vietnam War, more than 2,400 Americans are still listed as missing in
Indochina, 1,375 of them in Vietnam.

The opening of an American technical office in Hanoi, which Mr. Mochtar said the
Vietnamese are actively seeking, would establish the first permanent American
presence in the country in a decade.

No Full-Time U.S. Groups

Some Americans - among them scholars and scientists, Congressional delegations,
journalists and experts from the Joint Casualty Resolution Center in Hawaii -
travel to Vietnam on short visits, but no American organizations work full time
there.

Mr. Mochtar, who made a series of trips to Hanoi and Washington earlier this
year, says he has come to believe that the conflict in Cambodia stands a better
chance of being resolved within the context of improved United States-Vietnamese
relations. For this reason, he has been trying to bring about better relations
between Hanoi and Washington.

The Foreign Minister is preparing for a meeting in Kuala Lumpur in July between
Secretary of State George P. Shultz and the foreign ministers of Asean, in which
the members are Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and the
Philippines.

Mr. Mochtar said Friday that he thought Hanoi should concentrate its efforts on
the issue of missing Americans as a humanitarian concern and stop viewing it as
a bargaining chip.

'Help Them to Help You'

He said he recently told Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, that
Vietnam had to be ''forthcoming, or at least seem to be forthcoming on this, so
you can turn the tide, which is now running against you.''

''I know the Americans,'' he said he told the Vietnamese. ''Basically, they are
fair. There are still people there who are sympathetic to you. Help them to help
you. Make it possible to proceed.

''The Vietnamese are their own biggest enemy,'' he said, ''because while they
are willing to move, publicly they always feel that have to be tough.''

Vietnam, which earlier this year agreed to increase the two nations'
consultations on the missing from four a year to six, a few weeks ago abruptly
postponed a meeting tentatively scheduled for this month. The talks have been
rescheduled for next Wednesday through Friday, according to a Pentagon
announcement circulating here. Both sides hope the meeting might in clude the
first joint examination of a wartime crash site.

Progress Is Reported

The Vietnamese and the Americans who are close to the talks on the missing had
both been reporting encouraging progress.

American officials say the idea of a technical office in Hanoi was first
proposed in 1973, the year most American troops were withdrawn and two years
before the takeover of Saigon by the North Vietnamese.

According to Americans who were involved with the plan, Hanoi first agreed, then
later withdrew its approval. The subject has not been reported to have seriously
been raised since then.

Mr. Mochtar said Friday that he was encouraged by the recent American statements
that did not rule out a technical office.

''This news, if it is true, is a very welcome development,'' he said. ''Then we
can go somewhere.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              428 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIDEO ARTISTRY SPARKS A NEW SERIES

BYLINE: By Stephen Holden

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1502 words


Starting with its opening credits, ''Alive From Off Center,'' a new eight-part,
half-hour Public Broadcasting Service series that brings together the worlds of
avant-garde performance and the latest video technology, presents striking
images of artistic transformation. To theme music composed by David Byrne of the
rock band Talking Heads, a curtain rises on a stage to reveal cardboard images
of a ballerina, a concert violinist and a Shakespearean actor. Suddenly, the
stage falls away, and the ballerina comes to life as a modern dancer in an
austere, black-and-white minimalist space. A moment later, she becomes a
computer-animated figure framed by a proscenium that reappears as a television
set instead of a stage.

Designed by the video artist John Sanborn, the sequence succinctly evokes the
artistic climate to be explored on the series, which has its premiere tomorrow
night at 10 on many PBS stations around the country and next Sunday evening at
10:30 on WNET/ Channel 13.

The opening show includes six short pieces representing a cross section of art
forms, styles and moods. In ''Ear to the Ground,'' by Mr. Sanborn and Kit
Fitzgerald, the camera follows the percussionist David Van Tieghem around the
streets of New York as he ''plays'' the city, tapping out a spontaneous
percussive rhapsody with mallets and drumsticks on lamp posts, sidewalks,
telephone booths and anything else in sight that might yield interesting clangs
or thuds.

''The Discreet Charm of the Diplomacy,'' created by the Polish film maker
Zbigniew Rybczniski, portrays pompous diplomats feasting at a surrealistic
banquet. As the dinner proceeds, on the underside of the sumptuously laden
table, upside down, a menagerie of farm animals forms a noisy parade. Now and
then, one of the formally dressed dinner guests slips below the table to join
the beastly procession.

The pieces range from the austere to the farcical. Sankai Juku, the five-member
Japanese dance troupe, in white body makeup, perform a stark ritualistic
dance-theater piece that was shot on pipes and girders beneath the streets of
London. Laurie Anderson's video clip ''Sharkey's Day'' presents the performance
artist and recording star as a computer-animated vaudevillian singing and
dancing in vividly colored abstract spaces.

Three of the later shows in the series will each be devoted to a single piece.
Week five will feature ''Tongues,'' the critically acclaimed theater monologue
written by the playwright Sam Shepard, starring Joseph Chaikin and filmed by
Shirley Clarke. In the monologue, the actor becomes a vessel and mouthpiece for
dozens of different floating voices that travel between the living and the dead.
Miss Clarke, an independent film maker who has experimented with video since
1969, used computer animation to extend the resonances of the language into
rippling visual echoes that enhance the meaning of the words while the image of
the actor's face is continually distorted and fragmented.

''Not only is the monologue dramatic and beautifully written and acted, it is
also musical and kinetic,'' Miss Clarke explained last week. ''Unfortunately, if
you just filmed it and put it on TV as it is, most people would get tired of
seeing someone sitting there for 20 minutes and turn it off. The video
technology enhances the content and makes it more accessible by making you see
what you are hearing and feeling.''

Along with ''Tongues,'' Dan Reeves's ''Smothering Dreams'' is one of the
cornerstones of the series. An autobiographical meditation on the Vietnam War by
a former combat marine, the piece weaves together film clips from Government
archives, reenacted combat scenes and childhood memories with a score that is a
mosaic of words, music and synthesized sound.

Like most of the work being shown, both ''Tongues'' and ''Smothering Dreams''
had already been completed when ''Alive From Off Center'' was in the planning
stages. The third longer original piece, produced especially for the series and
to be shown on the seventh show, is ''A Personal History of the American
Theater,'' in which the actor-monologuist Spalding Gray recounts his absurd and
frequently hilarious experiences as an actor in the performance vanguard of New
York in the late 1960's.

''Alive From Off Center,'' a co-production of KTCA-TV in Minneapolis-St. Paul
and the Walker Art Center, was compiled by Melinda Ward, the center's film and
video curator. Miss Ward had been collaborating with KTCA, the local PBS
affiliate, in the presentation of experimental dance and performance pieces and
had tried to interest PBS in giving the work national exposure, but there was no
organized forum to present it. At the suggestion of Catherine Wyler, the
director of cultural and children's programming for PBS, Miss Ward dreamed up
''Alive From Off Center,'' and over a period of two years, she and her
co-producers raised $591,000 to create the series, beginning with a grant from
the National Endowment for the Arts.

Though the budget only permitted Miss Ward to produce one new work - the
Spalding Gray piece - instead of the three she had hoped to do, the backlog of
existing work that had only been shown in galleries and video exhibitions
provided a rich font of material. The final choices were selected by Miss Ward
and her staff after evaluating hundreds of hours of submissions.

''The first criterion was that the work had to be good broadcast television,''
Miss Ward emphasized. ''There might have been a piece by an important
choreographer or theater director, but if it didn't stand on its own, we
couldn't use it.''

Conceptually, the series shaped itself. ''Most of the artists belong to the
generation that grew up with rock-and-roll and with television, and for many of
them there doesn't seem to be an enormous gap between 'high' and popular
culture,'' Miss Ward said.

The target audience for ''Alive From Off Center'' is the ''baby-boom
generation'' - viewers in their 20's to early 40's - that PBS hasn't courted as
assiduously as it might.

''When I came to public television four years ago, I asked my staff to do a
survey of what we'd had in the previous three years that could be considered
surprising in the way of performance, and there was very little,'' said PBS's
Miss Wyler. ''At the same time all kinds of strange and fascinating programs
began to dribble in, but they needed a context in order to make sense. Our
prime-time demographics tend toward older people, and we're always looking for
opportunities to reach younger people. This series will fill that gap.'' In
bringing contemporary performance art to mainstream television, Miss Ward said
she was determined that avant-garde not be presented in ponderous trappings of
''educational'' programming. As host, the producers chose Susan Stamberg, the
broadcast journalist and co-host of the National Public Radio series ''All
Things Considered.'' Miss Stamberg's opening lines - ''I'm not going to Alastair
Cooke you through this series'' - help to set a non-academic tone.

''I think television works best at the extremes of the medium,'' Miss Ward said.
''Many of the pieces involve talking heads, in which you have one person -
Joseph Chaikin or Spalding Gray - making intimate contact with an audience. At
the other extreme, you have artists, like Nam June Paik, who use high-tech video
technology, rapid cutting and computer animation. MTV deserves a little credit
for preparing audiences for this work. You usually can't get a linear story out
of an MTV video clip - the content is based more on a feeling and a style. Today
the channel-switching phenomenon allows everyone to create his own narrative,
and it's usually quite disjunctive. These are techniques that the avant-garde
has been using for decades, and suddenly they're in the hands of the audience.''

Because of the overwhelming enthusiasm of PBS's affiliate stations, ''Alive From
Off Center'' is already considered by PBS to be a success, and a second season
is in the works.

''Measuring the success of a program on PBS is not the same as on a commercial
network,'' Miss Wyler explained. ''Ratings do matter, but station enthusiasm and
viewer enthusiasm are more important. We like to know we are satisfying a
devoted segment of the public.''

For the artists who contributed to the series, ''Alive From Off Center''
represents an important turning point in the relationship between video art and
television.

''I think that after many years it's finally appropriate to label what used to
be called video art, television art,'' said John Sanborn. ''It's the difference
between commenting on culture and actually making culture. For years, I've been
doing this kind of video work and feeling frustrated by having mainstream TV
people tell me I didn't know what I was doing or that I didn't understand
television. This series says that television has no rules and no boundaries,
that there's another kind of television that could be just as viable as
everything else we've ever seen.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ann Magnuson and Christain Marclay

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              429 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LONG ROAD BACK

BYLINE: By KERRY GRUSON;Kerry Gruson is a news assistant in the Miami bureau of
The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3846 words


I WAS STRANGLED IN Hawaii in late March, 1974, on my way to Vietnam. My
assailant was a former Green Beret I was interviewing in my hotel room. He left
me for dead.

I survived, but I am disabled. I use a wheelchair or walker to get around
slowly, my voice is unnaturally soft, my hands shake and I need a battery of
medicines to enable my body to function. That accidental encounter with a crazed
Vietnam veteran - he was found mentally incompetent to stand trial -has, in my
mind, left us both victims of the war.

I was 26 years old when it happened and still convinced that, with good will and
a little hard work, anything was possible. After all, we had driven President
Lyndon Johnson out of office. Although the United States had withdrawn its
troops from Southeast Asia and most journalists had gone home, I felt strongly
we were still responsible for the continuing war. Armed with an introductory
letter from the editor of The Boston Globe and assurances from five other big
city newspapers that they would regularly print my articles, I said a difficult
goodbye to the man I lived with, quit my job on the weekly newspaper The Boston
Phoenix, got all my shots along with an entry visa to South Vietnam and headed
West.

I don't remember meeting my attacker, I don't remember the attack and I don't
remember stumbling out of my Waikiki hotel room, which is initially what saved
my life. Later, my mother, who is also a journalist, pieced together some of the
details of what I have come to refer to as my ''accident.'' She said a policeman
saw me weaving down the boulevard, stumbling from one tree to the next. Thinking
I was on a bad drug trip, he took me to Honolulu's main hospital.

The admitting doctor noticed the finger marks around my neck. But there was
little he could do. Stran-gulation does more than cut off breathing. The
pressure on the blood vessels in the neck shuts off the brain's supply of blood
and, therefore, of oxygen. Most victims of strangulation who survive the initial
assault at first seem to recover, only to relapse or die about a week later as
the bruised brain deteriorates.

Five days after the attack, my parents decided to take me back to New York. They
had learned that one of the world's top neurologists, Dr. Fred Plum, was
practicing at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center. My father now says he
did not realize how dangerously close to death I was. My mother did. At one
point in those early days her maternal instincts told her I was slipping away.
Dr. Plum tried to comfort her, but he knew she was right. There was nothing he
could do.  In my family, I am known for my stubbornness, and it worked for me
then. I quite simply refused to give up. Soon I was over the hump, but no one
knew the extent of the brain damage I had sustained. While I was never comatose,
in those early days I failed simple neurological tests. My short-term memory was
poor - every time my parents came into my room I was surprised to see them, even
if they had been gone only for five minutes.

I ''woke up'' on April 2. That was the date on the hospital menu. I figured out
where I was by reading the laundry mark on the linen. At least I could think.
Dr. Plum had heard of only a few other cases where a strangulation victim had
survived with intellect intact. At first, I could barely lift my head; my arms
flapped uncontrollably in giant circles; the handles of my eating utensils had
to be thickly padded, because clenching to make a fist felt like grabbing white
hot coals. Most days, the pain in the over-tense muscles at the base of my neck
could only be endured with the help of synthetic morphine and valium.

Dr. Plum's diagnosis was traumatic Parkinsonism, which means that, in my case,
injury at the base of the cerebral hemisphere brought on the symptoms of
Parkinson's disease. (Usually, the disease results from gradual degeneration and
change in the tissues of the basal ganglia.) Since the accident, I have married
and divorced. I have translated from the French a book about the mammals of the
French and Australian Antarctic. I moved to Miami to avoid the muscle-stiffening
cold of the North and worked for The Miami News. For the last seven years, I
have been with The New York Times in Miami. I write for the paper, but I don't
have the pressures or the responsibilities of a full-fledged reporter.

My friends talk to me of my ''courage.'' This puzzles me; I have never felt very
courageous. In fact, a year ago, I was feeling negative about myself. So, early
last summer I decided to try, once again, to improve my physical abilities. A
stay at the Rusk Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine in New York City in 1976
had helped tremendously, but the effects had worn off. My father suggested I try
the Burke Rehabilitation Center in White Plains, N.Y., a hospital allied to
Cornell Medical Center. I agreed.

I went to Burke expecting nothing. I dared not hope, lest I be disappointed. I
know this is a dangerous state of mind, because hopelessness and despair are
hardly motivating forces. Right after the accident, my choice was clear-cut: I
would live or die. Now that I was out merely to improve the quality of my life
to some unknown degree, a subtler mix of grit and conscious determination was
called for.

BURKE IS SET in 60 acres of well-cropped lawns and carefully tended woods. The
main building houses 150 inpatients and contains the gyms, pool, dining rooms
and physicians' offices. There are nine other buildings, all neo-Georgian, some
of them arranged around a central quadrangle. The place looks more like a small
college campus than a hospital.

As I wheeled to my room past a group of patients gathered in the second-floor
lobby, I felt I had been abandoned in a netherworld populated by freaks:
slack-jawed people staring wide-eyed into nothingness or contorted like
corkscrews; people lying prone on wheeled stretchers or wearing strange helmets
that made them look like hockey goalies. For some reason, the many amputees I
saw seemed less threatening, perhaps because their loss was so obviously simply
physical.

The dichotomy between the ''outside real world'' and the ''inside hospital
world'' proved to be enormous. On the ''inside,'' the few ambulatory people I
saw were staff members or visitors. The patients were required to use
wheelchairs even if they were ambulatory. The chair, in my mind, quickly became
a symbol of dependency, almost a badge of shame. I remember that the first time
I passed a good-looking ''upright'' - a staff member walking by - I looked away,
as if, by not looking, I would be invisible to him.

Every day at Burke I worked four-and-a-half hours. That doesn't sound very
taxing. However, it was all intense, one-on-one activity requiring complete
concentration. My first ''program'' (Burke-speak for a therapy session) was
''O.T.'' (Burke-speak for occupational therapy) at l0 A.M. At 10:45, I proceeded
to ''P.T.'' (physical therapy), then, at noon, went back down the hall to speech
therapy for half an hour. After lunch, I was assisted into a bathing suit, which
I wore under my clothes for my individual P.T. session with Robyn Gentry, the
therapist, before ''hydro,'' my hour and a quarter in the blood-warm pool.

Dinner was served at the ridiculously early hour of 5:30. I was always famished.
Then, until Burke's switchboard closed at 9 P.M., I would stay in my room
anchored to the phone. It was my lifeline to the real world outside.

A T THE TWO PREVI-ous hospitals where I have done time, I wasted much effort in
occupational therapy on such ''essentials'' as making puppets and washcloths.
Burke's orientation is much more practical. My therapist for this activity,
Ronnie Schein, recognized that most of my energy should be directed toward
gaining greater mobility and independence. So I worked on transferring myself
from my wheelchair to a regular armchair, to an exercise mat and into the front
passenger seat of the mock-up of a car. The execution of these seemingly simple
movements is in practice quite complicated. My memory works best if I write
things down, so I dissected the motions needed and wrote myself a short
guidebook to basic mobility: ''First, slide forward to the edge of the chair.
Second, position feet on a diagonal, heading in the direction you want to end
up. Third, place the hand nearest the mat/chair/bed on it. Fourth, push off with
the head well forward over the feet. The head is the single heaviest body
appendage, so the rest easily follows its lead. Fifth, bend deep at the waist,
then bend the knees, and lastly, lower down slowly until seat meets seat.''

Later, I tackled sitting up from a horizontal position, standing up, sitting
down, moving toward and operating a dishwasher, sink and stove, and, most
complex of all, walking. Ronnie is a seasoned veteran, an authoritarian. I have
an instinctive aversion to being bossed, so I found it very hard to work with
her. Uncharacteristically, I gave way to pain instead of working through it. She
thought me a sissy.

F OR PHYSICAL THER-apy, each wing of the hospital's main building has its own
gym to cope with the different needs of the various patient populations. My
wing, 2-West, had a concentration of young people. Most suffered from
spinal-cord injuries or brain damage as a result of car, motorcycle, football or
diving accidents. While I was there, we also had one gunshot victim, two people
recently operated on for tumors and two patients with brain embolisms suffered
on the operating table during surgery for some other condition.

Our gym was ringed with mats on knee-high platforms of varying sizes. Two tilt
tables were parked in one corner. Strapped to one of these, I spent about an
hour a day stretching my overtight Achilles tendons. After that, I took my major
walk.

After gym, I hopped onto my Amigo, my snappy electric wheelchair, and tooled
along to speech therapy. At each major intersection in the hallways, overhead
mirrors reflected oncoming traffic to prevent head-on collisions. Some of the
patients, especially the young men, built up a considerable head of steam and
cruised down those hallways at a terrific clip. Chuck, a strapping young man in
his early 20's whose neck had been broken in an accident, had developed a subtle
sense of humor about his chair. He was riding the elevator one evening pushing
the empty chair as per regulations when a visitor asked him if he was a patient.
''No,'' Chuck said, pointing to the chair, ''but he is.''

Kate Halberson, my speech therapist, tested to see if I had enough breath for
speech. I had to come up with a sustained sound loud enough to turn on a
voice-activated light bulb. Then she had me read aloud. She diagnosed my
problem: my sentences end on an up note. I sound as if I am perpetually asking
questions, never quite sure of myself. Because I do a lot of my work on the
phone, I need to sound authoritative and in control.

Kate asked me whether I would mind sharing my session with another patient, whom
I'll call Doris N. (Other patients are referred to by their real names, but, to
protect their privacy, not by surname.) Our symptoms were similar. The therapist
felt we would egg each other on. She told me that Doris showed little interest
in working on her voice. I was flattered by the notion that I might be able to
help.

Doris is in her late 20's. She is involved in litigation, because she claims her
brain damage was caused by a physician's error. I spent a number of evenings
with her. She has a quick sense of humor, which occasionally surfaced through
her deep depression. Her boyfriend and her parents were her only visitors. But
she had one faithful attendant, a fellow patient, Dennis B. Riding a motorcycle,
Dennis had had a potentially disastrous encounter with a bus; his helmet saved
his life. One of his legs was badly broken. A large, heavy 19-year-old with tiny
eyes close-set in a big round face, he was almost illiterate. But he made up for
what he lacked in the brain department by his generous heart. Self-appointed
guardian angel and faithful retainer, he would spend his evenings at Doris's
bedside whenever she was alone, holding a straw to her lips so that she could
drink and handing her our standard-issue graham crackers.

Another fellow patient, Lissbeth L., in her early 30's, had multiple sclerosis.
She was at Burke to check out her medication. We became friends at a Wednesday
evening poetry workshop. She was an eye-catching redhead with curls, short and
slightly plump.

One evening we watched an NBC report on the dating/ mating scene. The network's
proposition was that women of the 1980's are tired of the sexual merry-go-round
of the 1960's and 1970's and want a more settled life. Men, however, spoiled by
the casual, no-strings-attached sex of the last two decades, are not interested
in longer-term responsibilities. The documentary focused on a Colorado bar
filled with gorgeous, leggy blonde junior executives who complained they could
not find permanent partners. Lissbeth and I looked at each other and wondered,
if these women were having such trouble, what hope was there for us? What man
would choose a woman with an obvious physical disability? Forget about walking
hand-in-hand down the beach into the sunset, Lissbeth said. What about a woman
for whom even a short walk to the bathroom is a shaky drama?

A T HYDRO IN THE afternoon, only the most sure-footed of us were encouraged to
use the steps into the pool. The rest used the sling to get into the water. Six
large metal hooks snapped into the hammock-like sling's eyelets. We were then
hoisted up over the edge of the pool and let down by the therapist to whatever
depth felt comfortable.

The water supported me while Anne-Marie Sirois, the therapist, used all her
considerable strength to bend, twist and move me. As a result, my pelvis, which
had been locked solid since the accident, actually began to move.

There were four or five of us regulars in the pool at the same time daily. It
was one of the few places where patients from different floors could meet and
hydro became a social event. It was there that I met one of my best friends at
Burke, Marshall D. Marshall has the paralytic disease called Guillain-Barre
syndrome. An unreconstructed flirt and a good listener in his early 30's, he had
soul sisters on just about every ward. We became good friends, despite the
mutually acknowledged sexual tensions. He is one of the sweetest men I have
known. A systems analyst for the International Business Machines Corporation in
Poughkeepsie, he is assertively married to his high-school sweetheart. She came
to visit every weekend with their two children.

He is tall, 6 feet 4, although the only place I saw him stand up was in the pool
supported by two therapists and chest-high water. Despite his otherwise
disease-racked gaunt body, his face is pleasantly round and open.

We found we had developed a similar method for dealing with pain. You
externalize it; or, rather, you distance yourself from it and from the body
which is experiencing the pain. In a sense, you become a listener, a remote,
albeit interested, observer rather than a participant in your suffering. You
almost literally levitate over the body, studying it.

Marshall D. and I had also developed great reserves of patience. This, we found,
was a neccessary tool for survival. And yet, we both realized that patience is
not enough. A bit of the opposite, in fact, is necessary. It takes a good deal
of impatience - of dissatisfaction with the status quo - to fuel the internal
machinery for its fight back to health. We feared our progress was slowed by too
much patience. It was anger and stubbornness that kept me alive in those crucial
first weeks after the strangulation. However, once the immediate crisis passed,
that unfocused anger became terribly draining.

I N MY EXPERIENCE, doctors rarely consult with patients before making a
decision. Dr. Bruce Volpe, my neurologist at Burke, a very bright, personable
and erudite man, cut down on my Artane the very first day, before we had done
much more than shake hands. Artane is a muscle relaxant for Parkinsonism
patients and was one of my long-standing drugs. I was furious. I told him in the
future I would not go along with any changes in my medication until we had had a
chance to discuss it.

Although he probably wouldn't agree with me, Dr. Volpe's problem, I believe, is
that he has absolutely no bedside manner. He doesn't know how to encourage
patients to open up to him. Nevertheless, after that shaky beginning, Dr. Volpe
and I began experimenting with my drugs. His idea was to regulate the dosage to
give me the most muscle flexibility without triggering the inevitable side
effects.

The key medication for me has always been Sinemet, an anti-Parkinsonism drug. My
brain is no longer capable of manufacturing the vital neurotransmitter called
dopamine, a protein that helps the brain tell the nerves and muscles what to do.
Sinemet contains synthetic dopamine and helps make up for my deficiency.

Dr. Volpe, in consultation with my original physician, Dr. Plum, began slowly to
increase my Sinemet intake to the point where it was one-and-a-half times the
original dosage. The effects were predictable. Each increase at first left me
feeling fat of lip, dry of mouth and thick of tongue. This, added to the problem
with my voice, made communication difficult. At the same time, Dr. Volpe weaned
me from two other relaxant drugs I was taking, Meprobamate and Haldol, both of
which are psychoactive. I developed severe shakes as a result of cutting down my
intake of Meprobamate. I first believed that these tremors were somehow my
fault, but when he learned of them, Dr. Volpe immediately prescribed
phenobarbitol. Taken over time, it can be habit forming, but for the short term
it countered the withdrawal effects of Meprobamate.

To replace the psychotropic relaxants, I gradually built up a tolerance to
Lioresal, which works on the sub-cortex and relaxes the nerves that travel
through the spinal column. In addition, my Artane intake was slowly raised from
the 16 milligrams per day I had been taking before entering Burke to 24 by the
time I left.

I MET A TRULY EX-traordinary person:

Connie P. She is a dwarf, as is her sister. They are both afflicted with a
hereditary disease which gradually brings about total paralysis. No one else in
their family has it, however, and they can find no record of a similarly
afflicted ancestor.

Connie, in her early 30's, is an art therapist, working mainly with emotionally
and physically handicapped children. She says her deformities do not matter with
the children, who are delighted that she is their size.

I was stunned by the power of Connie's drawings. One of them depicted a beached
whale of a woman, a stranded nude with a tiny wheelchair back in the distance.
Another showed a barroom scene with knots of people clustered about. In the
center, a small scrunched-up person in a wheelchair sat alone, a drink just out
of reach on the bar. Connie signed her drawing for me, clenching a ball-point
pen between her teeth. She was no longer able to hold a brush or pen in her
hand.

Another of my friends at Burke was equally determined. This was Piers C., a
tall, slightly balding executive with the General Telephone and Electronics
Corporation, who had crashed his car on an icy street. He credits his son, Piers
Jr., with saving his life. Young Piers, a Boy Scout, had recently learned
emergency procedures so he knew exactly what to do at the scene of the accident.
Because his father was unable to move his limbs, the boy suspected there was a
high likelihood of spinal-column injury, so he kept his father from being moved
even an inch and got professional help quickly.

I shared the fruits of my labor with Piers Sr. when I was practicing making
peanut butter and jam sandwiches. The trick is to think ahead to eliminate
repeat visits to the refrigerator and the cupboard, and to have a rolling table
or a lap board available. Piers, who had recovered the use of his limbs but
lacked all sensation in them, had to watch his hand seize the sandwich in order
to know he had gripped it. If he looked away, he could drop it without
realizing. He chafed at the hospital's restrictions and requirements. Abandoning
the obligatory wheel-chair, he walked everywhere. When he fell in his room, he
did not report the incident. He was afraid the staff would curtail his walking
privileges.

E ARLY IN MY STAY, I amazed myself by taking two steps completely on my own. No
canes. No walker. No braces. I was exhilarated and spent the evening on the
phone broadcasting the good news. But I doubted my capability to sustain the
momentum.

However, near the end of my stay, using the walker, I walked six times the
length of the gym. That is 300 feet, 100 yards, a football field!

My attitude toward Burke changed gradually. By the end of my stay, I was making
no effort to see friends from the outside. I no longer ate any of my meals alone
in my room. Instead, I would join the gang at the nursing station where a number
of patients congregated to eat. I began waking up at 5:30 in the morning in
order to write. It was uncharacteristically early for me - I am a late-night
person. My window faced west, so I could not see the sky as the sun rose, but
soon there was sunlight warming the brickwork outside with a special glow.

On my last day, I dunked Marshall D. in the pool after a 15-minute battle royal
which Anne-Marie allowed to proceed uninterrupted. No other devilish deed
occured to me as a fitting farewell gesture, short of rearranging the controls
on his environmental control unit. But that could have been dangerous.

Since leaving Burke, I am a great deal more limber on my best days. Sometimes I
fear I have regressed, because I no longer concentrate on therapy all day.
Walking is still tricky. Bending my knees is difficult, and, as a result, I tend
to walk stiff-legged, like a robot, swinging my legs from my hips. My voice,
always soft, is no better. On occasion it almost disappears, especially when I
am tired, tense or competing with other sounds. But I am off all psychoactive
medication. This leaves me with more energy and enthusiasm for life. And I have
just begun to accept the fact that my physical disability does not make me less
of a person.

One of the advantages of staying in any hospital is that there are always others
a lot worse off than you are. Putting yourself down becomes a rather silly
excercise. I would like to think I have gained some measure of self-confidence.
Sometimes I still feel that fate has dealt me an undeserved raw deal. But then I
think that, in a way, I am lucky that so many of my problems are diagnosed and
known and thus capable of being solved. I know, too, that if, by some miracle, I
suddenly regained all my abilities, my life would still not be gloriously free
of trouble.

This month I got the bill for my 13-week stay at Burke: $41,407.04. I consider
it money well spent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Derry Gruson (Murry Sill)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              430 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BIG FISH IN A SMALL QUAGMIRE

BYLINE: By Kevin Buckley; Kevin Buckley reported from Vietnam for Newsweek from
1968 to 1972.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 803 words


ONCE A WARRIOR KING Memories of an Officer in Vietnam. By David Donovan. 323 pp.
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company. $15.95.

''WE survived by being suspicious, a trait I have found difficult to set
aside,'' says the author of this engrossing memoir, who more often than not
sounds like the embodiment of the Platonic ideal for the American adviser in
Vietnam. Why then did he use a pseudonym to tell his story? My own early
wariness dissolved as ''Mr. Donovan'' gradually revealed himself as a very good
soldier and a very complicated and perceptive individual. Now identified as a
university professor of biological science with a wife and two children, he says
writing ''Once a Warrior King'' was a ''catharsis'' for him. It is
understandable that maintaining anonymity made it easier to look into himself
and his experiences as searchingly as he has. The result casts light far beyond
the small corner of the Mekong Delta the author so meticulously describes.

His memoir, mixing anecdote, journalistic exposition and admittedly
reconstructed conversations, provides valuable documentation on a relatively
obscure part of the American military effort - it describes how the war really
worked on the front line of ''Vietnamization,'' the training of local militia.
Along the way, while coming to grips with hilariously provocative young
Vietnamese women, a rabidly anti-American village priest and other complexities
of rural Vietnamese society, this ''very average American'' irresistibly evokes
the memory of Alden Pyle, the innocent and destructive title figure of ''The
Quiet American'' by Graham Greene. But Mr. Donovan, though just as much a victim
of grandiose fantasies as Pyle, seems eventually to have learned important
lessons from his experiences. ''Perhaps I was just a high-toned American, but in
my dreams I was a cavalier for freedom. I was a warrior for Camelot. Even more
than that. I was a Warrior King,'' he writes. Toward the end of his tour, he
takes a different tone. ''I knew that warrior kings really only live in fantasy
lands, and only there can they always deliver their people's needs. My failings
always proved that I wasn't a warrior king at all. I was just another soldier
who fell far short of perfection.''

''I had an amazing amount of power,'' he says, describing his job as a district
senior adviser and commander of four other Americans on a Mobile Advisory Team
during 1969 and early 1970. ''I was a twenty-three-year-old idealistic young
army officer, left essentially alone to fight my own little war with my own
little team of companions. I was determined and eager to do my best. Given free
rein by a do-nothing but compliant [Vietnamese] district chief, I began to
accept a growing list of duties and responsibilities. Military operations were
performed as I directed; people were imprisoned or freed at my word; food and
clothing from various agencies were distributed where I said, when I said;
aircraft bombed or strafed at my command; curfews were established according to
my wishes; villages ap-plied to or through me for medical help, school supplies,
building materials, and agricultural development assistance. I could even cause
the summary execution of practically anyone [Vietnamese] in my district. In many
ways I controlled life and death of thousands of the people.''

''I am not the Vietnam Everyman,'' the author insists. Nevertheless, his
reflections on his own use of power raise serious and important questions about
the American experience in Vietnam. One episode, in which he says he realized
''how far outside the bounds of custom and law I had wandered,'' is particularly
provocative. He recounts how two members of his American team narrowly survived
an ambush in which three Vietnamese militiamen were wounded and one killed. They
killed two of the ambushers, one of whom was a woman. ''Her fingers were still
entwined in the shoulder strap of an AK-47 and the rifle's magazine was almost
empty . . . She was an enemy soldier, playing the part in full.'' Six weeks
earlier, Mr. Donovan had taken part in an operation that brought the same woman
in as a Vietcong guerrilla suspect. Then, after saving her from a gang rape and
a brutal interrogation by a Special Forces sergeant, the author himself
brutalized the woman and another prisoner in the same way he had seen his
despised predecessor torment other suspects while trying to get information.
Shocked at his own behavior, Mr. Donovan abruptly released the prisoners,
earning the contempt of his teammates. The woman's eventual death in combat
''made me feel better about shoving my gun barrel into her stomach. . . . But
then a thought occurred that still approaches from time to time and whispers to
me from my dreams: Was she a Viet Cong before we captured her or only
afterward?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              431 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LIMITS OF MANIPULATION

BYLINE: By John Midgley; John Midgley was the Washington correspondent for The
Economist during the Johnson Administration.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 776 words


LYNDON JOHNSON'S DUAL WAR Vietnam and the Press. By Kathleen J. Turner. 358 pp.
Illinois: University of Chicago Press. $25.

THE term ''credibility gap'' is a legacy of President Lyndon Johnson's
Administration. Coined, quite possibly, by soldiers on the ground in Vietnam,
the expression was seized upon by journalists back home during 1965 to express,
as The Washington Post's Murrey Marder put it, ''growing doubt and cynicism
concerning Administration pronouncements.'' Before long, the White House press
office started keeping files on the credibility gap. Those files are now in the
Johnson Library in Austin, Tex., and Kathleen Turner has perused them searching
for the connection between Johnson's Vietnam War policy and his relations with
the American press. To be sure, Johnson did not come to the Presidency with any
towering reputation for frankness or openness. But it took the Vietnam War and
long, weary nights scheming to manipulate the press in order to win public
acceptance of the Administration's actions in Vietnam to generally undermine his
veracity.

In ''Lyndon Johnson's Dual War,'' Miss Turner, an assistant professor of
communication at the University of Notre Dame, argues that it was not neglect of
the press that damaged Johnson's Administration, but the contrary. No leader was
ever more preoccupied than Johnson with conveying his thoughts, motives and
intentions to journalists in terms they would not misunderstand. He believed
that if he succeeded with them, and if they faithfully interpreted his mind to
their readers and listeners and viewers, then the nation would be reasonably
united in its support of what he was trying to do. The strategy did not work.
Johnson ended his Presidency, and went to his grave convinced that the rift that
divided the nation on Vietnam was caused either by his failure to ''speak the
right phrase,'' as he put it, ''in the right way, under the right conditions,''
or by the news media's preference for distortion and dissent.

The truth was different and became, in the end, obvious. Americans did not
perceive the purpose of the war - preventing North Vietnam from subjugating
South Vietnam - as a true national cause. Johnson's attempts to keep everybody
calm by deferring disclosure of his measures of escalation, or by promoting
cheerful versions of the grimy details of the military campaign did not serve to
reassure the country, but sowed confu-sion and division. It would have been
better if he had adjusted his policies to what Americans were willing to
tolerate instead of squandering his authority in attempts to bamboozle them. But
it was as if his brilliantly successful career as a manipulator had blinded him
to the limits of what manipulation could achieve.

Whether the war would have turned out differently if Johnson had been less
occupied with public relations is a forbiddingly recondite question, but it is
not at all hard to see that Lyndon Johnson's Presidency would have turned out
differently. The Tet offensive on Jan. 30, 1968, was no great military disaster
in itself, but it exhausted any remaining disposition Americans had for
accepting anything the Administration said; this was fatal to Johnson, and he
bowed to the fact two months later. The Tet offensive would probably not have
been a mortal blow to his credibility if it had not fallen on ground already
prepared for disbelief. Suppose Johnson had not had to bow out of the 1968
Presidential race; suppose that Averell Harriman had been able to bring his
negotiations to a successful conclusion and Henry Kissinger's hard-line methods
had consequently not been required, that Congress had not been alienated by
Administration policies or the executive branch hamstrung by Congress - as Mr.
Kissinger complained and continues to complain. The most useless speculation is
often the most fascinating. The Johnson Administration, however, was a source of
unlimited journalistic fascination at the time, and no administration has been
nearly as interesting since.

Essential to appreciating Miss Turner's book is the fact that she is a scholar
of communications, not a historian. The many incidental deficiencies in this
book can be irritating and distracting. Already there are histories that treat
the period both in greater depth and with immeasurably more elegance. That Miss
Turner perceived the need for a narrative focused on Johnson's press relations
as a key aspect of his Vietnam policy was, however, a creditable thing, and
people who are scratching their heads, as many still are, over what went wrong
with the Republic in the 1960's will find this book stimulating and of some
utility.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lyndon Johnson with Gen. William Westmoreland in Vietnam
(United Press International)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              432 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 756 words


June 30, 1985 Fiction

* 1 ''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Berkley,
$5.95.) Life in an Ohio hamlet, 1868-1932.

* 2 FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $4.50.) The relationship of a mother
and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.

* 3 THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Bantam, $4.95.) One man's experience in the wars of
the Holy Land.

* 4 THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch. (Fawcett, $4.95.) A wealthy Welsh
family haunted by an ominous heritage.

* 5 LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Ballantine, $4.95.) A fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.

* 6 DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $4.50.) One man copes with a sinister
Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.

* 7 THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $3.95.) A young man from
Brittany sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.

* 8 THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike. (Fawcett, $4.50.) Three witches
wreak havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.

* 9 TENDER IS THE STORM, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $3.95.) A New York heiress's
passionate encounter with an Arizona rancher.

* 10 MISSISSIPPI! by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $3.95.) The ''Wagons West''
series reaches the post-Civil War South and New Orleans.

* 11 THE MODIGLIANI SCANDAL, by Ken Follett. (NAL/Signet, $3.50.) An early work,
first published pseudonymously, about a ''lost masterpiece'' and dirty dealings
in the international art world.

* 12 RAMBO: First Blood Part II, by David Morrell. (Jove, $3.50.) Novelization
of the film about a Vietnam veteran who rescues prisoners of war.

* 13 POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $4.50.) A woman discovers the
truth about her husband after he disappears.

* 14 THE WISHSONG OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $8.95.) The
battle against evil continues; end of a fantasy trilogy.

* 15 THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $4.50.) A lawyer
finds himself caught in a conspiracy to take over the world. Nonfiction General

* 1 THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

* 2 IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.

* 3 SON, by Jack Olsen. (Dell, $4.50.) The case of a young psychotic rapist at
large in Spokane, Wash.

* 4 FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter. (Fawcett Gold Medal, $3.95.)
Memoirs. Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

* 1 PENGUIN DREAMS AND STRANGER THINGS, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown,
$6.95.) Cartoons from the syndicated ''Bloom County'' strip.

* 2 BRIDE OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson. (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $5.95.)
Cartoons.

* 3 RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico. (Rand McNally,
$5.95.) For 1985.

* 4 EAT TO WIN, by Robert Hass. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) A regimen for sports and
fitness activities.

* 5* THE SILVER PALATE GOOD TIMES COOKBOOK, by Julee Rosso and Sheila Lukins
with Sarah Leah Chase. (Workman, $11.95.) Recipes from the owners of a Manhattan
gourmet food shop.

* 6 MORE SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and Friends. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) Words
that should appear in dictionaries, but don't. Illustrated.

* 7 THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.

* 8 SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and Friends. (Collier/ Macmillan, $5.95.) Newly
minted words.

* 9* GROWING UP CATHOLIC, by Mary Jane Frances Cavolina Meara, Jeffrey Allen
Joseph Stone, Maureen Anne Teresa Kelly and Richard Glen Michael Davis
(Doubleday/Dolphin, $4.95.) Humor.

* 10 GARFIELD MAKES IT BIG, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $5.95.) Cartoon humor.

* 11 AAA NORTH AMERICAN ROAD ATLAS 1985. (American Automobile Association/Random
House, $5.95.) Maps and traveling advice. The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores and from representative
wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail outlets, including newsstands, variety
stores, supermarkets and bookstores. These figures are statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. The number of
titles within the two subdivisions of nonfiction can change from week to week,
reflecting changes in book buying. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates
that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are
barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              433 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words


June 30, 1985 Fiction

* 1 1 2 SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
horror set in contemporary America.

* 2 3 6 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) In this forerunner to
the 17-volume Sackett saga, a restless explorer scouts the 17th-century American
wilderness.

* 3 2 6 THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a Maine
orphanage earlier in this century.

* 4 4 15 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States with the
Soviet Union's most advanced nuclear secrets.

* 5 9 15 INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A
traditionalist Jew's quest for identity in glittery contemporary America.

* 6 5 7 HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
Continuing the family saga begun in ''A Woman of Substance.''

* 7 6 23 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.

* 8 8 11 CHAPTERHOUSE: DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $17.95.) A new world
rises from the Old Empire's ashes in this volume of the ''Dune'' series.

* 9 7 18 THINNER, by Richard Bachman. (NAL Books, $12.95.) In this pseudonymous
novel by Stephen King, a lawyer's body mysteriously wastes away.

* 10 10 10 THE CLASS, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $17.95.) What happened to five
members of the class of 1958 after they left Harvard Yard.

* 11* 2 A CATSKILL EAGLE, by Robert B. Parker. (Delacorte, $14.95.) In his 12th
case, the private eye Spenser joins hands with Federal agents to bring down a
powerful scoundrel.

* 12 14 13 THE LONELY SILVER RAIN, by John D. MacDonald. (Knopf, $15.95.) A
yacht's disappearance, a debutante's murder and other puzzles Travis McGee must
solve to save his life.

* 13 1 LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old
West seen larger than life.

* 14 11 8 A CREED FOR THE THIRD MILLENNIUM, by Colleen McCullough. (Harper &
Row, $17.95.) A man and a woman set out to salvage a spiritually exhausted
America in the not-too-distant future.

* 15 12 17 FAMILY ALBUM, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $16.95.) A married
couple with five children cope with the crises of contemporary America.
Nonfiction

* 1 1 35 IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
$19.95.) The rise of the automobile executive from immigrants' son to top jobs
at Ford and Chrysler.

* 2 2 8 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random House,
$19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 3 5 7 CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Memories of more than 50 years of golfing, by the comedian.

* 4 3 13 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
(Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze the successes
and failures of modern women in looking for acceptable men.

* 5 8 18 BREAKING WITH MOSCOW, by Arkady N. Shevchenko. (Knopf, $18.95.) The
autobiography of the highest-ranking Soviet official ever to defect.

* 6 6 44 LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/Holt, $13.95.) Suggestions
for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the fullest.''

* 7 7 5 MOUNTBATTEN, by Philip Ziegler. (Knopf, $24.95.) The authorized
biography of the British diplomat, naval hero and royal counselor.

* 8 4 7 MY MOTHER'S KEEPER, by B. D. Hyman. (Morrow, $16.95.) A portrait of the
actress Bette Davis, by her daughter.

* 9 11 11 THE SOONG DYNASTY, by Sterling Seagrave. (Harper & Row, $22.50.) The
tangled lives of Charlie Soong and his six children, who shaped much of China's
modern history.

* 10 12 4 THE HEART OF THE DRAGON, by Alasdair Clayre. (Houghton Mifflin,
$29.95.) Companion volume to the PBS television series on China.

* 11 23 SON OF THE MORNING STAR, by Evan S. Connell. (North Point, $20.) A
biography of George Armstrong Custer that is also a history of the Plains Indian
wars.

* 12 23 ''THE GOOD WAR,'' by Studs Terkel. (Pantheon, $19.95.) World War II as
remembered by men and women who lived through it.

* 13 13 43 THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The
author of ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' tells of his search for love.

* 14 14 20 THE COURAGE TO CHANGE, by Dennis Wholey. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.)
Conversations with two dozen men and women, many of them celebrities, about
their problems with alcoholism.

* 15 9 136 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $13.50.)
Light verse and drawings by the author. And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of
other recent books of particular interest) THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras.
(Pantheon, $11.95.) In this short and unremittingly intense novel by a leading
French formalist, an emotionally ravaged narrator in her 60's recounts an
adolescent sexual initiation by a rich Chinese lover in Saigon in the 30's. THE
TUNNELS OF CU CHI, by Tom Mangold and John Penycate. (Random House, $19.95.) The
war under the earth in Vietnam, where Vietnamese guerrillas scratched out a huge
complex of tunnels to balance American technological superiority.

I DIDN'T SAY GOODBYE, by Claudine Vegh. (Dutton, $14.95.)

Interviews with French men and women whose parents were sent to German death
camps in World War II; unable to mourn, many of them feel unworthy to live,
trapped in emotional vacuums.

THE SWEET-SHOP OWNER, by Graham Swift. (Washington

Square/Pocket Books, $7.95.) This earlier novel by the author of ''Waterland''
recounts, in one day, the poetry of a small man's life.

ALL FALL DOWN: America's Tragic Encounter With Iran, by Gary

Sick. (Random House, $19.95.) This convincing and balanced insider's story, by a
staff member of the National Security Council during the Carter Administration,
argues that despite Government infighting the Shah's fall, the rise of the
Ayatollah and the hostage crisis were essentially beyond American control.

SECRECY AND DEMOCRACY: The CIA in Transition, by

Stansfield Turner (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) Director of Central Intelligence
from 1977 to 1981, the author contends, candidly and vigorously, for the
compatibility of democracy and secrecy. VITAL LIES, SIMPLE TRUTHS: The
Psychology of Self-Deception, by Daniel Goleman. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A
clear and informative account, laid out on the mind-as-computer analogy, of the
ways the mind protects itself by ignoring unwelcome truths. Advice, How-To and
Miscellaneous

* 1 1 3 DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books,
$14.95.) A regimen designed to lose weight while improving health and increasing
energy.

* 2 2 37 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983.

* 3 3 13 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for
delicious dishes prepared at moderate cost.

* 4 4 30 NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to
buy real estate with little or no money; revised edition of a 1980 book.

* 5 37 WHAT THEY DON'T TEACH YOU AT HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL, by Mark H.
McCormack. (Bantam, $16.95.) Notes and tips of a ''street-smart'' executive. The
listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable. *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              434 of 434 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SIDESWIPES ON A TWO-WAY STREET

BYLINE: By William Taubman;

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1618 words


DETENTE AND CONFRONTATION American-Soviet Relations From Nixon to Reagan. By
Raymond L. Garthoff. 1,147 pp. Washington: The Brookings Institution. Cloth,
$39.95. Paper, $16.95. DURING the 1970's, after more than two decades of
on-again, off-again cold war, the United States and the Soviet Union entered
what both sides heralded as a new era of detente. Yet detente dissolved almost
as quickly as it took shape: each side blamed the other and the Americans argued
among themselves about whether it had failed or never really been tried.

This debate has not been kind to detente. Critics, such as President Reagan,
charge that the so-called relaxation of tensions supposed to take place between
the superpowers was a one-way street favoring the Kremlin. Detente's defenders,
such as Henry Kissinger, admit it turned out badly but blame the domestic
disarray caused by Vietnam and Watergate - not detente. Both President Reagan
and Mr. Kissinger agree that Moscow took advantage of American weakness to
launch a vast military buildup and expand Soviet influence throughout the third
world.

And yet, after several years of what Raymond Garthoff's exhaustive new book
calls confrontation, detente has recently returned to the American agenda,
placed there by Ronald Reagan himself. The Soviet leaders have pushed all along
for such a revival. Earlier this year, when asked whether he agreed with the
Kremlin that detente should be renewed, Mr. Reagan replied, ''Yes, we would
welcome such a thing if it is a two-way street.''

What is detente, anyway? What did it achieve during the 1970's, and why did it
fail? Should the United States try to rebuild it today? How ought any new
version differ from its predecessor? These questions are dealt with by Mr.
Garthoff, now in residence at the Brookings Institution after 30 years of
Government service as an analyst of Soviet military and foreign policy, member
of United States teams that participated in the strategic arms limitation talks,
and American Ambassador to Bulgaria. He makes the provocative argument that
detente in the 1970's was a two-way street, with the United States competing
more aggressively, and the Soviet Union considerably less so, than either
President Reagan or Mr. Kissinger is willing to admit.

''Detente and Confrontation'' is a major undertaking. Its thousand pages
chronicle every significant episode (and some not so significant) in
American-Soviet relations between 1969 and 1984. Even the alleged Soviet combat
brigade in Cuba, a nonissue if there ever was one but one that undermined Jimmy
Carter's efforts to ratify the 1979 strategic arms limitation accords, gets a
chapter of its own. Mr. Garthoff supplements published sources with personal
recollections and revealing interviews with American and Soviet officials. He
serves as a one-man truth squad on the memoirs of public officials, chiding them
all for ignoring professional State Department Soviet experts, and as a result
compromising the course of detente.

The book is a gold mine of information, with all its formidable coverage
organized chronologically except for an introductory treatment of Soviet and
American conceptions of detente, and a concluding chapter on les-William
Taubman, Bertrand Snell Professor of Political Science at Amherst College, is
working on a book on United States-Soviet relations from Dwight Eisenhower to
Lyndon Johnson. sons for the future. But Mr. Garthoff's analysis is nearly
overwhelmed by the flood of details he has been loath to leave out. Moreover, in
his effort to correct what he regards as one-sided assessments of detente, he
has gone too far in the opposite direction.

Mr. Garthoff is at his best depicting double-dealing in Moscow and Washington.
Each solemnly recognized that ''efforts to obtain unilateral advantage at the
expense of the other, directly or indirectly,'' were inconsistent with detente,
yet both sought just such an edge. The Russians certainly did so in Angola,
Ethiopia and Afghanistan. But Mr. Garthoff rightly notes that Moscow exercised
considerable restraint in the early stages of these involvements, as well as in
the October 1973 Middle East War, and suffered serious setbacks (in Egypt, the
Sudan and Somalia) along with successes. He is also right that America was
hardly a patsy in the 1970's. In addition to trying (in Mr. Kissinger's word) to
''expel'' Russia from the Middle East, Washington aligned itself with Moscow's
arch rival, China, helped topple President Salvador Allende of Chile, conspired
against Communists in Portugal and frustrated Soviet designs elsewhere - all the
while proclaiming, even more sanctimoniously than the Russians, that detente's
rules of mutual restraint must be obeyed.

Besides deceiving each other, both sides misled world and domestic opinion by
exaggerating detente's achievements. This is particularly true of President
Richard Nixon, who tried to use the two United States-Soviet summits with
General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev in June 1973 and June 1974 to bolster his
popularity as the Watergate noose tightened around his neck. Nor was Brezhnev
above buttressing his own authority by claiming that those summits were more
successful than in fact they were.

The irony, as Mr. Garthoff points out, is that instead of fooling each other,
each side in the end deceived itself. Moscow half-convinced itself that
Washington would sit still for Soviet expansionism while providing the Russians
with extensive economic assistance. Washington half-thought it could get Moscow
to play by the rules while ignoring them itself. In both cases, the nature of
the political system reinforced the self-deception. In the closed world of
Soviet politics only a foolhardy adviser would complain to the boss that detente
was overrated. In the more open United States, the public first bought the Nixon
Administration's idealized image of detente and then overreacted when those
expectations proved unrealistic.

So far so good with Mr. Garthoff's analysis - even though some of it is implied
rather than stated and much has to be extracted from an almost endless,
insufficiently edited narrative and then reassembled by the reader. But
''Detente and Confrontation'' leaves the erroneous impression that the Russians
were forever reacting defensively to American threats. It loses sight of the
fact that the American menace was often in the eye of Soviet beholders, whose
ideology assumed inevitable enmity between capitalism and communism. Mr.
Garthoff underestimates the extent to which the Soviet regime's need for
domestic legitimacy fuels its expansion abroad, and he downplays the Kremlin's
compulsion, generated partly by struggles within the Politburo, to turn third
world turmoil to its advantage even when it does not create that turmoil.
Brezhnev and company may have been alarmed by American machinations. But a
decade in which the Soviet Union achieved nuclear parity, and the United States
was defeated by North Vietnam, seemed hospitable to the Russians' geopolitical
ambitions - which they pursued with growing boldness and confidence. The case of
Afghanistan illustrates Mr. Garthoff's approach and its limitations. According
to his account, the 1979 Soviet invasion was not Moscow's ''next step'' toward
the Persian Gulf, but rather a desperate attempt to avoid the emergence of a
virulently anti-Soviet regime backed by the Americans on the Soviet Union's
southern doorstep.

Though inconsistent, the American response of imposing punitive sanctions
against the Soviet Union, including an embargo on sending American grain to
Russia and an increase in military and economic aid to Pakistan, convinced the
Russians that the American threat was real. But whatever their initial motives,
their Afghan adventure brought them closer to the Gulf. And however much the
Russians feared American power, Washington was not strong enough to deter the
invasion. While the American response may have confirmed Soviet suspicions, a
nonresponse, far from reassuring the Russians, would have tempted them to
advance even farther at the next opportunity.

Mr. Garthoff is sometimes better at rendering the Soviet view of the world than
at describing the world itself. But the former is no mean achievement. Moscow's
self-image does not necessarily correspond to reality, but it is crucial to know
what that self-image is. Realizing that the Russians feel threatened does not
change the fact that they are often doing the threatening, but it might enable
those who would deter or resist them to do so more effectively. Mr. Garthoff
correctly observes that mutual misperception can make matters worse, and that
relations can be improved by seeing the other side as it sees itself. W HEN it
comes to the future, more accurate perception and improved understanding are
among Mr. Garthoff's prescriptions.

He can imagine rules of superpower restraint (including a ban on military
intervention in third world countries, and on military threats against any
country), but he fears both leaderships would reject such arrangements as either
too tight or too loose. He therefore recommends not a code of conduct, but
rather ''a process of diplomatic consultation and adjustment to prevent rivalry
and competition from leading to uncontrolled confrontation.''

Such an outcome would hardly be the millennium. Yet readers who slog their way
through all the conflicts and misunderstandings recounted by Mr. Garthoff, and
who combine his jaundiced view of American diplomacy with a more somber sense of
the Soviet Union, will emerge even less optimistic. Will we and the Russians get
along any better in the 1980's than the 1970's? So far, alas, that seems
unlikely.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Leonid Brezhnev and Richard Nixon, 1973 (United Press
International)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
