
                               1 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 1, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Expansion in U.S. Continues Into a 59th Month

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1670 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 30


The United States enters its 59th consecutive month of economic growth on
Thursday, marking the third-longest expansion of the economy since monthly
records were first kept in 1854.

The duration of the current expansion has confounded liberal skeptics, surprised
some conservative ideologues and handed Republican candidates a political issue
they can use to advantage in elections for the White House and Congress next
year.

Since the economy began to pull out of the last recession in November 1982, the
nation has created more than 13.5 million jobs. The unemployment rate fell in
July to its lowest level since 1979 as employment surged, even in manufacturing,
and the rate remained at the same level, 5.9 percent, in August.

Median family income, after adjustment for inflation, rose last year for the
fourth consecutive year, according to the Census Bureau. Despite fears about the
revival of inflation, the stock market continues strong. The Congressional
Budget Office estimates that the net worth of American households has increased
39 percent since late 1982, thanks to increases in the value of stocks, homes
and other assets.

And the outlook apparently remains bright. The Government today reported an
increase of six-tenths of 1 percent for August in its index of leading economic
indicators, which predicts trends three to six months in advance. It was the
seventh consecutive rise for the Government's main barometer of economic
activity. [Page D1.] President Reagan says the sustained growth of the economy
results, in large part, from his market-oriented policies: his campaign to
reduce individual income tax rates and Federal regulation while shifting assets
and programs from Government to private industry. Others say increased
Government spending, particularly for the military buildup, has sustained the
growth.

'Get Out of the Way'

Mr. Reagan said Tuesday that he had helped set off a global ''revolution in
economic thinking'' based on this precept: ''The best thing government can do is
get out of the way. And that's just what we've tried to do.''

The extent of the Reagan Administration's role, though, is a matter of debate.
The length of the current expansion also fits into a long-term trend. Geoffrey
H. Moore, director of the Center for International Business Cycle Research at
Columbia University, said that since the 1930's ''the periods of business
expansion have become longer and the periods of recession shorter.''

''Service industries like banking and insurance have become much more important
as a source of employment, and they are less affected by business cycles than
the goods-producing industries like manufacturing,'' he said in an interview.
''Typically the service industries don't carry inventories. You can't stock a
service. So the service industries have to produce rather steadily and
continuously to meet demand.''

Only two economic expansions were longer than the current one, and both occurred
in wartime. One lasted 106 months, from February 1961 to December 1969, driven
in good part by the impact of the Vietnam War. The other ran 80 months through
World War II, from June 1938 to February 1945.

Economists said these factors had contributed to the unusual duration of the
current economic growth:

* A huge infusion of foreign investment has made it possible for American
businesses to get the money they need to expand production even as the
Government borrows more and more to finance its budget deficits.

* Consumer spending has outpaced the growth in personal income and fueled demand
for goods and services. Drawing on their personal savings and taking on debt to
make purchases, consumers pushed the personal saving rate to its lowest level
since 1949.

* Members of the baby boom generation who surged into the labor force in the
1970's have gained experience and have presumably become more productive, said
Gordon W. Green Jr., assistant chief of the population division of the Census
Bureau. In addition, the educational level of American workers continues to
rise, even though employers say it is not high enough.

* The sharp reduction in inflation, from 12.4 percent in 1980 to 1.1 percent
last year, stabilized the economy and restored confidence in its future
performance. And tax cuts that took effect from 1981 to 1984 apparently
stimulated investment, as Mr. Reagan intended.

* The military buildup created jobs, partly offsetting the long-term loss of
jobs in manufacturing. From 1980 to 1985, the number of people holding jobs
related to military contracting grew by 45 percent, to a total of 3.2 million,
according to a study by the Commerce and Labor Departments.

Overall military spending rose from $157.5 billion in the fiscal year 1981 to
$273.4 billion in 1986. Military outlays accounted for 5.3 percent of the gross
national product in 1981 and 6.6 percent in 1986, a slightly higher proportion
than in the last years of the Vietnam War.

Lester C. Thurow, dean of the Sloan School of Management at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, said the growth of the economy tended to confirm the
ideas of John Maynard Keynes. ''In 1982, we gave the economy a tremendous dose
of Keynesian medicine,'' Mr. Thurow said in an interview. ''If you reduce taxes
and increase defense spending, it stimulates demand.''

Impact of Oil Shock

The previous longest peacetime expansion was 58 months, from March 1975 to
January 1980, following a serious recession that had been exacerbated by the oil
crisis.

Some of the same factors that helped fuel the growth of the last five years have
also stirred concern.

C. Fred Bergsten, a Treasury official in the Carter Administration who now
serves as director of the Institute for International Economics, a private
research center here, said, ''We now know the miracle of supply-side economics:
Foreigners supplied many of the goods and most of the money.''

The net inflow of funds from foreign countries totaled $117.4 billion last year
and $303.7 billion in the period from 1982 through 1986, according to the
Commerce Department. Some of the foreign money was lent directly to the
Government through purchases of Treasury securities. Some was invested in
corporate stocks and bonds.

Foreign holdings of such bonds, which reflect borrowing by American corporations
in foreign markets, soared to $142 billion last year, from $32.8 billion in
1984, according to the Commerce Department. Foreign investors' spending to
acquire or establish businesses in the United States reached a record $31.5
billion last year, double the figure for 1984.

Payment of interest and dividends to foreigners will be a major expense in
future years, economists say.

''The combination of the dollar's decline and the massive net U.S. obligations
to foreigners will reduce the overall rate of growth of the American standard of
living,'' said Martin Feldstein, a professor of economics at Harvard who served
as chairman of Mr. Reagan's Council of Economic Advisers from 1982 to 1984. ''In
the future, we as a nation will have to give up some of each year's production
to service our public and private debts to the rest of the world.''

The Federal budget deficit reached a record $220.7 billion in the fiscal year
that ended Sept. 30, 1986. The budget deficit and the United States trade
deficit are closely linked.

Beryl W. Sprinkel, the departing chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers,
said the trade deficit ''reflects the fact that, as a nation, we are spending
more than we are producing and importing the difference.'' Budget deficits, he
said, account for ''a substantial portion of this excess of expenditure over
income.''

In a speech Tuesday at the annual meetings of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, Mr. Reagan acknowledged that the United States'
record trade deficit was ''of justifiable concern.'' But he said that
unemployment in this country had declined dramatically since late 1982, even
though the trade deficit had soared. By contrast, he said, in Japan and West
Germany, which have large trade surpluses, unemployment has increased.

Mr. Reagan sometimes portrays his economic record as a continuous, glittering
success story. But after Washington slammed on the brakes in 1981 to halt
inflation - Administration officials insisted the heavy foot belonged to the
Federal Reserve Board - a recession ensued and the jobless rate reached 10.7
percent by late 1982. Also, economic growth has been much slower in recent years
than in the first year and a half of the expansion.

Prof. Victor Zarnowitz of the University of Chicago, an expert on business
cycles, said, ''From mid-1984 to date, the average annual rate of growth has
been less than the postwar trend of 3.3 percent a year from 1948 to 1975.'' The
economy grew at a rate of 7 percent a year from late 1982 to the middle of 1984.
Since then, growth has averaged less than 3 percent a year.

A Shift in Spending

Mr. Sprinkel acknowledged that economic growth was ''weaker than expected'' in
1985 and 1986. The main reason, he said, is that there was ''a shift in domestic
spending away from domestically produced goods to imports.''

However, Jerry J. Jasinowski, chief economist for the National Association of
Manufacturers, said the sluggish growth of the economy in the last two years
had, in a curious way, prolonged the expansion.

''Slow growth,'' he said, ''has provided more economic stability and has
prevented inflation from accelerating in such a way that the Federal Reserve
would have to tighten monetary policy and bring on the risk of a recession.''

THE FIVE LONGEST EXPANSIONS
Since detailed monthly data became available in 1854.
                                                   Duration
Trough                             Peak         (in months)
Feb. 1961                     Dec. 1969                106
June 1938                     Feb. 1945                 80
Nov. 1982                    Continuing                 59*
March 1975                    Jan. 1980                 58
March 1933                     May 1937                 50


*As of Oct. 1987

(Source: National Bureau of Economic Research; Commerce Department)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs show increase in real economic growth, and decrease in
unemployment rate, since 1982 (Sources: Commerce Department, Labor Department)
(Pg. D4)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 1, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Lack of Pilots Idling New Army Helicopters

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 30


A lack of trained pilots has forced the Army to park dozens of new AH-64 Apache
helicopter gunships, each costing $11.5 million, officials say.

The Army said Tuesday that disruptions in pilot training schedules were not
unusual when a new type of aircraft was introduced. A spokesman also asserted
that the service would ''rather have the machines sitting there waiting than
have excess pilots trained with no aircraft to fly.''

But the spokesman, Maj. Phil Soucy, acknowledged that 20 percent of the Apaches
built for the Army thus far were sitting on the tarmac outside the McDonnell
Douglas Helicopter Company's production plant in Mesa, Ariz.

As of Aug. 31, the Army had 55 of the advanced aircraft parked at the Mesa
facility, Major Soucy said.

Delays in Training Pilots

''Pilot training has fallen behind schedule, thus delaying unit activations and
increasing the number of aircraft remaining at Mesa,'' he said.

The Army, without publicity, has twice revised its original ''fielding plan'' to
activate Apache combat battalions.

It is now activating its fifth Apache battalion, Major Soucy said. Two years
ago, however, when the original fielding plan was developed, ''we had hoped to
have nine battalions activated at this point,'' he continued.

''We're not going to catch up completely until fiscal 1991,'' he said.

Each aviation battalion consists of 18 Apaches.

Major Soucy agreed to discuss the matter Tuesday after a report on the program
was published by Armed Forces Journal, a trade magazine. The magazine criticized
the service for allowing more than $600 million worth of new helicopters ''to
sit baking in the Arizona sun.''

The Apache is a two-seat helicopter gunship that is replacing the Cobra from the
Vietnam War era as the Army's primary attack helicopter. Designed to knock out
enemy tanks, the Apache is powered by two engines and carries Hellfire and Hydra
7 missiles and a 30-millimeter cannon. The Army plans to buy a total of 573
AH-64's.

Major Soucy said Tuesday that the Apaches parked at Mesa were not suffering any
wear or tear in the dry desert heat. He also said the Army had decided from the
beginning of the program that it would use the Arizona plant as a base for 24
Apaches designated for a ''contingency fleet'' to respond to emergencies.

The number parked at Mesa has grown to 55 instead of 24, he said, because pilot
training schedules were disrupted by safety grounding orders and by a problem
encountered more than a year ago, but since corrected, with the simulators used
for training.

The Apache has been grounded three times over the past two years, most recently
in late August. The Army announced Sept. 10 it would start returning the
helicopters to service gradually after replacing a key component of each
copter's tail rotor assembly.

''We've had to drop three classes of pilots now because of the safety
groundings,'' Major Soucy said.

Each class of 18 pilots requires at least 14 weeks for training. Safety
groundings can have a ''ripple effect'' that destroys the best-laid training
plans, Major Soucy said.

He said the service still expected to complete the process of fielding 29 AH-64
battalions by 1992.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 1, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

On His Last Day, It's Hail to the Chef

BYLINE: By MARIAN BURROS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Home Desk

LENGTH: 826 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 30


At 3 o'clock this afternoon, Henry Haller collected his knives and assorted
utensils from the White House kitchen. It was his last day as executive chef.
After preparing meals for five presidents over 21 years, Mr. Haller is retiring
''to make some money,'' as he puts it.

He will promote his White House cookbook, to be published in November, make
appearances on behalf of a French liqueur and pursue a variety of other
lucrative interests, from a cooking show on television to endorsing food
products.

Mr. Haller said he has no regrets -at least not yet. ''I certainly feel a lot
better than when I came here the first time,'' said the Swiss-born chef. ''The
pressure is off me. I feel like I won an Olympic medal for endurance. But after
all, how many times can you do that?''

After so many years on the job, his departure from the White House seemed
especially low key. No banners or balloons, singing telegrams or cakes. His
retirement party will be held at the White House on Monday.

But today, butlers, Secret Service agents and members of the Reagan staff
dropped by the kitchen to say goodbye. Roland Mesnier, the White House pastry
chef, who has worked with Mr. Haller for eight years, said: ''It's the end of a
tradition. It's like closing a door to a very vital part of our business, and it
isn't necessarily for the better.''

Mr. Haller, who is 64 years old, said he would especially miss are ''the
wonderful people I work with.'' Pause. ''Except for a few.'' He would not
elaborate.

He is gladly giving up the long hours and the early mornings, and having to
stand on his feet for endless hours, the typical complaint of most chefs. ''The
biggest challenge has been the physical challenge,'' he said.

The White House kitchen is unlike a restaurant or hotel kitchen. It has a tiny
staff by most standards: three chefs, and a pastry chef. Sometimes there is
nothing to do. More often, however, the chefs juggle three functions in a single
day.

The most hectic time, Mr. Haller recalled, was in 1976, during celebrations for
the Bicentennial. ''We had seven state dinners in six weeks,'' he said, ticking
off the guests of honor, who included Queen Elizabeth.

But then he remembered the Nixons' dinner for former prisoners of war in
Vietnam, an event for 1,300 under a tent on the White House lawn. It rained for
days and the grass turned to mud. And he couldn't leave out President Jimmy
Carter's peace treaty dinner for 1,360, which was arranged in a week to honor
Menachem Begin, the Prime Minister of Israel, and President Anwar el-Sadat of
Egypt.

Mr. Haller does not simply oversee such functions. He chops parsley, cuts up
cheese cubes and cleans up after the men who work for him, among other things.
And his last day of work was business as usual. Except, of course, for the Swiss
television crew that followed him around to record his last hours in the White
House.

And there was yet another visit from Rex, the Reagans' dog, who had actually
stopped in for a snack, not to say goodbye.

His wife, Carol, an American whom he met when both were working at a hotel on
Martha's Vineyard, also came to visit.

Today was spent supervising and cooking for his last official function, a
cocktail reception for 450 Republican Eagles, contributors to the Republican
National Committee. By the midafternoon Mr. Haller and his staff were putting
the finishing touches on beef brochettes, Gruyere cheese crepes, canapes of foie
gras in aspic, smoked salmon and salmon mousse and lump crab, along with a
stunning assortment of miniature French pastries.

A reception for 450 is the bread and butter of White House kitchen work. There
is very little commotion; work proceeds at a stately pace; no voices are raised.
In fact, Mr. Haller had plenty of time to reflect on the changes that have taken
place in the last two decades.

Until President and Mrs. Reagan arrived, most of the changes were gradual. The
food, however, has remained first class. ''We had good food when I came here,
and we have good food now,'' he said.

But Nancy Reagan instituted a system of trial dinners at which she and the
President were served the menu proposed for the next important dinner. Polaroid
pictures are taken of the dishes as Mrs. Reagan approves them, so that the rest
of the staff knows how she wants the food to look. A trial dinner was held
tonight to prepare for a private dinner for the Crown Prince and Princess of
Japan. There will be another on Oct. 18, preceding the Cabinet dinners on Oct.
21 and 22. They will be prepared under the guidance of Jon Hill, a 33-year-old
native of Spokane, Wash., who is Mr. Haller's successor.

The executive chef's last chore was to clean out his room on the third floor of
the White House. After the reception, he packed his remaining personal
belongings, put them in his car and drove home to Potomac, Md.

''No Champagne - no wine,'' he said. ''I don't even know what we're having for
dinner.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of White House chef Henry Haller at work, and petting the
Reagan's dog, Rex (NYT/Paul Hosefros) (Pg. C10)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 1, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV Reviews;
Heston In 'Proud Men'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 489 words


WHILE the new CBS series ''Tour of Duty'' continues tonight to exploit the
Vietnam story with standard war games and buddy stories, a made-for-TV movie on
ABC at 9 P.M. makes a more oblique yet considerably more powerful attack on the
same subject. ''Proud Men'' is set not in Vietnam but in the American Northwest.
Charlton Heston plays Charley McLeod, a weathered, tradition-steeped cattle
rancher who is told he is dying. His wife, Laura (Nan Martin), phones their son,
an increasingly successful photographer in France, to come home. Charley Jr.,
portrayed by Peter Strauss, went AWOL 15 years earlier in Vietnam.

Written by Jeff Andrus, the script is uncomplicated. And the Von Zerneck-Samuels
Production, directed by William Graham, is as attractively lean as an old-style
western. But instead of trying to paper over a grueling experience with
uplifting stories of battlefield heroics, ''Proud Men'' confronts painful
realities that linger in the national psyche. The older Charley still
disapproves of what his son did. He is still ashamed that his son, as he puts
it, ''cut and run.'' And Charley Jr. is just as convinced that ''the thing was
absurd - I swore an oath to my country, not to what was going on over there.''
Father and son are very much alike, two proud men, each convinced that he alone
is right. Mr. Heston and Mr. Strauss bring them to life with strong and
sensitive performances.

''Proud Men'' is strewn with cliches. When, for instance, Charley reveals that
he might cut his son out of his will, Mom cries: ''This land has been in the
McLeod family for three generations.'' But for the most part, the more
predictable moments are handled well. Upon his return, Charley Jr. discovers
that a good many people in the small town are not about to forget. There is much
muttering about ''traitor'' and ''yellow-belly.'' But then there is the sweet
old girlfriend, already divorced, who is willing to believe that Charley Jr.
acted honorably, although she was never in favor of those war protesters who
seemed to be ''cheering for the other side.''

When the older Charley takes a turn for the worse, Charley Jr. sends to Paris
for his French wife and young son. Needless to say, the presence of his
grandson, a cowboy fan, softens the old man considerably, even if the youngster
can't speak English. Taking the boy out on horseback, Charley gives him a hot
dog, assuring him that ''you take a bite out of that and you'll start talking
American.'' In the end, the town toughs, the ones making a big issue about
Charley Jr.'s ''cowardice,'' turn out to be nasty bigots against all
''outsiders.''

''Proud Men'' manages to encompass just about every shade of opinion concerning
the Vietnam experience, and even comes up with a comforting ending as three
generations of the McLeod family ride off together into the sunset. The point,
though, is that the unsettling issues are at least confronted and not buried.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Peter Strauss and Charlton Heston

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At an Open-Minded Meeting In Moscow, Anything Goes

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1047 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Oct. 1


If a war of ideas is developing in the Soviet Union, the front line Wednesday
evening was at the Oktyabr Theater in Moscow.

For four hours a slice of the city's intellectual elite assembled under the
banner of Ogonyok magazine, one of the leading proponents of glasnost, for an
unfettered discussion that brought the audience and a panel of prominent
cultural figures face to face with the freedoms and passions unleashed by
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's effort to increase openness.

Issues that would have been considered improper for public debate a year ago
ricocheted off the walls: the wounded psyches of soldiers returning from
Afghanistan, religious persecution in the Soviet Union, censorship,
homosexuality, the works of Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, even the deeds of Nikita
S. Khrushchev, the dishonored former leader.

Some Heartened, Others Aghast

The hunger for talk and information after decades of stifled discourse seemed
nearly explosive. Combining elements of a Russian poetry reading, a New England
town meeting and a Sunday afternoon of extemporaneous speechmaking at Hyde Park
Corner, the evening left some people heartened, others aghast.

''This is the kind of open atmosphere we must have,'' said Vladimir S.
Chernikov, a musician.

But Yuri D. Kiselev, an engineer, complained, ''More meetings like this and
there will be no standards remaining.''

To Russians already buffeted and bewildered by the changes unfolding under Mr.
Gorbachev, the evening must have seemed both electrifying and disquieting, a
step into a world where familiar and reassuring boundries do not exist. Those
who disapproved could at least take solace in the knowledge that such gatherings
remain very rare.

As if to underline that point, the police today detained two editors of
Glasnost, an independent magazine published by several men who spent time in
prison or labor camp for questioning Government policies, associates reported.

They said the editors, Dmitri Eysner and Andrei Shilkov, were seized by the
police at a Moscow subway stop and taken to a militia post, where they were held
for several hours. Fifty copies of the magazine - typed sheets of paper stapled
together - were confiscated. Mr. Shilkov was warned he faced prosecution for
being in Moscow without a residence permit.

At Wednesday's meeting, dozens of notes scrawled on scraps of paper were passed
from the audience to the panel of prominent writers, artists, actors, musicians
and film directors. Before long the editor of Ogonyok, Vitaly A. Korotich, who
served as host and moderator, was partly hidden behind a small mountain of
notes.

The messages, a traditional Russian method of relaying questions to speakers
that assures the questioner anonymity, captured the flavor and ferment of the
event, and of the current times in Moscow. Addressed to Mr. Korotich and other
speakers, including Andrei Voznesensky, the poet, they came from all political
corners. Here is a sampling:

''Comrade Korotich, does A. Solzhenitsyn have any truthful writings in addition
to 'One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich?' ''

''Thank you and your editorial board for the extremely important and necessary
work of cleansing Soviet society from the Stalinist infection.''

''We have to thank Stalin for the chance to sit here and have this discussion,
you rascals.''

''It's 50 years since the execution of Bukharin. Are there plans to publish his
works?''

''Comrade Korotich, you must be very careful. A group of extremists has sneaked
into the hall and they will try to sling sewage at all your company.''

''Dear comrades, why has the downfall of Jewish culture, the persecution of Jews
in our country, never been raised?''

''Why do you worship Jews so much?''

''The war in Afghanistan is often compared to Vietnam. What do you think of
this?''

''If Gorbachev is ousted, under various pretexts an end will be put to
perestroika. What happens then?'' (''Perestroika'' means ''restructuring.'') Not
all the questions were answered because there were so many, but most of the
subjects raised were touched on.

Although Mr. Korotich expressed fear that critics of Ogonyok might try to
disrupt the gathering, there were no incidents. The magazine has become a
lightning rod for criticism of glasnost and the general liberalization of Soviet
society under Mr. Gorbachev.

At a recent meeting of journalists, the No. 2 Communist Party leader, Yegor K.
Ligachev, reprimanded the magazine for publishing ''sensational'' articles.

Tickets in Demand

Because of the magazine's visibility, tickets to Wednesday's session, the first
of three ''evenings with Ogonyok,'' were swept up as soon as they went on sale.

Dozens of people waited along Kalinin Prospekt outside the theater hoping to buy
unused seats. When a few spare tickets became available, the sellers were nearly
crushed by shoving, shouting buyers.

Inside, the atmopshere was equally intense. Artyom Borovik, a young staff writer
at Ogonyok, described for the audience of about 3,000 people, most of whom
appeared to be young and well educated, the scenes he encountered on a visit to
Afghanistan. ''It is a sad, strange place,'' he said. He told of meeting Afghan
veterans who felt estranged from the Soviet Union and were abandoned by wives
and girlfriends because of wounds or psychological disorientation.

At one point Mr. Voznesensky held up a drawing from someone in the audience that
showed a defaced Star of David. Mr. Voznesensky has become a target of
anti-Semitic attacks because of his defense of Jews and his recent role in
organizing the first major exhibition in the Soviet Union of Chagall paintings,
many of which have Jewish themes.

''If the author was so brave to send me this picture, maybe he is brave enough
to stand up and name himself,'' Mr. Voznesensky said. No one in the audience
moved. Mr. Voznesensky shouted ''Cowards!'' and the hall erupted in applause.

Yuri Nikulin, a well-known circus performer, fielded one question that asked if
Mr. Gorbachev's program would meet the same fate as the changes instigated by
Khrushchev.

''I think things are really changing this time,'' he answered. ''The fact that
someone could ask that question, and I can answer it here, is proof. This could
not have happened five years ago.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vitaly Korotich, Robert Rozhidestvensky and Ilya Glazunov
(Ogonyok/Pavel Krivtsov) (page A6)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies

BYLINE: Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1288 words




'They Hardly Kissed'

Sex and violence.

Samuel Z. (for Zachary) Arkoff is against the former and for the latter.

No, Mr. Arkoff is not running for President. He's a movie producer, with - by
his calculation - more than 500 films to his credit since ''The Day the World
Ended'' first saw the light of a projector in 1954.

For him, Annette Funicello and Frankie Avalon went to the beach in 13 movies,
Michael Landon was a teen-age werewolf and Shelley Winters played Ma Barker in
''Bloody Mama.'' Mr. Arkoff is 69 years old now. He still smokes Churchill-size
Romeo y Julieta cigars, and he is back running A.I.P. This is not the A.I.P.
that stood for American International Pictures, of which he was chairman and
president before a merger in 1979 and a sale in 1980.

This is Arkoff International Pictures, and at an age when many executives are
thinking of retirement, Mr. Arkoff, the company's chairman and president - armed
with Canadian venture capital reported to run into nine figures - is getting
back into production after several years of trafficking in the sale to cable and
video of rights to some of his old movies and making a few new ones with his son
Louis, executive vice president of the new A.I.P.

''The nature of my physical makeup is such that I need excitement,'' Mr. Arkoff
said. ''I need a crisis a day to get my blood flowing.'' Besides, he said before
a good-humored digression into California's community-property laws: ''My wife
of some 40 years told me a long time ago there's no place for me at home in the
daytime some five days a week. Under these circumstances, I have a mental
picture of myself wandering through the park waiting for 8 o'clock to come. What
alternative do I have?''

So, cornered by fate and fueled by lucre, Mr. Arkoff is planning a schedule of
productions to be filmed in Canada, the United States and Mexico, where, he
said, American banks and withered pesos have created an attractive cinematic
climate.

Mr. Arkoff hopes to begin filming ''Ice Riders'' before the end of the year.
It's a story of an ice motorcyclist, traumatized by a friend's death, trying to
make a fresh start in a new town. He's got plans, too, for ''Nightcrawler,''
about a man who returns from the dead to wreak vengeance. And he's thinking
about a sequel to ''I Was a Teen-Age Werewolf,'' perhaps using Michael Landon's
children and some footage from the 1957 original.

Mr. Arkoff said he has had occasion to tell Mr. Landon he is a middle-aged
werewolf now, so the producer is thinking in terms of ''Son of the Teen-Age
Werewolf'' or ''Daughter of the Teen-Age Werewolf'' or maybe ''Family of the
Teen-Age Werewolf.''

''I have never been given to a great deal of sex in pictures,'' Mr. Arkoff,
said, pointing out that in the ''Beach Party'' movies, ''They hardly kissed,''
and adding, ''From a sex point of view, our pictures have been reasonably
mild.'' And these days, he said, ''The various diseases around make this the
most unlikely kind of subject.''

But when it comes to violence, Mr. Arkoff said: ''I think you have to have a
certain measure of violence in pictures. I've always believed that. You can't
make pictures about accountants with their pens. I don't mean to defame
accountants. Some of my best friends might be accountants, but quite honestly,
you need to have action and consequently you do get a certain measure of
violence.''

Mr. Arkoff pointed out that many prominent Hollywood producers, directors and
actors have managed to go on record as opposing violence while splattering their
pictures with it. ''Their rationale,'' Mr. Arkoff said, ''always has been:
'We're not really for violence. We're showing it because we're against it.' ''



Premiere Is a Benefit

Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer, the producers of such box-office hits as
''Top Gun'' and ''Beverly Hills Cop,'' are flying to London today for the
English premiere of their latest moneymaker, ''Beverly Hills Cop II.'' On
Thursday night, they'll be on the receiving line with the Duke and Duchess of
York at the Empire Leicester Square Theater for the film's British premiere, a
benefit for charity.



'Farm of the Year'

Richard Gere has been spending the late summer and early fall in Iowa, starring
in ''Farm of the Year'' under the direction of Gary Sinise of the Chicago-based
theater troupe Steppenwolf. Mr. Gere and Kevin Anderson, who received glowing
reviews for his performance as Matthew Modine's brother in Alan Pakula's film
version of ''Orphans,'' are cast as brothers working a farm that - in their
father's day - was voted farm of the year. ''We have a lot to live up to,'' Mr.
Gere said, of the characters he and Mr. Anderson play. ''I've always wanted to
do something about brothers.''

Mr. Gere, recalling that he once starred in ''Blood Brothers,'' a film about a
family of construction workers, said, ''I wanted to explore that territory some
more.'' ''Farm of the Year,'' besides being about brothers, he said, ''is also
about middle America, which is where my parents and grandparents came from. It's
nice to get both of those in the same project.''

Sometime next year, Mr. Gere said, he hopes to begin work on ''Witness to War,''
based on the life of Dr. Charles Clements, a pilot in the Vietnam War who later
walked from California, where he had been treating migrant workers, to El
Salvador to treat peasants in the combat zone.



A Gish Opening at 91

Lillian Gish's 91st birthday on Oct. 14 will be a special sort of celebration.
That night, the actress's 105th movie - ''The Whales of August'' - will open at
the Coronet to the accompaniment of klieg lights, red carpets and limousines.

The guest list for the event - a charity benefit - includes not only Miss Gish
but also her co-stars, Bette Davis, Ann Sothern and Vincent Price, as well as
Lindsay Anderson, who directed the tale of two elderly sisters (Miss Gish and
Miss Davis) and their friends in the waning days of summer at their girlhood
home on the Maine coast.

The premiere, beginning at 7 P.M., will benefit the March of Dimes Birth Defects
Foundation. Tickets range from $25 to $200 (including a post-screening black-tie
supper party at the Plaza Hotel). Reservations and information: 922-1460 or
682-2289.



Malle's Golden Lion

Louis Malle's new movie, ''Au Revoir les Enfants,'' winner of the Golden Lion,
top prize at the Venice Film Festival, is to open in New York in February.
United States rights to the film - the first the director has made in France in
many years - have been acquired by Orion Classics. The movie deals with an
incident in the director's life - in France in 1944, when he was an 11-year-old
student at a Roman Catholic boarding school where the priests hid three young
Jewish boys from the Gestapo.



Homage to Hollywood

On the night the 25th New York Film Festival opened at Lincoln Center, the
Second Tokyo International Film Festival started in Japan. Among the attractions
at the Japanese event, concluding on Sunday, is a segment called ''Homage to 100
Years of Hollywood.''

Chosen for screening were 26 films: ''Giant,'' ''Going My Way,'' ''Morocco,''
''Stagecoach,'' ''The Ten Commandments'' (silent version), ''My Darling
Clementine,'' ''The Seven Year Itch,'' ''Grand Hotel,'' ''Casablanca,'' ''All
About Eve,'' ''The Covered Wagon,'' ''From Here to Eternity,'' ''A Place in the
Sun,'' ''It Happened One Night,'' ''Roman Holiday,'' ''On the Waterfront,''
''East of Eden,'' ''Ben Hur'' (the 1959 version), ''Some Like It Hot,'' ''Sunset
Boulevard,'' ''On the Town,'' ''An American in Paris,'' ''Gone With the Wind,''
''The Birth of a Nation,'' ''Little Women'' and ''Gentleman's Agreement.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard Gere (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 3, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE REDUCES SENTENCE OF MAN IN BRINK'S CASE

BYLINE: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 474 words


A Federal judge has reduced the prison sentence of a defendant convicted of
hiding a key suspect in the 1981 Brink's armored-car robbery in Rockland County.

The defendant, Edward L. Joseph, was originally sentenced to 12 1/2 years in
prison. But the sentence has now been reduced to 9 years. As a result, Mr.
Joseph, who has been in prison since March 1982, is likely to be released early
next year.

Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy, who conducted the Brink's trial in Federal District
Court in Manhattan, reduced the sentence in a court order signed Wednesday and
made available yesterday. He noted that Mr. Joseph obtained a college degree and
wrote three plays while serving as ''a model prisoner.''

Obtained University Degree

Mr. Joseph's lawyer, William Mogulescu, said he was informed yesterday about the
sentence reduction and immediately sent the news in a telegram to Mr. Joseph in
the Leavenworth Penitentiary in Kansas.

''I'm sure he will be very happy and gratified,'' Mr. Mogulescu said. ''And I'm
certain, that by his actions when he is released from prison, he will justify
the faith Judge Duffy has shown in him.''

''He has an incredible record in prison,'' Mr. Mogulescu said. The lawyer added
that Mr. Joseph studied psychology and sociology in prison, obtaining his degree
from the University of Kansas ''with almost straight A's.''

Mr. Joseph, who is known as Jamal, also organized a theater group in prison and
wrote plays about prison life and a returning Vietnam veteran, the lawyer said.

Eligible for Parole

In the Federal trial of the Brink's case in 1983, Mr. Joseph was acquitted of
participating in the armored-car robbery in which a guard and two police
officers were killed. But he was convicted of being ''an accessory after the
fact'' because he helped hide an associate, Mutulu Shakur, accused of carrying
out the robbery.

Mr. Joseph is already eligible for parole, but parole is unlikely because of the
serious nature of the Brink's case. Federal rules require that he be released
for good behavior after serving about two-thirds of his sentence.

Judge Duffy, who originally sentenced Mr. Joseph to the maximum possible for the
accessory conviction, said in the reduction order that he realized ''there are
some people who will disagree with my decision.''

The judge expressed sharp criticism of people who want sentences to be handled
by ''a mindless robot, automaton or computer.'' He was apparently referring to
new Federal sentencing rules that are due to go into effect on Nov. 1 limiting
the discretion of sentencing judges and abolishing parole.

Judge Duffy assailed what he termed ''turning the prison system into a
warehousing facility.''

''This not only dehumanizes the system,'' he said, ''but also turns persons with
a potential of doing some good into hardened criminals.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Brothers' Fund Is Passing to a New Rockefeller Generation

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 46, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1242 words


The Rockefeller Brothers Fund, one of the country's wealthiest and most
prestigious philanthropies, is passing on its leadership to a younger generation
of the family that plans to bring a fresh outlook to the foundation's work.

In a long-planned transition, David Rockefeller Sr., who is 72 years old, is
stepping down as chairman of the board. He will be succeeded next month by his
son, David Jr., 46, who has emerged as leader of the 23 Rockefellers in the next
generation, who call themselves ''the cousins.''

''The family's voice on the foundation will become a cousins' voice instead of a
brothers' voice,'' the younger Mr. Rockefeller said.

David Rockefeller Sr. and his four brothers created the fund in 1940 as the main
vehicle for their charitable activities. Three of the brothers have died and
another, Laurance, has not been active in the fund since 1985. $245 Million in
Assets During its 47 years, the fund has made grants totaling $341 million. It
now has assets of $245 million and is likely to expand its annual budget of $10
million with new financial support from the younger members.

The fund is expected to venture into new areas, with public education as one
probable choice. It also will give increased attention to international
environmental concerns such as resource depletion and issues of global security,
including arms control, economic development and food scarcity.

As part of the transition, the board will elect a president to succeed William
M. Dietel, a 60-year-old educator who has been the chief administrator for 12
years.

Mr. Dietel said the changes will be both quantitative and qualitative. ''This
isn't a transition that goes simply from David Senior to David Junior, although
that is critically important,'' he said. ''It's taking greater account of the
diversity of interests of the cousins that is the big jump. Where you had five
brothers who were mature men and had very common interests in spite of
personality differences, you now have 23 individuals ranging in age from 19 to
49.

''I think we will see in the 90's the fruition of the experiences of a
generation that came through the 60's with a great deal of idealism. They have
met tough situations and lived through them - like the Vietnam War, the struggle
against racism, and the shift in the attitude toward women in society. That's
going to be reflected when they sit down around the table and talk about what
kind of world they and their children and grandchildren want to live in.''

Nine Seats on the Board

On the fund's 17-member board, 8 positions are filled by nonfamily members and 9
by younger Rockefellers or their spouses. Their generation, including spouses,
counts among its members a United States Senator (John D. Rockefeller 4th,
Democrat of West Virginia), a psychiatrist, several other doctors, a college
dean, lawyers and business executives.

Outside the fund, the younger Rockefellers for years used their personal
fortunes to make independent grants or worked through the smaller Rockefeller
Family Fund, which served as a philanthropic training ground for the fourth and
fifth generations. The family no longer has any role in the bigger Rockefeller
Foundation created in 1913 by John D. Rockefeller Sr., who founded the family
dynasty.

David Rockefeller Jr. thinks the transition will encourage younger Rockefellers
to conduct their philanthropy through the fund.

''I hope, as chairman-elect of the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, to be able to
encourage members of the family, if not others, to build both the annual budget
and the endowment and I'm sure I myself will become an annual contributor,'' he
said.

The fund's role is ''more than handing out checks,'' he said. It also provides
help in management and fund-raising, areas in which the organizations it aids
will need increasing assistance. ''We need to run twice as fast and be twice as
clever to add value to our dollars,'' David Rockefeller Jr. said.

The environment has long been a special interest of Rockefeller philanthropies.
''Should it concern us that Borneo and South America are losing tropical rain
forests or is that a problem for Borneo and South America?'' David Rockefeller
Jr. asked. ''More and more the message is coming across that we are a global
unit and that we are bound together in terms both of our economy and our
security and what threatens any part of the world, threatens all of us.''

The foundation also is likely to become involved in a broad-ranging effort to
improve public education.

''Speaking personally, I'm deeply concerned about the quality of teaching,''
David Rockefeller Jr. said. ''We have to recruit better people, train them
better, pay them better and something needs to be done about the environment of
schools, both physical and financial and frequently pedagogical.'' He added that
greater attention should be given to the very young because ''age 6 is just too
late.''

Eastern European Projects

The foundation also will expand its activities in Eastern Europe that began with
a program to help stranded Polish scholars who were unable to return home after
martial law was imposed in 1982. A foundation official is abroad now, helping to
develop an American-style school of business in Budapest.

Next month, the fund's board will, for the first time, meet abroad. The meeting
in Bangkok, Thailand, will include a symposium that brings together more than
130 recipients of $20,000 annual awards that the fund gives for leadership in
Asia.

The awards, sometimes referred to as the ''Nobel prizes for Asia,'' have gone to
scientists, writers, humanitarians and government leaders. The prizes were
established in 1957 to honor the memory of Ramon Magsaysay, the president of the
Philippines who had just been killed in an airplane crash.

David Rockefeller Sr. recalled during a recent interview the founding of the
prizes. ''We did it spontaneously, on the spot,'' he said. ''It was the way the
Rockefeller Brothers Fund could do things, flexibly.''

That style was characteristic of the fund's early days when decisions were made
by the brothers, sometimes joined by their sister, Abby Rockefeller Mauze. She
and three of the brothers John D. 3d, Nelson A. and Winthrop -have died. The
other brother, Laurance, was chairman of the fund until he reached age 72 in
1982 and became a non-voting member. He ended active involvement with the fund
at age 75.

Soon after David Rockefeller Sr. became chairman five years ago, he asked David
Jr. to lead a committee of family and non-family members in drafting a strategy
that would reflect the interests of the newer generations.

David Jr. acknowledges that before the committee was set up, the younger
Rockefellers had little enthusiasm for the fund, believing that it reflected the
interests of their parents.

But in the last four years grants have aimed toward fulfilling the new strategy
and the attitudes of the cousins toward the fund has warmed, Mr. Dietel and
family members said.

''Now the question has become one of the cousins finding ways to extend their
impact beyond the $10 million annual budget of the fund,'' Mr. Dietel said. ''My
guess is they will find new ways to make the dollars count by going on
organization boards.

''I'm confident their commitment to the vision of this family as a leader in
American philanthropy will drive and lead them to be effective. They will figure
it out, just as their parents did.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David Rockefeller and his son, David Jr. (The New York
Times/Sara Krulwich)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

1943 Draftee Retires

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 38, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 69 words

DATELINE: CAMP PENDLETON, Calif., Oct. 3


Chief Warrant Officer Charles B. Russell, the last marine on active duty to
serve in World War II, retired Friday. The 62-year-old marine, who survived two
South Pacific battles in World War II but was seriously wounded in the Vietnam
War, was given the Marine Corps's meritorious service medal at his retirement
ceremony. He was drafted into the Marines in 1943 and discharged in 1946, but
re-enlisted in 1954.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Rejoins Her U.S. Mother

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 52, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: LEOMINSTER, Mass., Oct. 2


For eight years, Mai Barlow kept the existence of a daughter in Vietnam a secret
from her husband. When she told him, it began a six-year quest that ended with a
chance encounter with the right Vietnamese official at the right time.

That encounter enabled the Barlows to cut through red tape and place Mrs.
Barlow's daughter, 19-year-old Nguyen Thi Ngoc Linh, on a flight to the United
States in August.

''The officials in Vietnam and Bangkok are just upside down trying to figure out
how we got it all done,'' Bernard Barlow said. ''So are we.''

Mrs. Barlow believes the father, an American serviceman, was killed when her
daughter was 4 years old. Mrs. Barlow, who is 35, had not seen her since 1973,
when Mrs. Barlow came to Massachusetts from Vietnam and married Mr. Barlow.

Raised by Grandmother

The child was raised by her grandmother in a village about 30 miles inland from
Nha Trang. Mrs. Barlow kept in touch and sent money, telling her husband the
girl was her sister.

Mrs. Barlow said she waited eight years to tell her husband the truth because
she feared his reaction. When she finally told him, Mr. Barlow was determined to
add the girl to their family.

Mr. Barlow, 35, has a two-inch thick binder of letters and documents he compiled
while seeking permission for Miss Linh to leave Vietnam. The couple sold their
house to raise money for the quest. Fourth-grade schoolmates of their son Bobby
wrote President Reagan asking him to help.

Six years of paper pleas were fruitless.

The Barlows decided to try a more direct approach. In August, they joined the
first tour of Vietnamese-Americans returning to Vietnam. Mrs. Barlow was
reunited with her daughter, who had been working in rice fields, earning 30
cents a day.

Hands Showed Hardship

Mr. Barlow said, ''The first thing I noticed when I held her hand was how rough
and calloused it was.''

Then the couple appealed to government officials, trying to get permission for
her to leave.

''He was persistent,'' said Greg Kane, an organizer of the tour. ''He went to
the local offices. He pushed them to process the paperwork. He hand-carried it
from office to office to office. He was persistent and he was lucky.''

With less than a week left in their trip, they returned to an office in Ho Chi
Minh City, formerly Saigon, where a government worker sympathized but said only
an official in Hanoi, the capital, had authority to grant an exit visa.

As they were leaving, that very official, Tran Quoc Van, strolled into the
office for a surprise inspection.

''The official was curious to know about us, what our thoughts were on Vietnam
and Communism,'' Mr. Barlow said. Mr. Van asked about the changes Mr. Barlow saw
in Vietnam since being stationed there, and if the family could support Miss
Linh.

Good Wishes and Advice

The official granted her a passport, telling her to go to school and to be a
good citizen, Mr. Barlow said.

The girl had not been interviewed by United States authorities, a normal
requirement that can take nearly two years to arrange. Mr. Barlow called the
American Embassy in Bangkok, Thailand, demanding that Miss Linh be allowed to
come to the United States.

On Aug. 6, Miss Linh left Vietnam with 130 other refugees under the Orderly
Departure Program, a United Nations operation to help Asians with American ties
reach the United States. The Federal Bureau of Refugee Affairs estimates there
are 8,000 to 12,000 Amerasians in Vietnam.

The Barlows were on the same flight with Miss Linh, after spending about three
weeks in Vietnam.

''Something like this has never occurred,'' said Mr. Kane, a co-founder of
Vietnam Veterans of America. ''For someone on the first group to get their own
daughter out of Vietnam is unbelievable.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bernard and Mai Barlow with Mrs. Barlow's daughter, Nguyen Thi
Ngoc Linh (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Social Events;
Standard, Ethnic and Novel

BYLINE: By Robert E. Tomasson

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 64, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 865 words



Evening at Maxim's


  Oct. 5 - Since its founding in 1982 the Friends of Lenox Hill Hospital, New
Yorkers in their late 20's and early 30's, have raised funds for the hospital's
blood donor program. Now they are turning their attention to the hospital's
neonatal critical care unit, intent on raising $50,000. To that end a black-tie
dinner-dance and raffle (some 70 prizes, as various as a designer sweater and a
catered party for 25) will be held at Maxim's, 680 Madison Avenue at 61st
Street. Tickets $125; 212-439-2410.

Leading the Way
  Oct. 7 - The Seeing Eye, which since 1929 has provided programs and assistance
for the blind, including the breeding of seeing-eye dogs, is only now getting
around to holding its first benefit dinner-dance. The organization needs money
to expand and improve its guide dog program at its center in Morristown, N.J.
Cocktails at 7:30 at the Pierre start the black-tie evening. Tickets $500;
212-737-1350.

Theater Benefit
  Oct. 7 - New York State will match the funds raised for the renovation of the
47-year-old Hunter College Playhouse at a benefit preview of ''Cabaret'' at the
Imperial Theater and Champagne reception afterward at Sardi's. Tickets $100 (of
which $60 goes to the renovation); 212-772-4074.

To Rehabilitate
  Oct. 8 - The Patricia Neal Rehabilitation Center in Knoxville, Tenn., named
after the Academy Award-winning actress, who has suffered three strokes, is
holding a 10th-year observance. It helps victims of stroke and other head and
spinal cord traumas. The actress and Eddie Albert will be co-hosts at the
presentation of awards to James Brady, the press secretary who was shot in the
assassination attempt on President Reagan, and Barbara Mandrell, the singer.
Cocktails at 6 at the Waldorf-Astoria start the black-tie evening, followed by
dinner, dancing and songs by Maureen McGovern. Tickets $300; 212-722-3207.


  Bachelor Auction
  Oct. 8 - Last year the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation raised $45,000 at a novel
fund-raising event: an auction of bachelors. This year a new twist: women will
also go on the block. Women will have the chance to bid on 31 men in their 20's
to mid-50's with varying degrees of notability, among them Storm Field, the
weatherman for WABC-TV, and Richard Burgi of NBC's ''Another World.'' Men can
bid on five women. The highest bid last year was $4,500 for Michael Sergio, who
parachuted into Shea Stadium during the World Series. High bids will buy
anything from a night on the town to a trip to any Caribbean island of the
bidder's choice (separate rooms). Wine and hors d'oeuvres precede the auction,
which will run from 6 to 11 P.M. at the Marriott Marquis. Tickets $30 from
212-986-8783, or $40 at the door.

Briefly Noted:
  Oct. 8 - Women from 17 states and 7 nations, members of the International
Women's Forum, will hold a dinner benefit starting with cocktails at 6:30 at the
Grand Hyatt Hotel. Helen Hayes and Dr. Mathilde Krim, who are scheduled to be
present, and Corazon C. Aquino will be honored. Marvin Hamlisch will entertain.
Tickets $150; 212-303-0480.
  Oct. 8 - Walter Cronkite will be honored at the 20th anniversary dinner-dance
benefit for the South Street Seaport. The black-tie evening starts with
cocktails at 6:30 at the Ocean Reef Grill in the Fulton Market Building. Tickets
$300; 212-669-9430.
  Oct. 11 - A new Yiddish musical, ''Songs of Paradise,'' will be performed at a
benefit for the Yivo Institute for Jewish Research. Dinner is at 6, with the
performance afterward in the ballroom of the Marriott Marquis. Tickets $100;
212-535-6700.
  Oct. 14 - Casita Maria, a settlement house that operates centers in Spanish
Harlem and the South Bronx, is holding its annual black-tie benefit at the
Pierre, starting with cocktails at 7:30, followed by a dinner-dance. Tickets
$300; 212-581-7370.
  Oct. 14 - Tony Randall will be the master of ceremonies and the Vietnam
Veterans Ensemble Theater Company will present a dramatic improvisation at the
annual benefit for the Lower Eastside Service Center in the delegates dining
room at the United Nations. Tickets $100, $200 and $300; 212-233-5372.

Latino Yacht Cruise
  Oct. 14 - A four-hour cruise around Manhattan aboard the yacht World Cabaret
will pulsate to a Latin beat at the annual benefit for the Latino Playwrights,
founded by Raul Julia and Carla Pinza. In addition to producing works, either
finished or in progress, the group provides college assistance for students
studying creative writing, acting, journalism and music composition. Boarding is
at 5:30 P.M. at Pier 62, 23d Street and the Hudson River; departure at 6. There
will be dinner, dancing and entertainment. Tickets $250; 212-724-7059.

Visiting Nurse Benefit
  Oct. 14 - Since 1893 the Visiting Nurse Service of New York has been attending
to the home health care needs of New Yorkers, and last year nurses made 1.7
million visits to homes in Manhattan, Queens and the Bronx. A benefit, a Fall
Cocktail Dansant, will be held for the service from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M. at the
Fifth Avenue Hotel at Ninth Street. Tickets $40, at the door. Information:
212-787-0644.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Hold the Borscht, Here Comes Mort Sahl

BYLINE: By PETER J. BOYER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1729 words


MORT SAHL, A SATIRIST rooted in the comedy clubs of the urban hip, has worked
the Borscht Belt only once - and that time was a disaster. There was a police
convention in the house, and just as he got rolling on his Richard Nixon jokes,
the officers stood up and started singing ''God Bless America.''

But now, in a way, the Borscht Belt has made amends.

After trying vainly for five years to interest a Broadway producer in his
one-man show, Mr. Sahl finally got a bite from James Nederlander, who booked Mr.
Sahl into his Neil Simon Theater, where ''Mort Sahl on Broadway'' begins preview
performances today and opens next Sunday.

Mr. Sahl is convinced that he owes his Broadway opportunity to Jackie Mason, a
prince of the Catskills whose Tony-winning one-man act, ''The World According to
Me,'' has been such a phenomenal success that it made Mr. Sahl's long-resisted
proposal suddenly seem a reasonable risk. ''The Mason thing, there's no doubt
about it, that that gave them the courage,'' Mr. Sahl says. ''I've been trying
to get this show here for a long time, but Nederlander's guard must have been
down bcause of the Mason success.''

Mr. Mason, too, credits Mr. Sahl's engagement to his own success, and he notes
the irony of the Borscht Belt stand-up having paved the way for the intellectual
jouster. ''It's unbelievably ironic, it's ironic to the point of being
ridiculous,'' Mr. Mason says, inimitably, ''that Mort Sahl, a guy who belongs on
Broadway, couldn't get there, and the guy who doesn't belong on Broadway, me,
has to be a hit to get him there. They'd have never taken a shot on Mort without
me.''

Actually, Mr. Sahl played Broadway 30 years ago, the young, acid-witted saloon
talker about whom Brooks Atkinson of The New York Times wrote, ''Name anything
that is current in intellectual society and Mr. Sahl can make it look either
bogus or hopeless.'' Three decades later, the act (as the man) is essentially
the same; only the perspective has changed. Mr. Sahl used to ask his audience,
''Is there anyone I haven't offended yet?'' Now, he says, in the post-Vietnam,
post-Watergate, post-Iran/contra world, his outrage is shared by the audience.
''The things that used to be known as my aberrations and my obsessions have
happened to all of them now, from Watergate to Iran. We're all inmates here
now.'' So, Mr. Sahl says, an evening with Mort Sahl will now seem less like an
act of social contrition. ''One of the things that has changed is that instead
of being a kind of hard guy to take, but it's good for you - 'He's noble and
he's on the right side and he's virtuous' - they like me a lot of the time. I
never lied to them. They like me now, and so I can get away with a lot more.''

But the man who skewered Ike and Nixon says he isn't in New York to do ''Mort
Sahl's Greatest Hits,'' popular roastings from the past, although he suspects
that's what some of his liberal urban audience might expect of his Broadway
show. ''The liberals are ready to elect Bill Bradley and invade Nicaragua under
his leadership,'' Mr. Sahl says, warming up to a favorite topic, ''so they want
me to make them feel better about it. How do I make them feel better? I talk to
them about Nixon? I won't let them off the hook that way. Or tell them that
Reagan is the Teflon President? I won't do that for them.''

In fact, liberals have become a favorite target of Mr. Sahl's in recent years,
and, as he worked his act in clubs and theaters on the West Coast, he went after
Mr. Reagan ''only because the liberals are so toothless, they can't do anything
about him.''

Speaking of which, there is the current crop of Democrats (''Who are these
guys?''), who have provided such tempting targets as Senator Joseph R. Biden
Jr., he of the rhetorical borrowings. ''I think we've reached the lowest level -
my ghostwriter has stolen from your ghostwriter.''

Mr. Sahl has edged into the movie business in recent years, mostly writing
scripts that studios have liked enough to commission, but not enough to make
into movies. Hollywood, not unexpectedly, will get consideration in his act;
Hollywood is filled with liberal angst. ''I'm working for a producer, and he
says to me, 'I don't know how you remain politically active.' He tells me how
disillusioned he is.

''He says to me, 'I worked for Jack Kennedy, and these kids today love Reagan,
stock certificates and BMWs. I feel so distraught. I don't live in the same
country I was born in.' He's a disenchanted idealist. He says, 'I suppose it's
absurd, we're out of the mainstream, nobody's going to listen to us, our lives
are almost over. All we can do. . .' And I listen, because I want to know what
we can do, 'All we can do,' he says, 'is make as much money as we can.' ''

On the subject of movies: ''You know, I remember when movies were a populist
form. They weren't supposed to mean anything. It was diversion. They were being
written by guys like Ben Hecht, literary Jews who owned books. And now they're
being made by those guys from film school who shoot through each other's feet,
who have no story sense, those guys with the beards and the glasses, and
everybody's analyzing them. Film analysis. That's part of what I'm going to talk
about.''

If liberals and Hollywood will feel the heat, women will, too. ''This is a
generation intimidated by women,'' Mr. Sahl says, ''God, are they afraid of
women. The guys are Cream of Wheat.

''The trick, of course, is to tell the truth and keep it funny. The feminists
are notoriously humorless. I'll tell you a joke that they rarely laugh at, if
you really want to press them. I'll do this opening night and you'll see. 'Our
generation made a lot of mistakes, we didn't realize that women were people,
too. We made a lotta mistakes. We're not as smart as you kids. We did some
ghastly things - we tried to sleep with our wives early in the marriage, God
help us.' They hate that. . .

Perhaps the ''Is there anyone I haven't offended?'' query still applies. ''I
am,'' Mr. Sahl says, ''the opposition.''

That is more than he can say for the new, and eminently successful, crop of
comedians, those who were weaned on television and then ordained by Johnny
Carson and David Letterman into the order of show business wealth. ''In the
phrase of Graham Greene, the comedian is a dangerous man. Well, they're not
dangerous men. What they're trying to do is sell-in; they're not trying to
overthrow. They're not Bertolt Brechts here. They want to be part of that
commercial success, they want to join it. The Carson show is a ticket to join
it. The healthy attitude for them would be to be skeptical of that, as a
protector of the status quo, which he is. . . .''

Mr. Sahl's run at the Neil Simon is scheduled for four weeks, with the hope, of
course, of a Jackie Mason-like hit run. The show, which features minimal sets,
Mort Sahl and not much else, is a relatively minor risk for Mr. Nederlander, the
producer -costing less than $250,000 to mount (including advertising).

Although Mr. Sahl's comedy is starkly different from Mr. Mason's, their course
to Broadway was the same. After the Mason show became a hit in Los Angeles, the
producer Nick Vanoff brought ''The World According to Me'' to Mr. Nederlander's
Brooks Atkinson theater, where it found its triumph. Mr. Nederlander then put
Mr. Sahl in the Henry Fonda theater in Los Angeles, where a one-week run sold
out. It seemed worth taking a shot on Broadway. ''We're coming into an election
year, he's a political satirist,'' Mr. Nederlander said. ''It's a guesswork on
my part. Nobody can pick a hit from a flop.'' Mr. Sahl is more certain of his
chances. Although his run is scheduled for four weeks, he's already thinking of
long-term housing, and he supposes that by the time he's through, there will be
new demand for his unproduced movie scripts. ''I suppose at the end of this run,
I'll be able to clean out the bottom of the trunk. They'll want to make
everything. That's standard. Because I'm confident this is going to run very
well here. There's a vacuum here. They should be ready.''

Vintage Sahl

For more than three decades, Mort Sahl has taken on just about everyone -and
just about every political belief - in his humor. At one point, he would ask
toward the end of his nightclub act, ''Are there any groups I haven't
offended?'' Here are some examples of his humor, and his targets, over the
years. 1953: (The joke that got him his first job, at the hungry i in San
Francisco): ''Have you seen the Joe McCarthy jacket? It's like an Eisenhower
jacket, only it's got an extra flap that fits over the mouth.'' 1950's: ''If you
are in the Eisenhower Administration, you have a lot of problems, like whether
or not to use an overlapping grip.'' 1960: ''Vote No for President - let's keep
the White House empty for another four years.'' 1960: On Richard Nixon: ''I
admit his chances look good, but what about ours?'' 1960: ''I'm for capital
punishment. You've got to execute people - how else are they going to learn?''
1964: ''Lyndon Johnson is the first President to put the country in his wife's
name.'' 1966: On Israel: ''The only privately endowed country in the world.''
1968: ''You know why the liberals say we should get out of Vietnam, why it's 'a
senseless war'? Because we're losing.'' 1968: On race riots: ''I don't condemn
those who steal color TV sets, nor do I condone them. I'm a liberal that way.''
1968: On Hollywood's race consciousness: ''In 'In the Heat of the Night,' Rod
Steiger played a bigot, and Sidney Poitier played a Negro - to the best of his
ability.'' 1981: ''A liberal is somebody who will do the right thing for the
wrong reasons so he can feel good for eight minutes.'' 1981: In Saudi Arabia,
''everything is owned by one family.'' In El Salvador, ''everything is owned by
14 families'' and the country ''is thus classified as a democracy.'' 1982:
President Reagan won only because of the public's disenchantment with Jimmy
Carter. ''If Reagan had run unopposed, he would have been defeated.'' 1987: ''I
think Alexander Haig is a terrifically bright guy. I presume he'll throw his
helmet into the ring.'' 1987: ''Haig is the only candidate who may understand
anything about foreign affairs. Cuomo doesn't have to face the allegations that
he doesn't since he's left the race and can go back to talking to St.
Augustine.''

- Mervyn Rothstein

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Mort Sahl (Martha Swope)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOME VIDEO;
DOCUMENTARY

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 191 words



Homefront, U.S.A. and The End of the Tunnel, 1973-75

Vietnam: A Television History - Vol. 6. Sony Video Software. 120 minutes.
$29.95.

The seven-volume series on the Vietnam War produced by WGBH, Boston's
outstanding public television station, is an objective presentation of the most
divisive modern event in the country. Stanley Karnow, a respected Asian
correspondent during the war, provides the factual narrative.

There are two episodes on the cassette. ''Homefront, U.S.A.'' begins with the
protests - for civil rights legislation and against participation in the Vietnam
War. The familiar footage includes the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.'s ''I have a
dream'' speech. The program also illustrates the Nixon Administration's attacks
on the press, the shooting of students at Kent State University, and Vietnam
veterans throwing away their medals on the Capitol steps. A second hour, ''The
End of the Tunnel, 1973-75,'' covers the cease-fire in 1973 and the final
toppling of the Saigon regime in 1975. Seen together, both episodes illustrate
the cost, at home and abroad, of intervention in a war without popular support.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By PAUL KREISBERG; Paul Kreisberg is a senior associate at the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace who writes on policy issues relating to Asia.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1729 words



INSIDE THE PHILIPPINE REVOLUTION
By William Chapman. 288 pp. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. $18.95.

WILLIAM CHAPMAN concludes his short history of the radical left and its
insurrectionary prospects in the Philippines with a gentle apology; his book
ends in December 1986, ''at a point of maximum uncertainty.'' The Communist
Party of the Philippines seemed then to be in a state of total disarray. Its
strategy of boycotting the 1986 presidential election had failed completely. It
was sharply divided over negotiations with the Government on a cease-fire.
Several of its key leaders had been arrested or were shortly to be caught,
including the military commander of the New People's Army and the chairman of
the party. The high hopes of one regional party leader whom Mr. Chapman, a
longtime reporter for The Washington Post, had interviewed a year earlier - that
the party might simply force ''the government to stop functioning . . . like
what happened in Nicaragua,'' perhaps as early as 1986 or 1987 - seemed pure
fantasy. The party's strategy to engineer the collapse of the regime of
Ferdinand Marcos by mobilizing huge street demonstrations, paralyzing the
Government and bringing about the defection of the military to the mass movement
had indeed been strikingly successful. It was Corazon Aquino, however, who had
benefited, not the Communist Party.

The attempt of the party's political fronts to win seats in the National
Congress elections this year ended in a virtual rout. But, since the elections,
President Aquino's personal power has ebbed, her immunity from criticism has
ended, and her administration has come under mounting attack for its alleged
weakness and vacillation in dealing with the Communists. The abortive coup
attempt by disaffected army men in late August left much of the army in sympathy
with the mutineers. In addition, Mrs. Aquino's two closest advisers were
dismissed and her old rival, Vice President Salvador Laurel, resigned as Foreign
Secretary. The domestic political scene is far more disturbed and uncertain than
seemed likely barely six months ago. The prospects for genuine restoration of
political stability and an extended period of growth, development and
reconciliation have dimmed, and with this has come a new surge in violence, by
both the left and the right, as evidenced by the assassination last month of the
leftist leader Leandro Alejandro.

The timing for a thorough assessment of the threat posed by Communist insurgency
to the Philippines and the likelihood for its success could not be better.
''Inside the Philippine Revolution'' does part of the job, but unfortunately it
falls considerably short of meeting the expectations it raises. It draws
concisely on the historical record and on numerous very useful interviews with
local and national Communist leaders from 1984 to 1986, when Mr. Chapman
repeatedly visited the Philippines from his reporting base in Tokyo. But
important broad issues and questions continually come to mind that are not
addressed in any detail or that are not even raised.

For instance, what is the relationship between the leadership of the Communist
Party and that of the New People's Army, particularly now that key older leaders
of both - Jose Sison, Rodolfo Salas, Rafael Baylosis and Bernabe Buscayno (known
as Commander Dante) - have surrendered or been captured in the past few years?
The future leadership of the insurgency is one of the most intriguing puzzles
the book raises, but it leaves the issue in doubt. Mr. Chapman introduces us to
a large cast of characters by their first names or noms de guerre, including a
dozen or more young local leaders of the party and the N.P.A., and tells us that
future leadership is likely to come from such men and women. But their
biographies are simple and schematic, and their comments are limited to set
phrases of doctrinal cant when they discuss anything outside of their local
setting. We end up knowing virtually nothing of what they might do on the
national scene or what their influence is in the party as a whole. Mr. Chapman
suspects they will probably be more militant than their predecessors.

Unlike the rural rebellion of the Huks in the 1950's, which was concentrated in
the northern island of Luzon, the current insurgency is spread widely throughout
most of the islands (it would have been helpful if the book included a map of
some sort). But why are the insurgents strong in some areas and weak in others?
Why has the insurgency split into two divisions in the mountainous areas of
northern Luzon? And what are the relationships between the Moslem insurgents of
Mindanao and other southern islands and the Communist Party and the New People's
Army? One issue observers have argued about is whether there is tight
centralized control over policy and the military activity of the N.P.A.'s
semiautonomous military commands by the party's national executive committee. We
learn little about Mr. Chapman's findings or views on this critical question,
although the glimpses of activities of the N.P.A. or of the party cadres in the
villages that he gives are always interesting.

The Communist Party and the New People's Army exercise some degree of influence
in a substantial proportion of the country's barangays, or village areas;
estimates are that they have an important presence in from 14 to 25 percent of
them. Mr. Chapman interviewed people from several areas in which the party was
particularly strong, but he gives us little feel for where the party and the
N.P.A. have been less successful and what lessons their failures offer for those
in the Philippine Government who are looking for political and military ways of
ending the insurgency.

Mr. Chapman is skeptical of the assurance of one source that ''we have not
noticed any reductions in the mass base'' of the party after Mrs. Aquino's
succession to power. The virtually total failure of the political candidates
favored by the Communists in the 1987 elections justifies that skepticism. How
much influence do the Communists and the N.P.A. really have at the grass roots?
Genuine economic and social reform would be almost certainly a more powerful
counter to the ''revolution'' than direct military counterinsurgency. Mr.
Chapman, however, shares the doubts of many Filipinos expressed even in 1986
that such reform would happen, and cynicism has grown in 1987. There is a useful
review in one chapter of the role of the Roman Catholic Church and the efforts
by the left to infiltrate and use the church as an instrument for pursuing
Communist objectives through local ''base communities.'' But we are left
wondering about the longer-term prospects for the struggle between the church
and the revolution.

There are many in the Philippine military and on the political right who believe
Joker Arroyo, the human-rights lawyer on whom Mrs. Aquino depended heavily for
advice until she was forced to fire him in September, was a Communist
sympathizer. The military's suspicions probably grew when Mr. Arroyo at tempted
to have the treason charges against the former N.P.A. leader, Rodolfo Salas,
reduced so that he could post bail this summer. But is there any real evidence
of a Communist Party strategy to build support inside the Philippine
bureaucracy? Also, while there are many comments on the Philippine Army
throughout the book, there is no cohesive discussion of the army's views of the
insurgency and its plans for dealing with the party and the N.P.A., or of
internal differences within the armed forces. These issues have become
increasingly important this year, but they were already evident in debates
inside the army and in the Philippine National Defense College from 1984 on.

Has it been primarily bad leadership, inadequate equipment, poor intelligence,
corruption and poor tactics by the Government that enabled the N.P.A. to take
advantage of poverty and oppression in the countryside and urban centers?

Young officers of the Philippine Army were dissatisfied with Mr. Marcos and are
now equally unhappy with Mrs. Aquino, in part over her policies toward the
insurgency. This issue could precipitate a successful military coup d'etat in
the not too distant future -a fundamental change from only two or three years
ago, when hardly anyone saw a military regime in the Philippines as a real
possibility.

Mr. Chapman believes that the New People's Army is less a military than a
political threat, but his book lacks a careful discussion of the overall
military security situation, and of how the Philippine Army views the effect of
the insurgency on the political system. Is there a military strategy that might
be successful, either alone or accompanied by a broad move for social, economic
and political reform? How important would the military threat be if the new
policy of the Communist Party and the N.P.A., aggressively to seek foreign aid,
is successful? And what would be the main source of that aid - Moscow, Vietnam,
Arab or Iranian radicals? Is a containment of the revolution the best one can
hope for? Mr. Chapman seems to offer his own metaphorical, and diffuse, answer
to this last question by comparing the Filipinos to a Philippine carabao (water
buffalo) - hard to arouse, but once angered, extremely dangerous and persistent.

FINALLY, what is the significance of all this for the United States? Mr.
Chapman's book does not claim to cover that subject. But his thoughts on whether
the N.P.A. is likely to target Americans and American installations more
intensively would seem to be pertinent. Bombs were thrown this summer at the
International School and the United States Information Service Center in Manila,
but American bases have thus far been essentially off-limits to insurgent
activity. Presumably the Communists have been reluctant to arouse this country.
If the N.P.A.'s policy of staying away from American targets is under active
review, as some United States officials now believe, the direct challenge to
American investors, visitors, military facilities and to overall United States
policy could take on a new dimension.

Mr. Chapman's book is a helpful primer on the Philippine extremist left for the
general reader, but a powerful analysis of the new generation of Philippine
revolutionaries, their objectives and their significance in the years ahead
remains to be published.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of New People's Army guerrillas (Sygma/Alain Nogues) HER ENEMIES
ON THE LEFT

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PALACE OF BROKEN DREAMS

BYLINE: By EARL W. FOELL; Earl W. Foell, editor in chief of The Christian
Science Monitor, covered the United Nations in the 1960's for The Monitor and
The Los Angeles Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 33, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 756 words



THE U.N.
In or Out? A Debate Between Ernest van den Haag and John P. Conrad. 355 pp. New
York: Plenum Press. $19.95.

WHEN did you last see a political cartoon using the familiar glass slab of the
United Nations to symbolize anything? When did you last encounter a television
news segment covering any debate or vote in the United Nations Security Council?

Unless you're long in the tooth you may not recall that Americans once were
regaled nightly with the United Nations oratory of Adlai Stevenson and Henry
Cabot Lodge; the battles of United Nations peacekeeping forces in Korea, Sinai
and the Congo; the New York chicken-cooking habits of Fidel Castro's aides; or
the roguish antics of Nikita Khrushchev in the United Nations General Assembly.
None of those events gave a fully accurate picture of what the United Nations
does. But they were television network endorsement of the idea, now obsolete,
that the United Nations mattered.

The authors of this book-length debate seek to remedy this generational amnesia
- for diametrically opposite reasons. John Conrad wants to see the United
Nations used and strengthened. Ernest van den Haag wants to see it shrunk or
disbanded. Neither argument could marshal wide support at current levels of
political attention. Mr. Conrad is a criminologist whose familiarity with the
United Nations started when he helped organize and attended United Nations
congresses on crime prevention. Mr. van den Haag is a Fordham University
professor of jurisprudence and public policy and a Heritage Foundation scholar,
known for waspishly crisp enunciations of right-wing views on world affairs.

This is their second book-debate, the first having been on capital punishment.
Mr. Conrad and Mr. van den Haag lack not for anecdotes, statistics, copious
footnotes, spicy invective and occasional displays of generosity. But like all
debate in the classical form, this jousting is likely to shed more heat than
light for its audience. You know who you think won, but not necessarily who's
right.

Even the debaters suffer at times from adversarial excess. How can one take
seriously Mr. van den Haag's statement that there is no advantage to negotiation
at the United Nations - ''any coffee shop will do''? It's true one can negotiate
on a raft at Tilsit or on a walk in the woods, but bargaining at the United
Nations has some advantages. It provides a setting where international meetings
are routine. And it provides a useful pretense: that one is bargaining for the
benefit of mankind, however self-interested the real motive.

If Mr. van den Haag is naive, so is Mr. Conrad when he says that the lack of
peaceful solutions stems from our inability to ''restrain generals and admirals
in pursuit of military glory.'' Some men with stars on their epaulets suffer
megalomania, but more of the 130 wars that have taken place since World War II
have been caused by political miscalculation than military adventurism. Mr.
Conrad also appears to look indulgently on the proposition that third-world
expropriation of multinational corporations may be necessary to help solve
global economic imbalances. That seems an unlikely route to expanded world
production, trade, employment and economic growth.

Over all, Mr. Conrad seems to win many of the crucial arguments. Mr. van den
Haag is right that some United Nations offices have wasted money. But how
relatively little; Mr. Conrad correctly notes that the total budget of the
United Nations would not sustain the Pentagon for a day. (Besides which, large
amounts of United Nations spending feeds back into the New York and United
States economies.) Mr. van den Haag rightly observes that nuclear stalemate has
fended off a third great war. But he fails to grasp the usefulness of several
United Nations peacekeeping forces, and of quiet background diplomacy, where the
superpowers have allowed them.

What doesn't come across clearly enough, amid the swordplay, is the fundamental
reasons that the great powers that created the United Nations are wary of using
its machinery - as were the powers that met at the Congress of Vienna and those
that created the League of Nations. Their basic reason: fear of setting a
precedent of collective action that might in future be applied to them or to
their allies. Hence their reluctance to let the United Nations move in Vietnam,
Berlin or any place where great-power interests might collide. In general, it's
O.K. to stop lesser conflicts, but just remember who's got the veto, the
checkbook and the bomb.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Can the Contras Go On?

BYLINE: By James LeMoyne; James LeMoyne is The Times's bureau chief in San
Salvador. He has covered the contras since 1983.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4093 words


THE AIRDROP CAME suddenly. Bright parachutes popped open a few hundred feet
above the cluster of bare thatched huts and green tents that served as the
contras' border command post. Within moments, the wooden ammo crates thudded to
the ground. Having dispensed another load of American bullets to the Nicaraguan
contras, the rebel supply plane ducked over the jungle tree line and headed back
to its C.I.A. landing strip.

Contra recruits - coffee-brown young men with the broad, Indian features of
northern Nicaraguan peasants - raced to gather the crates. In the distance,
Sandinista rockets whizzed, then crashed into rebel positions on a nearby hill.
There would be wounded by nightfall.

It was early summer. Fueled by $100 million of new American aid voted by a
deeply divided United States Congress, the contras were rapidly abandoning their
bases in Honduras and re-infiltrating into Nicaragua by the thousands.

Watching the contras move out had been an impressive sight: Column after column
of heavily armed guerrillas marching into Nicaragua, outfitted in new camouflage
uniforms, hoisting Red-Eye antiaircraft missiles, M-79 grenade launchers, AK-47
assault rifles, bandoleers of machine-gun bullets, shiny backpacks and new
computerized radios, all provided by the United States. In addition to the
regular C.I.A. supply flights, American Green Berets had provided specialized
training for contra patrol commanders in everything from explosives to
map-reading. The contras appeared ready to fight on indefinitely.

But despite the new American aid and the new battles inside Nicaragua, Mike Lima
was worried. As he watched his men collect the air-dropped ammunition cases, the
veteran contra combat commander began to fire anxious questions at an American
visitor.

How long would it go on? Mr. Lima asked. Thousands had already died. He and his
men were willing to fight on, but wasn't there a good chance that the contras'
money would be cut off once again by the United States Congress - a vaguely
leftist institution that he confessed to trusting little and understanding not
at all? If that happened, Mr. Lima said, the fight was over.

What would become of his men? he asked. And what about Mike Lima himself, a
guerrilla who has lost his right arm and several bits of the rest of his body to
Sandinista bullets, shrapnel and bombs? A man who has ordered executions and who
many times has looked over the barrel of his gun at another Nicaraguan's face
and calmly pulled the trigger? What would Mike Lima do at the wise, tired age of
28, a counterrevolutionary without a cause, a guerrilla without a patron?

He would be forced to kill off ''Mike Lima'' - the nom de guerre that so neatly
fits the knife-quick, feared fighter he has become in the years of bloodletting
- and once again become Luis Alfonso Moreno Payan, just one more
lower-middle-class Nicaraguan living in exile, eking out a living and hating the
Sandinistas.

And what about the United States and Ronald Reagan, the country he admires most
and the leader he reveres? What would they do about the 10,000-man rebel army
they organized to wage the war they have directed and funded since 1981?

Mike Lima recalled that when he graduated first in his class from the Nicaraguan
military academy in 1978, a promising recruit for the National Guard that
defended the Somoza dictatorship, his prize had been a two-week visit to West
Point. ''It was beautiful,'' he said, ''a real military academy.''

He loved the trip to America, just as he has come to enjoy the company of the
pot-bellied C.I.A. agents who tell him he is a great guerrilla and reminisce
about their days in Laos and Vietnam, where they funded and trained and then
abandoned other peasant guerrillas who liked their company and believed their
promises too. But now, Mike Lima, beneath his simple loyalties and hatreds, was
beginning to feel strongly that he and his men might also be abandoned.

''If you cut us off again, morale will plummet, we won't survive,'' he said.
''And when you cut us off, what do we do? What do I do with one hand, after
fighting all my life?''

THEY WERE PRES-cient questions. On Aug. 7, the presidents of the five Central
American countries signed a peace accord that, among other things, mandates an
end to all outside support for rebel forces in the region. Last week, the
contras' American aid officially ran out. Secretary of State George P. Shultz
has declared that the Administration will ask for $270 million more for the
contras, but with peace under discussion in Central America, Congress seems
unlikely to approve it.

It is possible that a compromise will be worked out, or that some other way will
be found to keep the contras afloat. But it seems just as likely that, after a
new aid cutoff, the rebels may begin to fall apart for good.

If that happens, there will be a painful reckoning over a policy that has been
under attack from the earliest days of the Reagan Presidency. Six years ago few
would have predicted that a ragged army of Nicaraguan peasants would lay claim
to the political soul of the Reagan Administration and nearly sink it in
scandal. Or that the peasant army would play a leading role in the campaign to
determine the next leader of the United States.

Already, Presidential aspirants are trooping through Central America. The debate
over who lost Nicaragua is well under way. Col. Enrique Bermudez, the contras'
chief military commander, meets almost weekly with delegations of Congressmen.
Last month, sitting in a lone tent pegged among the burned-out, abandoned
remnants of what used to be the main rebel base on the Honduran-Nicaraguan
border (map, page 66), Colonel Bermudez spoke angrily of his fear that defeat
could be at hand.

''If they cut the aid and leave us,'' said the former National Guard officer,
''I'm definitely going to feel as if we have had another Vietnam or Bay of Pigs
- I'll feel totally deceived. And my troops - they are the ones who have lived
this war and will suffer more.''

The references to Vietnam and the Bay of Pigs reflect a central point about the
contras' struggle: it has always been as much about confused and contradictory
American ideas of democracy, Communism and the American role in the world as it
has been about events in Nicaragua. When Americans argue about Nicaragua, they
see many things - but they rarely see Nicaraguans, or the small country for
which thousands of Nicaraguans are fighting and dying.

DURING THE LAST five years, I have marched with the contras inside Nicaragua and
visited their border bases and refugee camps. I have watched the rebels ambush
Sandinistas and be ambushed in turn. And I have spent time with Sandinista
soldiers who bloodied contra units.

I have also come to know several C.I.A., State Department and American Army
officials who dedicated themselves to organizing the rebel army demanded by
their President. Some were mediocre men, living fantasy lives on the periphery.
Most were dedicated public servants who were doing what they thought was right,
but who often felt the policy was misconceived and badly executed.

Totally convinced of its cause, the Administration created a guerrilla force
that suffers from what in Latin America is a fatal defect: being seen as a
creature of Washington. As an Administration official conceded, ''We emphasized
control at the expense of leadership.''

Too many of the contras' original C.I.A.-selected officials and military
commanders were either former National Guardsmen or civilians who collaborated
with the deposed Somoza dictatorship. After bitter internal splits, the rebels
and their American advisers four months ago selected a more capable political
directorate, one which includes several Nicaraguans who once served in the
Sandinista Government. But it is unclear how much influence they have. The
rebels are still organized like a traditional Latin army; their civilian
officials and military commanders belong to very separate, and sometimes
opposing, camps.

Burdened by Administration rhetoric and Sandinista propaganda, the contras have
had a hard time being seen for what they are: a committed army of ill-trained
hillbilly peasants from northern Nicaragua. Like land-owning farmers the world
over, most are political conservatives. They hate the Sandinistas in the way
independent people hate anyone who orders them around, rations their food, sets
prices for their crops and claims a monopoly on truth and morality.

The contras' opposition to the Sandinistas is not contrived. The young peasants
recount tale after tale of what they see as Sandinista oppression: how they were
forced into state cooperatives; how they were given ration cards and ordered to
join militia units; how they were punished and forced out of their homes. Nor
were most of them servants of the Somoza regime. Almost all contra troops are
too young to have served on anything but their farms a decade ago.

Efrain Rodriguez is typical. He is 25, and says he fled his village of Yali in
northern Nicaragua because the Sandinistas harassed the conservative Protestant
evangelical sect to which he belonged. His father and brothers are also rebels.
Mr. Rodriguez says he has fought from the war's beginning; he looks considerably
older than his age, perhaps one effect of having lost, by his reckoning, more
than 40 of his friends in combat.

''We've had so many years of war, you can't just leave it like that,'' Mr.
Rodriguez said, as other rebels packed up the last boxes of gear at their former
border base a few weeks ago. One of Mr. Rodriguez's friends, a contra task-force
commander code-named ''Douglas,'' ambled over. Asked about the new regional
peace treaty, both men shook their heads.

''To me the only way to stop the Sandinistas is with lead,'' Douglas said.
''They won't comply.''

Rebels like these express one part of the broad opposition to the Sandinistas in
Nicaragua. But they are a rude war machine that has seldom risen above what
Washington designed them to be: a sharp club to beat the Sandinistas into
changing their ways. The rebels will fight because they believe in their
struggle, but their language of simple peasant reaction is too narrow to gain
broad appeal. Despite recent political and military improvements, after six
years of war the contras remain essentially an instrument of American policy.

I FIRST MET THE CONTRAS IN 1983 when I linked up with a guerrilla combat unit on
a steep mountainside in Nueva Segovia province. Suddenly, 60 fully armed,
uniformed contras were standing before me, chatting about their C.I.A. training
and their secret weapons supplies.

During the next week of ceaseless marching and fighting, the contras impressed
me as dedicated peasant soldiers with strong local support. But they had almost
no political direction other than crude anti-Communism. Most of their commanders
were ex- National Guardsmen, and signs of brutality were already evident.

Virtually all the rebels who shared their lives with me that week four years ago
are dead. The commander of the unit, whose chillingly accurate nom de guerre was
Suicide, and at least two of his lieutenants, were executed by the contra
leaders for mutiny, murder and a string of human-rights abuses. Most of the
others have died in combat. These dead are only a handful of the more than 4,000
rebels who have died in what has become a long and bloody war.

Apart from their enthusiasm for killing Sandinistas and their physical
toughness, what struck me most about the contras then, as now, was their
childlike faith in their American patron and their belief in the absolute power
of the American Government that had organized and armed them. As Josue (the
code-name of a boyish, but deadly, patrol commander) put it, ''How can we lose
if the greatest country on earth supports us?''

When I bid the contras goodbye at the end of a long week of fighting, the only
thing they asked from me was anything - anything at all - made in America. Echo,
the patrol commander, who had a soft face and confessed to feeling badly when he
executed Sandinista prisoners, got my bright red T-shirt commemorating the
previous year's marathon in Austin, Tex. He is since reported to have been
killed in combat. Josue got my old plaid shirt. He looked lovingly at the label,
even though he couldn't read a word of English, and handled the faded cotton as
if he was holding a piece of the true cross. He is said to have died as well.

A lot of other Nicaraguans have died in the war that Mr. Reagan has justified as
(among other things) necessary to make the Sandinistas cry ''uncle'' - without
bothering to define what ''uncle'' might mean, and without seriously exploring
whether the Sandinistas would be open to any compromise. Sandinista estimates
put the total dead and wounded from the rebel war since 1981 at more than 40,000
- in a nation of three million. The figure does not seem exaggerated. It is a
human measure of the cost of a proxy war Washington can fund indefinitely
without raising taxes or expending American lives.

PONDERING THE WAY Washington has handled the rebels, a senior American diplomat
in Central America who oversees contra policy concluded it was a miracle the
rebels survived at all.

''I seriously doubt the United States Government has the capacity to organize
and manage a successful guerrilla war,'' he said. ''We don't understand
revolutions, the C.I.A. lacks political vision and the Pentagon doesn't want to
touch it with a stick.''

The Administration, meanwhile, blames Congress. And there is ample room for
criticism: Congress has half-funded, then cut off, then partially re-funded,
then fully re-funded the rebels in an unsavory effort to avoid taking
responsibility for an explosive political issue.

But from the beginning, the Administration has acted even less defensibly. In
1981, the C.I.A. hired Argentine military officers to train the contras at a
time when the Argentines' most notable skills were torturing and murdering
civilians - talents the contras soon acquired.

''The Argentines knew about urban counterterrorism,'' said the contra leader
Aristides Sanchez. ''but they knew nothing about a rural guerrilla war. The
truth is, a lot of them were Nazis.''

Making use of their training, the contras spent their first years of combat
executing Sandinista health workers, teachers and other civilian officials. In
1984, it was disclosed that the C.I.A. had given the contras a manual suggesting
they commit political assassinations. That same year, the C.I.A. mined
Nicaragua's harbors without informing Congress.

These actions, together with the fact that the Administration repeatedly lied
about why it was arming the contras - first claiming their sole purpose was to
interdict arms shipments to the Salvadoran guerrillas -created the atmosphere of
distrust and partisanship that has surrounded Administration policy toward the
contras ever since.

''The Reagan Administration on this issue has been more like the papacy than a
Presidency,'' said a senior American official deeply involved with policy toward
Nicaragua. ''To go into the White House to talk to the President about the
nuances of the contras was like going to the Pope to discuss a few dissident
points on Virgin birth - you couldn't do it.''

In 1984, angry Congressmen cut off aid to the rebels, setting them back at a
moment when they had the military initiative in Nicaragua. The main rebel army
retreated to Honduras; meanwhile, the Miskito Indian rebels, who were also
fighting the Sandinistas, as well as the contras' most politically appealing
figure, Eden Pastora, left the fight entirely, bitterly criticizing the C.I.A.

After Congress cut off aid, Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North ran the contras from the
White House as virtually his private army, using advisers whose chief virtues
seemed to be anti-Communism and loyalty to Colonel North, but who knew nothing
about guerrilla war.

''Oliver North sent down this kid, Robert Owen, to deal with us in Costa Rica,''
Mr. Pastora recalled, as he sat by a Costa Rican beach overseeing a fishing
cooperative he and some of his troops have started since his forced retirement.
''What a joke,'' Mr. Pastora said. ''What lousy imperialists you are.''

''Let me tell you, when you talk to a Cuban in the Department of the Americas of
the Communist Party, you meet a guy with 15 years of experience in revolution,''
the veteran rebel said. ''And when you meet a Russian K.G.B. specialist on Latin
America, you know he's dispatched more than one son of a bitch in his life.''

''You Americans don't know how to manage a revolution that depends on the
masses,'' Mr. Pastora snorted, tucking his pistol further into his belt. ''You
want to resolve everything quickly, with dollars.''

The C.I.A. twice flew him to Washington, Mr. Pastora said, to meet the then
Director of Central Ingelligence, William J. Casey. Mr. Casey, who died in May,
was perhaps the President's most influential adviser, but the irreverent
Nicaraguan guerrilla leader was unimpressed. ''I saw a tired old man who fell
asleep in conversations,'' Mr. Pastora recalled.

An American official who dealt with Mr. Casey voiced a deeper criticism. ''Casey
wanted a rollback of Communism - he and the Reagan right saw post-World War II
history as a string of dominoes falling to the Soviets,'' the official said.
''So Casey conceived of the Reagan Doctrine to use guerrillas to defeat
Communist governments, and he saw Nicaragua as a test case.''

''But you know,'' the official went on, ''he could never even pronounce the word
'Nicaragua' - he always said something like 'Nicarga' or 'Nigara'. The place
itself didn't seem to matter to him.''

Against all odds, the contras survived. When I visited them in early summer at
their border bases, and then inside Nicaragua, they appeared ready to wage a
long war. Colonel Bermudez drove up in a jeep to address a patrol of the Jorge
Salazar regional task force, perhaps the most effective contra fighting unit.

''Each of you has to become a politician,'' the commander said. '' If you don't
talk to people and explain our fight, how will they know why we are fighting?''
It was sound advice - five years too late.

A long shed that served as the contras' intelligence center was filled with
blinking computer terminals that collated thousands of intercepted Sandinista
radio messages. The surrounding walls held detailed war maps, with red pins
indicating Sandinista military bases, and blue pins charting contra patrols.
Northern Nicaragua seemed covered with blue. Ronald Reagan beamed down from a
wall poster, telling one and all: ''I'm a contra too.''

Lima Sierra, a contra logistics officer who spent 28 years as a sergeant in the
National Guard, sat in his tent wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with ''Support the
Afghan Freedom Fighters.'' He exuded the hardness of a lifetime noncom in a
corrupt Central American army, but when he talked of Ronald Reagan, his face
softened into a broad smile.

''Reagan said, 'My sons, I will not abandon you' and I believe him,'' Lima
Sierra told me.

A few hours later Willy, the rebels' top helicopter pilot, lifted off from the
contra base; I sat beside him as he nosed the small, C.I.A.-provided, Hughes 500
helicopter through the chop of the rainy-season clouds like a surfer cutting
across waves, dipping and bobbing over the green tropical canopy below.

We landed at the bank of the Coco River and marched into Nicaragua, where the
rebels were setting up forward positions - positions they would soon lose, then
recover, in a largely senseless fight with Sandinista troops. Today, the contras
are still dug into the same hillsides, which the relentless rains have converted
into a slough of mud.

During the march into Nicaragua, a contra showed me a letter he had taken off
the body of a dead Sandinista. It made the enemy all too human: ''Hello Polito,
how are you? I hope well, along with your comrades in the struggle. Your mother
gives me hugs to send you. . .'' The letter concluded with adolescent
abruptness: ''Well, Polito, it's night and I have to say goodbye - Armando.''

The rebels were optimistic in early summer; but now, in the harsh war within
Nicaragua, they are losing as many as 400 dead and wounded a month, according to
rebel commanders. ''It's not like it was for us in 1984,'' Mike Lima admitted.
''When you hit a Sandinista unit now you better run, because they'll be after
you in force within an hour.''

The war continues to drain the Nicaraguan economy; without the increasing
pressure exerted by the contras, the Sandinistas almost certainly would not have
signed the peace agreement in August. But the Sandinistas have managed to keep
the rebels away from politically vital population centers. They also have
forcibly relocated tens of thousands of peasants who once served as the rebels'
base of support.

Contra commanders admit new recruiting has barely kept up with casualties in the
now-sparsely populated mountains. Despite larger claims for propaganda purposes,
senior American officials concede there are probably not more than 10,000 contra
fighters - enough to continue to wage a punishing guerrilla war, but not enough
to defeat the Sandinistas in the forseeable future, even if American support
remains steady.

Visiting the war zones from the Nicaragua side in midsummer gave a taste of the
bitter, grinding conflict now under way. Contra units had attacked armed
Sandinista cooperatives in northern Jinotega department at Abisinia, El Cedro
and Mancotal, killing several armed militiamen, as well as some civilians, and
burning warehouses, a clinic and the homes of Sandinista activists. Bernardo
Tinoco, a wiry Sandinista state security agent at El Cedro, mattter-of-factly
described his job as ''hunting contras.'' Mr. Tinoco, whose nine brothers and
mother are rebels, nosed the hills like a terrier sniffing a rat hole for the
scent of prey.

Once again there were contras all over the place, he said. A man couldn't go
wandering in the hills without an armed patrol to back him. Traffic didn't move
on the dirt roads between 5 in the afternoon and 8 in the morning - contras come
out at night.

It was a capsule description of the way guerrilla war paralyzes normal life and
polarizes a society. People were afraid, government control was in question. In
early September, the rebels attacked El Cedro again.

But despite the contras' relative effectiveness, the new regional peace treaty
has forced them to radically reassess their strategy. The treaty carries the
first significant political concessions offered by the Sandinistas - perhaps the
most the contras and the Administration can hope to win. A handful of contra
leaders say they may return to Managua to explore the political opening offered
by the new accord. But the fight for popular support inside Nicaragua promises
to be extremely risky, testing the rebels where they have been weakest and
forcing them to give up any hope of eliminating the Sandinistas for good.

The contras also face a cooler reception in Honduras. Worried by the regional
peace treaty, Honduran officials say they may close down contra airstrips.
''When the water is up to Ronald Reagan's knee, it's over Honduras's head,'' is
how one senior Honduran official described the pressure his country is feeling.

THE CONTRAS ARE NOW asking Congress to give them aid which would be held in an
escrow account, the money to be released if the Sandinistas fail to offer a
genuine political opening. It is a clever idea, and it might allow the rebels to
hold on. But the tenuousness of their situation has made rebel leaders
increasingly bitter.

The contras' feelings are partisan. Still, it is difficult not to conclude that
it has been hypocritical, immoral and deeply damaging to the United States to
send men to kill and to die for six years on half-promises and sporadic
assistance. It is as wrong to have unleashed a terrible war on Nicaragua without
first debating whether that war was necessary, and whether Americans were
prepared to support it.

''You North Americans have great values, but you need to learn to define and
apply them,'' said Donald Castillo, a former Sandinista who is now one of the
contras' most able political analysts.

''You have been generous to us -and you have also utilized and manipulated us as
part of your domestic political agenda,'' he added quietly. ''But have you been
aware that you're playing with the life and blood of a people and a country?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of the contras in Nicaragua (Ron Kinney/Black Star & NYT/Angel
Franco)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

About Men;
The Dark Playground

BYLINE: By Daniel Voll; Daniel Vol is a writer who worked last summer as a
firefighter for the National Forest Service.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 86, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words


I MET LEE SIX MONTHS after she had been raped.

We met at the museum where she is a curator. She has large green eyes and a
dancer's body. She told lively stories and laughed at my jokes. I took her
cross-country skiing; when the rivers melted, she took me trout fishing. A month
later, she told me about the rape.

It happened at a playground in a family neighborhood. She'd been jogging as
twilight turned to dark. She felt safe - there were street lights overhead, a
church on the corner. The ordeal lasted three hours. She escaped twice and was
dragged back screaming. They never caught the rapist.

When a man learns that a woman he loves has been raped, how does he respond?
There must be a lot of us, because at least once every 10 minutes a woman is
raped somewhere in America. I held Lee close and silently vowed to be
understanding. But I was afraid my words or actions might someday trigger that
awful memory. I tried never using the word ''rape'' in any context. Even my
kisses became more tender. But I also consigned the rape to Lee's past, wanting
to believe that it could not affect our relationship. I was wrong. One night,
exactly a year after the rape, Lee woke up beside me crying, remembering. I
whispered, ''How can I help?''

She took a deep breath, then said: ''I don't know. At the Rape Crisis Center, it
was always women talking to women.''

''I guess,'' I said, ''explaining rape to a man is like trying to explain
Vietnam to someone who wasn't there. But I want to help.'' ''That playground
still frightens me,'' she said.

''What if you took me there - right now.''

She wiped away her tears. ''You're kidding!''

''No. Let's reclaim that playground. Would it scare you, going back?'' She said,
''It might scare you more.''

We dressed and walked out into the warm night. Clouds were moving across the
moonless, black sky. Lee held my hand. I felt strong, as though we were going to
battle and would win. We walked to the playground -a dirt field surrounded by a
chain-link fence. During the day, schoolchildren play baseball there. From the
street, I could see the swing set, but the heart of the playground was dark. Lee
spoke calmly, as if narrating a movie: ''This is where I heard footsteps behind
me. I started running. He grabbed me by the neck. I kept stabbing at him with my
keys. He said, 'Stop screaming or I'll knock you out.' He started dragging me
toward the playground. I held onto the fence until he smashed my hands. I was
still screaming. He just lifted me up. He took me to the darkest part of the
playground. He punched me in the face, which blacked my eye, but I kept
fighting.''

I walked with Lee, retracing every step of her fight until I was lying supine in
the dirt. She sat astride my chest, her knees on my biceps, her hands on my
throat. I said, ''Show me how he hit you.'' I watched her fist coming down, as
if out of the night itself, striking lightly against my face. She said: ''I
can't hit you as hard. He kept hitting and choking me. I heard people on the
street. I started screaming. He hit me hard and crouched over me, shoving a
glove in my mouth. I prayed they would see us, but it was so dark. I couldn't
breathe. The people kept walking; I could hear their footsteps, walking away. I
was so weak from not breathing. When the people were gone, he raped me.''

We stayed on the ground, Lee's face against my shoulder. I said: ''You're so
calm. It seems so unreal, like a movie.''

''That's how it felt at the time - unreal, like it wasn't happening to me. His
face was young, like a bank teller's. He had binoculars around his neck. I
pleaded with him, 'People go to jail for this. Can't you see this is wrong?' At
one point I twisted away and started running toward the street, pulling up my
sweatpants. I thought I could outrun him. He caught me by the hair and threw me
on my face into the dirt and raped me again.'' We walked to the spot, and I lay
face down. Lee stretched out on my back and hugged my shoulders. My eyes were
closed and full of tears. I could taste dirt in my mouth. We stayed that way for
a long time, just the two of us, fully clothed. Rage swept through me like
nausea. I could find no empathy for the rapist or his violent, random sickness.
At the start of the night, I was afraid I might find the rapist in me. But he
was not there, and this is what Lee had understood all along.

But lying there, I was discovering a fear of my own, one buried not so deep in
my subconscious. At college, almost busted for drugs, my friends and I joked
about prison rape, but our voices betrayed the terror we felt, our shared
vulnerability. Now, on my stomach in the dirt, I acknowledged that fear, and for
the first time I found a way to identify with some of the horror of Lee's
experience. I wanted to say ''I understand,'' but I couldn't find the words.

Lee seemed to understand my silence. She helped me stand, then said: ''When it
was over, he took me by the arm and walked me in a circle around the playground,
talking to me as if we'd just met at a singles' bar. He asked where I worked,
what my astrological sign was, if we could get together for drinks sometime. My
knees kept buckling. He was literally holding me up. Then he put me on a swing
and started pushing me. He pushed me several times. He said, 'Nice seeing you
again,' before he ran off.'' ''Then he was gone?'' ''He ran down the street. I
never saw him again. Everyone was very kind - the police, the nurses -everyone
except my boyfriend at the time. He said he was too busy.''

Lee's father gave her a gun on his next visit. Her brother told me that, when
Lee called him after the rape, he loaded his gun and came to stay with her. He
said, ''I wanted to buy a wig and a dress to stake out that bastard, blow his
brains out.''

I pushed Lee on the swing, her body rising toward the dark sky, then falling
back again - to me. She was smiling. She said my being there had helped, and
now, when thinking of the playground, she'd think first of this night. I know it
won't be easy. The memory of the rapist will always be with her. The terror of
him is also part of my memory. I can still taste that playground dirt, our
shared vulnerability.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Kota Kinabalu Journal;
Moslem Cause Celebre: A Good Christian Burial

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: KOTA KINABALU, Malaysia, Sept. 30


Seventeen years ago, Robert Din Hatt, also known as Robert Chua, decided to
renounce Christianity and convert to Islam. He called himself Rashid Din Hatt
Bulanggan.

Later Mr. Rashid, who served as a state assemblyman from 1981 to 1985, began to
have second thoughts, his family says.

In May of this year, according to his son, the 63-year-old former politician,
who was gravely ill, took a decisive step. He signed a declaration, witnessed by
relatives and nurses, formally renouncing Islam and again embracing
Christianity.

He died on Sept. 5, and his family buried him in a Roman Catholic cemetery here
in Sabah.

A Political Awakening

In most places, the story would end there.

But in Malaysia, religion has become an issue of great sensitivity and
volatility. Here in Sabah, where Moslems are especially uneasy, Mr. Rashid's
remains have become the focus of a struggle.

The frontier state of Sabah now has a Christian head of government, Chief
Minister Joseph Pairin Kitingan, who belongs to the Kadazans, an ethnic group
indigenous to the region. Membership in Christian churches is reported on the
rise here and in neighboring Sarawak.

After Mr. Rashid's funeral, the Sabah Islamic Religious Council petitioned the
courts for an order allowing them to transfer Mr. Rashid's body to an Islamic
cemetery -against his last wishes and the will of his grieving family - because,
they say, a Moslem cannot renounce his faith just like that.

Larger, Underlying Question

The renunciation of Islam, the Mufti of Sabah announced last week, must be
witnessed by two reliable Moslems.

Discussion of the case, which most people seem to believe will be decided in Mr.
Rashid's family's favor, raises this larger, underlying question: How will
Moslem-dominated Malaysia deal with the rising political strength of the people
of Borneo, most of whom are Christians, Buddhists or animists?

The eventual accommodation, or lack of it, between religious blocs in the
politics of Malaysia, may also be a guide to the future of Islam in the area,
politicians and scholars say.

The matter needs to be discussed because Malay society is by definition Islamic,
and many Malaysian Moslems, prodded now by pockets of extremists, say their
religion demands an Islamic state. They see the world in terms of Moslem and
infidel.

Cast in a Difficult Role

Malaysia's Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamad has been cast in the difficult role
of wanting to bolster the confidence of his people while fending off unending
challenges from inflexible fundamentalists.

The Prime Minister, a physician who is a defender of free enterprise and a
pluralistic society, wants to modernize the Malays. But Dr. Mahathir, who
narrowly survived a challenge to his leadership last April from a liberal wing
of the party, cannot afford a serious split in Malay ranks. As much ground as
possible is given to Islamic conservatives.

Nearly half the people of Southeast Asia are Moslems. They include more than 90
percent of Indonesia's 165 million people and minorities in Vietnam, Cambodia,
Burma, Thailand, Singapore and the Philippines.

But in Malaysia, where about 48 percent of the people are Moslem, tensions
within Islam, and between it and other beliefs, seem to be rising.

Humanistic Creed

Neighboring Indonesia prevented the formation of an Islamic state by adopting,
during its campaign for independence in the 1940's, a national, humanistic
creed.

Malaysia, on the other hand, chose to make Islam the official religion at its
independence in 1957, and the Constitution was written to reserve the prime
ministership for Moslem Malays.

All other religions were granted freedom of worship in Malaysia, within certain
limits. For example, Christian missionaries may no longer proselytize.

Another widely publicized dispute centers on whether significant numbers of
Malaysian Moslems are quietly being converted to Christianity. The Prime
Minister said this week that he had no evidence of such a trend.

But Christians in Sabah and Sarawak say that young people among the non-Malay
ethnic peoples of Borneo are turning to Christianity in surprising numbers.

Forbidden to Moslems

Michael Buma, a teacher and administrator for many years, is an ethnic Iban,
another group indigenous to the area. He said the young were not attracted to
Islam for cultural reasons.

An Iban in Sarawak government service said, ''Iban society is impenetrable to
Islam.''

Mr. Buma, an Anglican lay leader and writer on the traditions of the Iban, said
that pork, forbidden to Moslems, was central to all Iban ceremonies.

He described Moslems in Sarawak as tolerant people. ''If trouble comes, it will
be from outside,'' he added.

The government in Sarawak is gradually changing some scenery. A huge state
mosque is under construction near the state capital.

And at the Astana, the colonial palace overlooking the Sarawak River -a new wing
is being added. It is designed in Moorish style, with pointed arches lining a
19th-century European facade.

A conservationist in Kuching, asked about the change, shook his head and asked,
''What can we do?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of new wing being built at Astana, and map of Sabah.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Washington Talk: National Security Council;
Case of the Reluctant General

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1311 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 4


Shortly after President Reagan asked Frank C. Carlucci to become his national
security adviser last December, Mr. Carlucci telephoned Lieut. Gen. Colin L.
Powell at his post in West Germany to enlist the general as his deputy.

General Powell pleaded with Mr. Carlucci to find someone else. The general had
done eight years in Washington and was eager to remain with troops as commander
of the Army's Fifth Corps. ''I gave him every reason I could think of,'' he said
later.

But Mr. Carlucci persisted. In subsequent calls, he said Secretary of Defense
Caspar W. Weinberger supported the idea - they had all worked together when Mr.
Carlucci was Deputy Secretary of Defense and General Powell was Mr. Weinberger's
military assistant. The general still demurred.

Then, a few days later, came the clincher: President Reagan called. No serving
officer can turn down the Commander in Chief, so the general accepted the
assignment and reported to Washington in January.

A Key Player

In the ensuing nine months, General Powell has become a key player in rebuilding
the staff of the National Security Council and in reviving the interagency
process through which recommendations on policy are submitted to the security
council and the President.

While Mr. Carlucci responds to the President and the security council, General
Powell guides the staff, heads working groups and consults with White House
political officials. ''I try to help Frank drive the process,'' he said. ''I try
to do as much of the inside stuff as I can.''

By all accounts, General Powell, a tall, husky man with a quick laugh and
even-handed manner, has won the respect of top bureaucratic operatives who often
wield sharp knives. ''He has a good understanding of the system,'' said an
admirer, ''and a great understanding of how to get along with people.''

A Demoralized Staff

White House officials said the security council staff had been demoralized by
disclosures about the roles of the former national security adviser, Vice Adm.
John M. Poindexter, and an aide, Lieut Col. Oliver L. North, in the Iran-contra
affair.

They also said the staff had been left in disarray by a lack of management on
the part of Admiral Poindexter, who, because of his penchant for secrecy, wanted
everyone to deal with him rather than share information.

''In that horizontal reporting system,'' said one official, ''no one supervised
anyone else.''

General Powell, as befits a soldier, put into place a pyramid that defined
responsibilities for geographic areas like Europe and Asia or for functions like
military policy and intelligence. The command structure made staff members
accountable to their superiors and then to General Powell. ''That allows Colin
to have his finger on things all over the place,'' said a White House official.

On personnel, Mr. Carlucci and General Powell were at first inclined to wipe the
slate clean. But the security council staff has the least institutional memory
in Washington; it is not permanent, and people come and go rapidly. To preserve
some continuity, they decided to keep half the old staff.

Perhaps General Powell's most important task is to head policy review groups
that, depending on the issue, draw representatives from the State Department,
Defense Department, Central Intelligence Agency and other agencies.

In those meetings, each agency sets forth information, ideas and
recommendations. If the participants agree on an issue, a paper is prepared for
the security council and the President, with the preferred options specified.

General Powell said his job was ''to get rid of pet rocks,'' meaning plans
certain to be rejected by the council and the President. ''That takes a lot of
pressure off'' the council, a White House official said; before, many minor
issues were sent up for decision.

If the working group cannot agree, different options are sent along with
supporting material for each, including goals, costs and positions of other
governments.

General Powell has also established ties with Kenneth M. Duberstein, the deputy
to the White House chief of staff, Howard H. Baker Jr., and with Thomas C.
Griscom, the director of communications.

''That helps the N.S.C. staff understand domestic political needs,'' an official
said, ''and gives Duberstein and Griscom an understanding of the N.S.C.
operation that did not exist before.''

Then there are always crises, in which General Powell's role is central. Late
one recent Monday afternoon, he was told within the hour that two Army
helicopters flying from a Navy ship in the Persian Gulf had shot up an Iranian
ship laying mines. He immediately informed Mr. Carlucci in New York, where
President Reagan was addressing the United Nations.

Colin Powell, the son of Jamaican immigrants, was born 50 years ago in New York.
At the City University of New York, he joined the Reserve Officers Training
Corps, being commissioned on graduation in 1958.

Service in Vietnam

He served in Vietnam in 1962-1963 as an adviser to South Vietnamese units and in
1968-1969 as an infantry battalion executive officer and division operations
officer. In 1972-1973 he was a White House fellow, and it was in that spot that
he came to the attention of Mr. Weinberger and Mr. Carlucci.

After that, General Powell's career has been a mixture of command in the Army
and high-level duty in Washington.

As a soldier, clearly his first love, he commanded a battalion in South Korea, a
brigade in the 101st Airborne at Fort Campbell, Ky., and was assistant division
commander of the 4th Infantry Division at Fort Carson, Colo.

He also served on the Army staff, on the staff of Secretary of Defense Harold
Brown and as military assistant to the Deputy Secretary of Defense and later
Secretary of Energy, Charles W. Duncan Jr. In 1983 General Powell was deputy
commander at Fort Leavenworth, Kan., and was headed for command of a division
when he was called back to Washington as Mr. Weinberger's assistant. In 1986 he
became commanding general of the Fifth Corps. For how long? ''Six months,'' he
spit out.

Advocates Use of Officers

Given the much-disputed performance of Admiral Poindexter and Colonel North in
the Iran-contra affair, General Powell did not shy from advocating that military
officers continue to serve on the security council staff.

''It's essential,'' he said, that the security council's staff have access to
the experience of military officers, their ideas on military force and their
insights into the sometimes mystifying Pentagon. ''The record of military
officers serving on the staff over time has been one of distinction,'' the
general said.

As the deputy national security adviser, General Powell said he saw no conflict
with his oath of office as a military officer, and he said he had never been
placed in a compromising position. ''I don't see a problem,'' he said.

But he said he thought the political office of national security adviser should
be held by a civilian, even though it has been filled with distinction by
officers like Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr. of the Army and Lieut. Gen. Brent
Scowcroft of the Air Force.

General Powell will presumably remain with the security council staff until
President Reagan's term ends, although he said it would be presumptuous to say
so. After that, he hopes to return to the Army, ''as close as I can get to
troops.''

Military officers who serve in the White House are sometimes shunned by their
services afterward as being politicized. But that seems not to be true of
General Powell, for scuttlebutt in the Army says he stands a good chance of
becoming a full general and may be a candidate for chief of staff.

''Colin Powell is very highly regarded in the Army,'' said a general who is
known for choosing his words carefully. ''Taking that job hasn't hurt him
because we know he didn't seek it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lieut. Gen. Colin L. Powell (NYT/Ken Heinin)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 6, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HIGH COURT, SHORT A JUSTICE, TO HEAR 21 NEW APPEALS

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1137 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5


Opening its new term with only eight members, the Supreme Court agreed today to
hear arguments in several significant cases while declining to review nearly
1,000 other appeals.

Conducting first-day business as usual, the Court agreed to hear 21 cases and
took these actions in some of the most closely watched matters:

* It agreed to hear arguments on whether a newspaper had a constitutional right
to defy a court order barring publication of certain facts, instead of appealing
the order.

* It agreed to review an appeal by the New York State Club Association
challenging the constitutionality of a 1984 New York City law that bars clubs
deemed not to be ''distinctly private'' from excluding women as members. The
clubs say the law violates their First Amendment rights of association. [Page
B7.]

* It left intact a regulation allowing state-chartered banks that are not
members of the Federal Reserve System to underwrite corporate securities. [Page
D1.]

* It left standing a Federal appeals court decision barring Random House from
publishing a biography of the author J. D. Salinger unless brief quotations from
and paraphrases of Mr. Salinger's private letters are deleted. The biography was
written by Ian Hamilton, literary critic for The Sunday Times of London. The
appeals court based its decision on Mr. Salinger's copyright on his letters.
(Random House v. Salinger, No. 87-188.) [Page C17.]

* It declined to entertain a pretrial appeal by the former Presidential aide
Michael K. Deaver challenging the constitutionality of the Federal special
prosecutor law under which he is to stand trial on perjury charges on Oct. 19.
Mr. Deaver will be free to raise the issue again if convicted. (Deaver v. United
States, No. 86-2026.)

* It killed the last effort by William P. Tavoulareas, former president of the
Mobil Oil Corporation, to reinstate his $2 million jury verdict against The
Washington Post. The case concerns his libel suit over a report, which an
appeals court, in overturning a lower court decision, found ''substantially
true,'' that he had ''set up'' his son Peter in a shipping company doing
business with Mobil. (Tavoulareas v. Washington Post, No. 86-1967.)

* It refused to review Federal district and appeals court rulings that
multibillion-dollar lawsuits against the Union Carbide Corporation over the
Bhopal chemical plant disaster should be tried in India, not the United States.

* And the Court agreed to decide whether the Fifth Amendment privilege against
self-incrimination bars Federal prosecutors and courts from requiring suspects
to help them obtain the suspects' foreign bank records by signing consent forms.
(Doe v. U.S., No. 86-1753).

In brief, unsigned orders, the Court added 21 lower court decisions to the 90
appeals in which it had already agreed to hear oral arguments this term.

Empty Space Is Significant

When the Court took the bench today, the only evidence of the bitter battle over
Judge Robert H. Bork's nomination was an empty space where the most junior
justice would sit.

Because the Court has time for full reviews of fewer than 200 cases a year, it
declines to hear more than 95 percent of all appeals filed with it. In most but
not all cases, the effect is to leave the lower court ruling intact, without
suggesting that the Court necessarily considers it correct, and without setting
any national precedent.

The Rhode Island newspaper case grew out of action two years ago by The
Providence Journal. A Federal district judge ordered the newspaper not to
publish logs of conversations intercepted in illegal Federal wiretaps of a
reputed organized crime figure. The Rhode Island newspaper printed the
information in defiance of that order, which was later found unconstitutional.

The case could shed new light on how broadly the Court will apply its past
rulings, in the 1971 Pentagon Papers case and others, protecting the press
against court orders barring publication of articles said to be harmful to
national security, privacy rights or other legally protected interests.

Appeal by New York Clubs

While agreeing to hear the appeal by New York clubs claiming a constitutional
right to exclude women from membership, the Court ruled, somewhat ambiguously,
that San Francisco's 2,000-member Bohemian Club had no constitutional right to
discriminate against women in employment.

The Court's brief order in that case stated only that the club's constitutional
challenge to a state law barring it from discriminating raised no ''substantial
Federal question.'' (Bohemian Club v. Fair Employment Commission, No. 86-1915.)
The Providence Journal case, United States v. Providence Journal, No. 87-65,
pits the ordinary rule that violation even of unconstitutional court orders is
punishable as contempt against the Court's rulings in the Pentagon Papers and
other cases that ''prior restraints'' on publication are ''presumptively
unconstitutional.''

In the Rhode Island case, the Court will consider whether to reinstate the
contempt convictions of the newspaper and its executive editor for publishing on
Nov. 14, 1985, in violation of a temporary restraining order, an article
disclosing conversations overheard in warrantless, illegal Federal wiretaps.

The target of the illegal wiretaps had been Raymond Patriarca, the reputed boss
of organized crime in New England, who died in 1984.

The order barring publication, pending further proceedings, was issued by
Federal District Judge Francis J. Boyle of Providence at the request of Mr.
Patriarca's son, Raymond J. Patriarca, whose was also tapped.

The Journal violated the order, rather than await a scheduled hearing or appeal
it. Judge Boyle's order, which he lifted less than a week after issuing it, was
highly unusual, and the newspaper's defiance even more so.

'Prior Restraint' a Key Issue

For example, The New York Times and other newspapers that were ordered by lower
court judges in 1971 to suspend publication of the Pentagon Papers, a classified
study of the origins of the Vietnam war, complied with the orders while pursuing
appeals.

The Supreme Court eventually ruled in their favor, citing the ''heavy
presumption'' against the constitutionality of ''prior restraints'' of speech.
The Court has not previously decided whether this presumption would justify
action like The Providence Journal's.

Judge Boyle found the newspaper and its executive editor, Charles McC. Hauser,
in contempt. But a three-judge Federal appeals panel in Boston overturned the
contempt convictions.

The full six-member appeals court later revised this order by stating, that in
future cases, parties must ''make a good faith effort'' to appeal, and may test
the constitutionality of court orders by violating them only if ''emergency
relief'' is unavailable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Sam Donaldson and Kenneth Walker of ABC news (AP); President
Reagan at the White House (NYT/Jose R. Lopez) (pg. B6)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 6, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

China Says It Downed A Vietnamese Fighter

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 144 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Oct. 5


China said today that its Air Force shot down a Vietnamese jet fighter this
afternoon after it twice intruded into Chinese air space.

The official New China News Agency said the Vietnamese MIG-21 had intruded
nearly 20 miles over southern China. The brief report did not say how the plane
was shot down, nor did it gave the fate of the pilot.

The officer on duty at the Vietnamese Embassy in Beijing said he had no
information about the report.

China and Vietnam have been skirmishing along their common border since 1979,
when they fought a 17-day frontier war.

The news agency said China's Foreign Ministry had ''made representations'' to
Vietnam's Ambassador about the plane's intrusion. ''The Vietnamese authorities
must adopt practical measures to put an end to such incidents or they will be
responsible for all the consequences,'' the agency said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 6, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Washington Talk: Capitol Hill;
War Powers? What War Powers?

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5


What has happened to the War Powers Act?

That question is being asked with increasing frequency on Capitol Hill as the
situation in the Persian Gulf grows more tense. President Reagan has steadfastly
ignored the statute, and Congress has failed in all attempts, through either
legislation or court action, to force his hand.

Senator Dale Bumpers, an Arkansas Democrat, calls the War Powers Act a
''eunuch.'' Senator Paul S. Trible Jr., a Virginia Republican, pronounces it a
''nullity.'' Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., a Connecticut Republican, says the
measure is ''de facto dead.''

But most lawmakers are not quite ready to bury a law that defines the role of
Congress in controlling military actions. Senator Sam Nunn, a Georgia Democrat
who heads the Armed Services Committee, summed up the prevailing view: ''I think
the law's unworkable, but we have a duty to try to make it work.''

Several senators are drafting a plan to have a commission suggest ways of making
the statute more workable. Skeptics argue that Congress always creates a
commission when it wants to avoid a tough issue, but Senator John W. Warner, a
Virginia Republican, says only a panel of experts can break the deadlock between
Congress and the White House.

''A short-term, Band-Aid fix is not enough,'' Mr. Warner told the Senate last
week. ''We need a more permanent, long-term solution.''

Basic Constitutional Conflict

The War Powers measure is rooted in a basic Constitutional conflict, whereby
Congress has the right to declare war while the President is the Commander in
Chief. For 200 years, the executive and legislative branches have wrestled with
how to share this power of war and peace.

The United States role in the Vietnam War convinced many lawmakers that their
share of power had badly eroded, and in 1973 Congress tried to redress the
imbalance by passing the War Powers Act over President Nixon's veto.

Its main provision says that the President must report to Congress in all cases
when United States troops are introduced ''into hostilities or into situations
where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated.'' Once the
report is made, the President has 60 days to withdraw the troops unless Congress
authorizes them to stay. The deadline can be extended by 30 days at the
President's request.

All Presidents since Mr. Nixon have challenged the constitutionality of the law,
and the troop withdrawal mechanism has never been activated. Congress has acted
legislatively only once in the last 14 years to try to force the President to
carry out the law, when a Marine contingent landed in Lebanon in 1983. But even
then, Congress extended the deadline to 18 months, and the marines were
withdrawn long before a showdown could occur.

Despite its history of impotence, some lawmakers say the War Powers measure
remains an important weapon. Its mere existence, goes this argument, forces
Congress to debate military decisions, even when the letter of the law is not
obeyed.

''It is a tool to send a strong signal to the Administration with regard to a
lack of Congressional support,'' asserted Senator Jim Sasser, a Tennessee
Democrat who headed a study mission to the Persian Gulf. ''It keeps the pot
boiling.''

Some experts say the law is less useful in ''gray areas,'' such as the Persian
Gulf, where the United States decision to escort oil tankers does not fall under
usual definitions of war.

''When you get to a real war question, such as sending troops to Nicaragua, the
War Powers Act is a powerful instrument in the political process,'' said Fred
Wertheimer, president of Common Cause, the public affairs lobby.

But there is wide agreement in both branches of Government that the Persian Gulf
crisis has illuminated some serious flaws in the War Powers Act, and one prime
problem is when the measure actually applies.

To many Administration critics, all doubts about the law's relevance were erased
last month when a United States helicopter fired on an Iranian ship that it said
was laying mines. ''If that's not being involved in imminent hostilities,''
Senator Sasser complained, ''I don't know what is.''

The Administration itself was divided, with Howard H. Baker Jr., the White House
chief of staff, arguing that the law did apply to the Gulf. But he was
overruled, and one senior official said the White House position now is that
''the situation in the Persian Gulf does not justify notification under the War
Powers Act.''

A second major question is this: How can the President be forced to abide by the
law if he chooses to ignore it? In the Senate, an amendment directing the
President to invoke the statute failed by a vote of 50 to 41. A milder version
got 54 votes, six short of the number needed to break a filibuster against it.

This failure has left Mr. Reagan's opponents frustrated and keenly aware of the
President's advantage in foreign policy. They say many lawmakers criticize the
President but are reluctant to take responsibility for mandating a particular
action.

Senator Weicker, a leading advocate of the War Powers Act, said, ''They're just
afraid that something will happen out there that will make the President look
right and make them look like fools.''

In the House, 110 lawmakers have supported a suit in Federal court that would
direct the President to fulfill the law's requirements. In their view, any
legislative effort to force the President's hand is both futile and damaging to
their legal case.

''Congress should not have to pass a new law in order to enforce a law already
on the books,'' said Richard P. Conlon, executive director of the Democratic
Study Group, the organization of liberal Democrats who organized the suit.

But senators reply that the lawsuit is equally futile, since the courts have
repeatedly refused to enter such disputes betweeen the executive and legislative
branches.

Many lawmakers also argue that the Persian Gulf situation reveals a flaw in the
law's 60-day deadline for the withdrawal of troops. But they do not agree on the
remedy.

Too Short, Too Long

Some say the deadline is too short and should be lengthened to give the
President more flexibility. Others say the deadline is too long and creates a
period of dangerous uncertainty while Congress decides whether to remove the
troops.

Senator Warner also argues for changing the provision that allows Congress to
force a withdrawal of troops by simply refusing to act. He said the lawmakers
should be required to pass a resolution - over a veto, if necessary - so as to
require a withdrawal.

A final flaw is that the law simply cannot enforce itself. In one closed
late-night session on Capitol Hill, one Senator threw up his hands and
complained: ''If we pass a bill, what do we do? Send the Sergeant-at-Arms to the
White House to wrestle with the President?''

As a result, some lawmakers think the law should be amended so that when troops
are ordered withdrawn, the money to finance them is automatically cut off.

These and other thorny questions would have to be considered by any commission.
But a consensus seems to be emerging on two main points: some version of the War
Powers Act is still necessary, but the current statute is badly in need of
revision.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 6, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Washington Talk: The Study of Intelligence;
Only Spies Can Find These Sources

BYLINE: By JEFF GERTH

SECTION: Section A; Page 32, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5


It takes some snooping to find the favorite bookstore of Washington's
intelligence professionals. The store, the National Intelligence Book Center,
doesn't advertise, and its collection of almost 700 titles is tucked away in a
small, windowless room on the 10th floor of a downtown office building. It is
listed in the phone book, but there is no sign of it on the street.

Not surprisingly, some of those who helped get the bookstore started and keep it
going have intelligence ties and ''most of our customers are in the Bancroft,
who runs the store.

''We'll never be in an easy location,'' she said. ''That's part of intelligence.
The nooks and crannies, being hidden away - you have to find us.''

Hidden away across the Potomac River in Arlington, Va., is another treasure
trove of intelligence information: a computerized data base with 30,000 names
drawn from books, articles and intelligence rosters. Sets of its computer tapes,
at $100 for institutions and $35 to individuals, are sold to journalists, book
authors and other researchers delving into foreign policy and intelligence
issues.

As the home of the Central Intelligence Agency and the National Security Agency,
the Washington area has long been considered the nation's spy capital. And the
book center and the data base, albeit through different perspectives, are
enhancing Washington's reputation as a center for the study of intelligence.

A Draft Resister

If the book center is a favorite of the intelligence establishment, the computer
program is the work of an anti-establishment researcher.

Its founder, Daniel Brandt, resisted the draft in the Vietnam War and says his
current work is ''a continuation of what I started as an undergraduate
protesting U.S. policy in Vietnam.''

Mr. Brandt seems to share the book center's passion for anonymity, though. He
does not advertise. And neither he nor his company, Micro Associates, is listed
in the phone book.

For 15 years Mr. Brandt has combed through hundreds of books and publications
about intelligence, foreign affairs and related subjects and indexed them by
names of individuals and groups. Many of his source materials are for sale at
the book center, but he has never visited it. He has sent the book center a set
of his computer tapes for its own use.

His data base also includes rosters of such organizations as the Association of
Former Intelligence Officers and the Council on Foreign Relations as well as
official reports like the Tower Commission's study of the Iran-contra affair. In
addition, Mr. Brandt draws from publications in Communist countries, such as
articles in the Cuban press last summer that named United States intelligence
agents supposedly operating in Cuba.

''I can't vouch for the accuracy of things like the Cuban lists, and my
information is not new,'' Mr. Brandt said. The value of his data base, he said,
is that ''many of the sources are fairly obscure so it's a very effective way to
retrieve information on U.S. intelligence that no one else indexes.''

Also in Mr. Brandt's data base are all of the books by Philip Agee, a renegade
C.I.A. agent whose efforts to identify United States intelligence agents
incurred the Government's wrath. The data also cover works by more conventional
authors like the 1985 book ''Secrecy and Democracy,'' by Stansfield Turner, a
former Director of Central Intelligence.

Mr. Agee's most recent book, ''On the Run,'' gives a Post Office box for Mr.
Brandt in Virginia and says the Brandt project ''looked just like'' one that Mr.
Agree had contemplated.

'An Outrage' at Book Center

The book center carries Mr. Agee's books, much to the consternation of some
customers.

''Some of them will yell at me,'' Ms. Bancroft said. ''An old codger will say,
'This is an outrage! You're supporting Philip Agee.' ''

But, she added, others in the intelligence community can't wait to read Mr.
Agee's latest work. ''It's very important to carry both the official line as
well as criticism,'' the book center director said.

The book center began last year as a mail-order service. Its founding directors
include Ms. Bancroft, a Harvard University graduate with an interest in forensic
science and cryptography, and a current official of a United States intelligence
agency whom Ms. Bancroft would not name.

A number of ''patron saints,'' as Ms. Bancroft described them, also helped in
the center's formation. One, Walter Pforzheimer, is a leading intelligence
historian with an extensive personal collection of intelligence books. According
to references in Mr. Brandt's data base, Mr. Pforzheimer was the C.I.A.'s first
legislative counsel and a member of President Reagan's intelligence transition
team after the 1980 election.

Books and Mugs, Too

The center carries popular nonfiction spy books as well as out-of-print books
and just a few spy novels. Several books published by the Soviet Union are
available, including one with the conspiratorial title ''Chile, C.I.A., Big
Business.''

On one shelf at the book center is a collection of mugs with the insignia of
either the C.I.A. or its Soviet counterpart, the K.G.B.

Although the center is ''supposed to be profit making,'' it ''doesn't want to
become known as a spy shop so it's not on the street,'' Ms. Bancroft said.

Mr. Brandt, too, seems caught between the cult of intelligence and the demands
of commercialism. ''If it got too big,'' he said of efforts to market his data
base, ''it would be less fun.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Elizabeth Bancroft (NYT/Paul A. Souders) and Daniel Brandt
(NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 6, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

House Voted Justice for Interned Americans;
We Were at War

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 431 words


To the Editor:

The House of Representatives commemorated the Constitution's 200th anniversary
by approving apologies and reparations for the forced relocation of ethnic
Japanese during World War II. An official apology, a $50 million public
education fund and $1.2 billion in restitution were included in the Civil
Liberties Act, which passed 243 to 141 after several hours of heated floor
debate (news story, Sept. 18).

Where have we gone wrong that we blame our Defense Department and President
Franklin D. Roosevelt for the evacuation of 120,000 Japanese and
Japanese-Americans? Any reference to their being shorn of their rights disturbs
me greatly. First, 40,000 were not United States citizens, while 80 percent of
the Japanese-Americans had arrived here after 1920, thus still having close ties
to Japan.

We were at war with an implacable foe, whose reputation at the time was not one
of a friendly or peaceful people - having annexed Korea, seized Manchuria, taken
much of the Dutch East Indies, Indochina, Malaya and Burma, along with most of
China's coastal cities.

Following the bombing of Pearl Harbor and the near destruction of our Pacific
fleet, our West Coast military heads convinced the President there was an urgent
need to relocate ethnic Japanese on the possibility of sabotage or even
invasion.

This urgency was heightened by Emperor Hirohito's mandate granting dual
citizenship (dual nationality) to Japanese-Americans, and stating that all
Japanese, regardless of place of birth, were Japanese. This further fanned
American anger at Japan and those of Japanese ancestry.

President Roosevelt's Executive Order 9066, authorizing the relocation of ethnic
Japanese, was carried out with the full awareness that a country does what it
must in war to survive and win - there is no second chance.

What makes the Civil Liberties Act so incongruous is that in 1950 the United
States Government settled compensation and damage claims totaling $39 million
with all those who provided legitimate claims for loss of business and homes.
Before President Gerald R. Ford left office, he issued an apology.

While the debate on compensation for those relocated was taking place, many
veterans of World Wars I and II, of Korea and Vietnam are in need and
experiencing difficulty in obtaining medical help and financial assistance
because of Federal budget cuts. And only recently it has become public knowledge
that veterans make up a sizable number of our nation's homeless population. What
are our priorities?

JOHN CABOT GRAMPP
Woodside, Queens, Sept. 19, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 6, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION;
Angry Look at Colleges

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 970 words


''THE Closing of the American Mind'' by Allan Bloom has been on the New York
Times best-seller list for 23 weeks. Apparently this angry book has been
mis-titled: if so many are reading it, the American mind must be wide open.

The book is subtitled ''How Higher Education Has Failed Democracy and
Impoverished the Souls of Today's Students.'' This may explain its popularity.
Denouncing universities and young people is fashionable. Doing so makes their
elders feel virtuous and superior.

Mr. Bloom, a professor in the Committee on Social Thought at the University of
Chicago, believes that America's universities were destroyed in the 1960's by
rebellious students, abetted by cowardly faculties. He loves Plato and
Shakespeare, and fears that few on today's campuses share his love.

He sees only emptiness and disaster around him, and his view seems to appeal to
an audience that looks at American students with disapproval and contempt. And
there appear to be enough jealous intellectuals who enjoy hearing some of their
betters insulted, as when Mr. Bloom refers to anthropologist Margaret Mead as
''that sexual adventurer'' or to C.P. Snow as ''silly.'' Mr. Bloom sees today's
students arriving at college sated with experience, especially sexual. In better
days, he writes, ''a significant number of students used to arrive at the
university physically and spiritually virginal, expecting to lose their
innocence there.''

Today's students ''are unified only in their relativism and their allegiance to
equality,'' Mr. Bloom asserted in his book. He views relativism, the theory that
one subject of study is as worthwhile as any other and that human behavior may
differ but is never is right or wrong, as the cardinal sin of today's students.

Yet, an open-minded look at today's students should discover that many are
sophisticated enough to be committed, not to an everybody-is-the-same kind of
equality, but to equality of opportunity. These students do not believe that all
values are equal. Many, for instance, put a premium on civil and women's rights,
and they oppose apartheid in South Africa, just as their predecessors opposed
the war in Vietnam. Some still serve in the Peace Corps for which Mr. Bloom, who
prefers virtually exclusive concentration on Western Europe, gives them no
points.

Women on the campuses, he believes, no longer ''need the protection of NOW any
more than do women in general.'' Many students, female and male, disagree.

Most students today hold a view of democracy that differs radically from Mr.
Bloom's. They celebrate what Mr. Bloom deplores when he says that ''Harvard,
Yale and Princeton are not what they used to be - the last resorts of
aristocratic sentiment within the democracy.''

Mr. Bloom is a prisoner of his experience as a professor at Cornell in the
1960's, when black students, armed with rifles, pressed their demands in a
confrontation with university authorities. The experience was understandably
unnerving and the students' behavior was shameful.

But, while the weapons made this confrontation more dramatic and dangerous, the
situation differed little from other student uprisings - at Berkeley, Columbia,
Harvard, Kent State and elsewhere - over a variety of issues ultimately
dominated by anger over the war in Vietnam.

Mr. Bloom's anger over that era leads him to compare it to the takeover of the
German universities by the Nazis, an incredible distortion. When the heads of
German universities appeared in SS uniforms, they represented the total power of
Hitler's Third Reich, something that was hardly comparable to the strength of
the American student rebellion.

True, course requirements were dropped too readily in acquiescence to student'
demands. But the suggestion that this was an unprecedentedly nihilistic attack
on quality higher education ignores American academic history. In the 1880's,
Charles W. Eliot, the distinguished president of Harvard, abolished all course
requirements in order to liberate the students from the rigidly prescribed and
largely obsolete regimen.

But why does the book's attack on higher education find such a warm public
response? Is there a growing movement that, like Mr. Bloom, would prefer a
return to the days when a few elitist colleges enrolled the sons of the wealthy
and the powerful?

Do Americans agree that teachers should direct students ''to see the world as
Homer and Shakespeare did,'' instead of telling them, as he thinks teachers do
today, ''Homer and Shakespeare had some of the same concerns you do and can
enrich your vision of the world''?

Do many Americans share Mr. Bloom's contempt for modern youth? Do they believe
his charge that they lack competitive spirit?

Mr. Bloom rightly points to serious flaws in undergraduate education, such as
the lack of effective academic counseling and lack of a coherent curriculum. But
reforms now being almost universally sought cannot be built on college-bashing
and a contempt for students' values.

''It has been open-hunting season on higher education in recent years,'' said
Howard R. Swearer, president of Brown University, whose remarks appeared in the
Chronicle of Higher Education. ''This book plays into that climate.''

David Riesman, professor emeritus of sociology at Harvard, finds that the book
presents a ''false picture'' of the huge and intricate system of higher
education with its 12 million students and more than 3,000 colleges.

Leon Botstein, president of Bard College, said in an interview that the book was
an expression of the ''over-40's view of the barbaric young'' and the playing
out of an angry professor's fantasy.''

There is nothing wrong with one man's fantasy. But there is cause for concern if
large numbers of people want to share the fantasy and build on it the reforms of
education and youth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 8, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

An Honor for Journalists Killed Covering Wars

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 70 words


Kara Ulizio, 11 years old, and her brother Ryan, 10, looking for their
grandfather's name on a plaque that was unveiled last night during a ceremony at
the Sheraton Centre Hotel. Their grandfather, James J. McElroy, was killed
covering the Battle of Iwo Jima in 1945. The ceremony was attended by
correspondents and photographers who covered World War II, Korea, Vietnam and
other conflicts. (NYT/Ruby Washington)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 8, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

At the Met, a Hudson Revival

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS C. McGILL

SECTION: Section C; Page 31, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 963 words


The crowds are pouring in, and John K. Howat, the Metropolitan Museum of Art
curator who organized the exhibition of paintings that is attracting them,
thinks he knows why.

The exhibition, entitled ''American Paradise: The World of the Hudson River
School,'' which opened on Sunday, contains 88 paintings by American artists of
the middle 19th century. By and large the works are enormous, lush renditions of
pure and unsullied American landscapes -mountaintop views of fertile green
valleys, calm and luminous seascapes, misty views of the Western prairies at
sunrise and sunset.

''People want to get away from the smog,'' Mr. Howat surmised. ''These pictures
are welcoming and serene, and they don't depict the kind of stuff that bounces
off us every day. A little bit of certitude is pleasant when you're going
through some rough patches, as we have with Vietnam and Watergate and now
Iranscam.''

The exhibition, which continues through Jan. 3, is already drawing crowds on the
order of the recent van Gogh and Manet exhibitions - 5,700 on the first day,
museum officials said.

Art historians and artists also say the exhibition marks the full rehabilitation
of the Hudson River School, a style that was dominant in the art world until the
1870's and was then largely forgotten until the 1940's. Since then, it has been
slowly gaining in acceptance.

Mr. Howat, a slender art historian with salt-and-pepper hair and a sense of
humor dry as kindling, has had plenty to do with creating that comeback. Indeed,
the present exhibition, accompanied by a scholarly catalogue of essays by him
and other people, marks a kind of professional culmination for the 50-year-old
curator, who is chairman of the museum's departments of American art.

''It certainly brings together what skills and gifts I have in the field,'' he
said in an interview Tuesday in his office, a glass-enclosed corner space
overlooking Central Park.

Since 1964, Mr. Howat has mounted several exhibitions including works by Hudson
River School painters -notably a collaboration with the Worcester Art Museum on
a survey of the work of John F. Kensett at the Met in 1985 - and written a book
on the subject, ''The Hudson River and Its Painters.''

His interest in the field began in a kind of conversion, Mr. Howat said. It was
in 1963, he said, while he was a young curator at a small museum in Glens Falls,
N.Y., the Hyde Collection, that his interest suddenly shifted from medieval art
to Hudson River painting.

''The local school asked me to do some lectures on American art, and in
preparing them I discovered the landscape painters and fell in love with them,''
he said. ''The pictures were riveting, very beautiful. One of the most magnetic
things about them is the quality of light and space. You can practically smell
the light, it's so real.''

Such uncomplicated delight in painting is a hallmark of Mr. Howat's approach as
an art historian. His essay in the present catalogue, for instance, focuses on
reconstructing the social events and customs of the heyday of Hudson River
painting and avoids the theorizing about the style that has been common in
recent years.

It has often been said, for instance, that the luminosity and apparent
spirituality of many of the Hudson River landscapes - bright sky above, dark
ground below - is an artistic precursor to the work of such postwar painters as
Mark Rothko and Brice Marden.

'Historians Spinning Webs'

''I think it's art historians spinning webs,'' was Mr. Howat's curt appraisal of
such conjecture. It is in the reconstructing and retelling of historical events,
trends and customs -especially those of the boom years of Hudson River painting
in the middle 1800's - that Mr. Howat truly warms to his theme.

Such Hudson River School painters as Frederic E. Church and Albert Bierstadt, he
said, were the Steven Spielbergs and George Lucases of their day.

''These painters provided public entertainment,'' Mr. Howat said. ''People would
say, 'What's on today? Well, Frederic Church is on today.' '' Typically, the
painters spent their summers traveling and making copious sketches of exotic
spots throughout the American West and South America. During the winter, in
their studios in Manhattan and along the Hudson River, they would carefully
construct from their sketches huge canvases that both recorded and idealized the
landscapes they had seen.

Mr. Howat said a gallery would put the finished work on view for 25 cents a
person and split the take with the artist.

Just as museums sell replicas and posters today, galleries in the middle-1800's
sold engravings based on those paintings for $10 to $25, depending on whether
the engraving was signed.

From the historical record, Mr. Howat has found - and published in the catalogue
- evidence that the lush landscapes of the Hudson River painters was not
entirely conceived in sentiment and transcendental rapture. An element of the
crusader also existed, as documented in a flowery passage from a Thomas Cole
lecture of 1835.

''In this age,'' Mr. Cole said, ''when a meager utilitarianism seems ready to
absorb every feeling and senti-ment, it would be well to cultivate the oasis
that yet remains to us, and thus preserve the germs of a future and a purer
system.''

Now that we are all in that future of which Cole spoke, Mr. Howat suggested, the
present show may inspire in visitors a reverence for nature, which was Mr.
Cole's intent.

''People will come in here and look at one of the landscapes of the Hudson
River,'' he said. ''And then they'll go visit the same place, upstate, and get
run over by a speeding train or a bus. They'll draw comparisons between then and
now. It's inevitable. And they'll realize the natural environment is something
we have to preserve.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John K. Howat with ''Autumn - On the Hudson River,'' by Jasper
F. Cropsey (NYT/Keith Meyers)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Washing Talk: Department of Defense;
Weinberger on Persian Gulf: Cap the Chameleon?

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 8


A question on the minds of a number of what might be called the capital's
Weinberger watchers is why the man they view as Cap the Dove on the use of
United States forces in foreign engagements is acting like Cap the Hawk in
regard to the Persian Gulf.

For almost seven years Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger has been the
Reagan Administration's voice of prudence and caution on the use of military
force abroad. He privately opposed sending a Marine contingent into Lebanon in
1982 and pressed for the marines' removal once they were there. A year after
they were pulled out of Beirut after a terrorist bombing of their headquarters,
he outlined a set of criteria the United States would apply before involving
United States armed forces in military operations abroad.

But when the United States agreed last spring to protect Kuwaiti oil tankers in
the Persian Gulf and let them bear the United States flag, Mr. Weinberger
appeared to have suddenly reversed himself and became a vocal advocate of strong
military action to protect those ships.

'The Fuse That Exploded'

Senior Pentagon officials ascribe the Secretary's new hard line to a combination
of factors headed by his fundamental distrust of the Soviet Union. The report
last February that the Kuwaitis were going to put half their tanker fleet under
Soviet flags ''was the fuse that exploded Cap Weinberger,'' one official said.
''He was jet-propelled after that.''

The official said the Secretary believed that if the United States did not help
Kuwait and left it to the Russians, the American people would later blame the
Reagan Administration for ''losing the gulf'' to the Soviet Union.

Iran's intransigence in its war with Iraq and the Iran-contra scandal also
influenced Mr. Weinberger's views on the Persian Gulf, according to Pentagon
officials. ''Cap was convinced the Iranians would not come to the peace table
with Iraq and were out to topple the Arab regimes on the western side of the
gulf through terrorism and agitation,'' said one official.

Another official said Mr. Weinberger considered United States stock with the
Arab states in the gulf region to be at a low ebb in the wake of the Iran-contra
disclosures. This source also said that Mr. Weinberger was an ''Arabist at
heart,'' a inclination he developed while working for Bechtel, a company with
extensive Middle East contracts, and that he saw Kuwait's plight as an
opportunity to restore good relations with the Arabs while at the same time
frustrating the ambitions of the Iranians and Russians. ''It also had the
advantage of being unrelated to any Arab-Israeli issue,'' the source said.

Mr. Weinberger was reportedly encouraged to take steps to bolster the United
States position in the gulf by the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr., despite strong reservations in the Navy. Earlier in his
career the admiral commanded United States naval forces in the region and is
said to be a strong supporter of the Arab states there.

For his part, Mr. Weinberger says the United States actions in the Persian Gulf
are consistent with his earlier statements on the use of military forces abroad.


His 'Six Commandments'

His definitive policy statement cautioning against the use of military force
came in a speech at the National Press Club in Washington shortly after
President Reagan was re-elected in November 1984.

The six criteria that Mr. Weinberger set forth for using military force were
that the action involve vital national interests, an intention to win, clearcut
political-military objectives, continual reassessment of objectives, support by
the American people and the determination that all other means short of sending
in troops had failed. Mr. Weinberger said he deliberately phrased the criteria
negatively to ''sound a note of caution'' before military personnel were asked
to risk their lives. To illustrate his point, he cited Central America and said
the President would not allow military forces to be gradually drawn into a
combat role there.

Mr. Weinberger said his six tests, which became known around the Pentagon as the
''six commandments,'' were drawn from the lessons of Korea and Vietnam. Most
senior military officers who had experienced the frustration of those wars
applauded the speech at the time as a signal that there would be ''no more
Vietnams.'' Some generals, however, were concerned that the six tests could
spawn trouble abroad. Taken literally, they said, the rules were so restrictive
as effectively to preclude the United States from ever taking military action
short of World War III.

Whether Mr. Weinberger is now ignoring his own rules in the Persian Gulf is
debatable. When asked about this in a questions submitted to him by The New York
Times, he replied in writing, ''It seems to me that all the principles I tried
to enunciate in the Press Club talk were fully met.''

One Pentagon official observed that the Secretary had a ''lawyer's mind that can
rationalize anything.'' But there is no question that Mr. Weinberger has emerged
as the Administration's most forceful advocate of determined action in the Gulf.
He has harshly condemned the Iranians and has made it clear that United States
naval units will respond with force if threatened. This was borne out last month
when United States helicopters attacked an Iranian ship that they said was
laying mines in shipping channels.

Although not agreeing that Mr. Weinberger has changed his views, some associates
in and out of the Department of Defense say he believes the stakes in the
Persian Gulf are so high that risks are worth taking even if they do not neatly
conform to his formula.

A senior official pointed out that Mr. Weinberger has maintained his customary
prudence in the actual use of force. He noted, for example, that the Secretary
did not recommend military retaliation after the helicopters caught the Iranians
red-handed in the act of laying mines.

For 'Freedom of the Seas'

Mr. Weinberger says the United States response to the hostilities in the gulf is
in keeping with its commitment to ''pursue freedom of the seas'' and to prevent
a situation from developing that would require ''far more active and militant
participation.''

If the United States had not acted, he said, ''the gulf would soon become a
monument to Iranian intimidation and indiscriminate attacks on shipping.'' He
also said that a refusal to honor the Kuwaiti request to reregister the oil
tankers ''would have created a vacuum in the gulf into which Soviet power would
shortly have been projected.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Defense Sec. Caspar W. Weinberger (NYT/William E. Sauro)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Says Iran Boats Hit in Gulf May Have Had American Missiles

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1113 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 9


The small Iranian boats that American helicopters attacked in the Persian Gulf
Thursday may have been equipped with American-made Stinger anti-aircraft
weapons, the Pentagon said today.

''Equipment recovered aboard the small Iranian craft which we struck is believed
to be associated with the Stinger system,'' including batteries and packing
material, the Pentagon said.

The Stinger is a shoulder-fired, heat-seeking missile that is among the world's
most advanced weapons for use against helicopters and aircraft.

No Missiles Found

No missiles were found aboard the three small boats. The vessels initially were
thought to have been sunk, but two were found drifting and disabled after the
fight in the gulf on Thursday night, the Pentagon said today.

It said the boats, which are about the size of small fishing craft equipped with
outboard engines, were taken in tow by United States Navy ships.

The reported presence of Stinger equipment, first revealed in a passing remark
by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger this morning, raised fears that Iran
may possess a weapon that could be used to attack commercial aircraft in the
gulf or elsewhere.

Iran's Account

The Pentagon said Thursday that it had fired on the Iranian boats after at least
one of them shot with machine guns at a patrolling American helicopter. It said
that at least six Iranians were taken from the water but that two of them had
died. In a separate incident, an American helicopter reported gunfire from
Iranian forces on an oil rig in the gulf.

In response to the clashes, the Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Velayati,
said today, ''The region is on the verge of turning into another Vietnam,''
according to a Teheran Radio broadcast monitored by The Associated Press in
Cyprus.

Iran asserted today that it had hit an American helicopter during the
confrontation, using what an Iranian news agency called ''an Iranian Stinger
missile,'' A.P. reported.

The Pentagon's Denial

The Pentagon denied the assertion, as well as statements by Iran that it had
attacked and damaged an American warship and that the American side had fired
first during the gunfight on Thursday night.

In that episode, as described today by Pentagon officials, three American
helicopters flying together from a barge used by the Navy as an offshore base
approached a group of four Iranian ships that were being carefully tracked in
the zone near Farsi Island, in the central gulf, where Iran has a base.

One helicopter was an MH-6 aircraft, equipped for night-time searches but not
carrying heavy armament. The other two were AH-6 models, which are similar but
more heavily armed and not as well equipped for surveillance.

The three helicopters, acting as a team, attacked the Iranian vessels as soon as
they opened fire, officials said.

Mr. Weinberger said today that one of the four Iranian vessels, which he
described as a 160-foot corvette, or fast naval patrol boat, had escaped. A
smaller craft, a Swedish-made Boghammer speedboat, was sunk in the helicopter
attack, he said. The two smallest boats were discovered still afloat this
morning and are in American hands, he said.

Mr. Weinberger said that the Pentagon expects sporadic fighting involving
American forces in the gulf to continue, but that there is no reason to invoke
the War Powers Resolution, which gives Congress an opportunity to vote on
whether to keep forces there.

Debate in Senate

''We believe there may be a series of incidents or separate incidents designed
to interfere with the free flow of commerce,'' he said. While the United States
would respond ''appropriately,'' he said, ''We don't want to deal with them by a
full-scale war or by hostilities of a continuing nature.''

The shooting episode in the gulf on Thursday raised a stormy debate in the
United States Senate over whether such fighting should trigger implementation of
the War Powers Resolution, which calls for Congress to vote on military
deployments where hostilities are ''imminent.''

The Senate Democratic leadership today backed off from a demand for a direct
vote on continuation of the Administration's policy of escorting oil tankers in
the gulf.

Under a new proposal announced by Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the
majority leader, the House and the Senate would only have to vote on an
unspecified resolution early next year that could avoid the issue of approving
or disapproving the Administration's policy.

The New Proposal

The new proposal backs off from one the Democratic leadership had supported last
week that would have required approval by Congress to continue the escorting of
Kuwaiti oil tankers. The vote would have come within 90 days of enactment of the
law.

This proposal, while it had the support of a majority in the Senate, would have
faced a Republican filibuster that the Democrats could not have ended. In
addition, President Reagan had vowed to veto it. Because of this, the leadership
dropped it.

Under the watered-down compromise offered today, the Congress would get a report
from the President within 60 days of enactment of the law. Thirty days later,
the Congress would have to vote on a resolution whose content would be decided
at the time. The resolution could require anything from ending American escorts
of Kuwaiti oil tankers to requesting the President to submit another report in
three months.

The House majority leader, Representative Thomas S. Foley of Washington, said he
did not expect the Democratic leadership to move in the near future on its own
effort to vote on the war powers issue. ''The Congress itself feels the act is
somewhat difficult to apply in these circumstances,'' he said, adding that he
personally would not want the United States to withdraw all its forces from the
gulf.

Weapons Pose New Threat

Iranian possession of Stingers or comparable heat-seeking, shoulder-fired
anti-aircraft weapons would pose a new and serious danger to American
helicopters patrolling the gulf, according to military experts.

If the weapons are Stingers, their possession by Iranian Revolutionary Guards
would call into question whether the arms were obtained from rebels in
neighboring Afghanistan, who have close ties to Teheran. Stingers are not known
to have been supplied to Iran by the United States, even under Shah Mohammed
Riza Pahlevi.

The United States has covertly supplied the weapons to the Afghans, despite
longstanding worries by lawmakers that the arms might fall into other hands.

In Afghanistan, the Stingers have proven especially lethal against Soviet
helicopters.

Among Arab nations, Saudi Arabia is known to possess the weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of U.S. warship patroling in Persian Gulf (AP) (pg. 6)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Regime in Cambodia Offers Top Post to Prince Sihanouk

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 379 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 9


The Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia has offered a top political post to
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the head of an opposition coalition recognized by the
United Nations, as part of a drive for national reconciliation.

The offer came in a statement issued by the Vietnamese Mission here on behalf of
the Government of Heng Samrin, which is supported by a large occupying
Vietnamese force and has never won United Nations recognition.

Asian diplomats said the offer appeared intended to reduce support for a
resolution that condemns Vietnam's military occupation of Cambodia. The
resolution also calls for the withdrawal of Vietnam's forces and the setting up
of a new, freely elected government.

The General Assembly is to vote on the measure next week.

A Diplomatic Maneuver

This resolution, strongly supported by China and most Southeast Asian countries,
has usually been passed each year by a substantial majority, with only the
Soviet Union and its Communist allies opposing it.

But Prince Sihanouk has not been offered a political position by the Heng Samrin
Government until now, diplomats from the region said. They added, though, that a
few weeks ago, he was invited to return to the capital.

Asian diplomats said they expected Prince Sihanouk to reject the offer because
he does not recognize the Government in Phnom Penh and because the post appears
to be one inside the country's existing Communist administrative structure.

''Sihanouk would lose all political credibility if he showed any interest,'' a
Southeast Asian ambassador said.

Effort to Weaken the Move

Prince Sihanouk, who heads an opposition coalition with two other Cambodian
leaders, Son Sann and Khieu Samphan, left the United Nations earlier this week
for France and could not be reached.

Over the last few weeks, the Cambodian Government has issued a number of
statements intended to show that it is seeking a political compromise with its
opponents, apparently as a way to weaken support for the United Nations
resolution.

Asian diplomats say the offer to Prince Sihanouk also reflects growing Soviet
pressure on Vietnam to end its military involvement in Cambodia, which Moscow
sees as a major obstacle to the improvement it wants in its relations with
China.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Air Force Study Finds No Unusual Health Problems Among Agent Orange Handlers

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 604 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 9


Recent medical examinations for volunteers participating in a 20-year study have
failed to uncover any unusual health problems among pilots or ground personnel
who handled the defoliant Agent Orange in Vietnam, the Air Force says.

In a 45-page report released this week, the study team said the follow-up
reports found there was ''not sufficient plausible or consistent scientific
evidence at this time'' to link exposure to the herbicide with poor health.

The medical researchers went on to caution that while there were few differences
at the moment in cancer rates, it might still be too early to make any
judgments.

The aerial spraying of Agent Orange in the Vietnam war was intended to defoliate
large sections of the countryside to deny ground cover to North Vietnamese
soldiers.

Dioxin Exposure Is Conceded

Studies indicate that a contaminant of Agent Orange, dioxin, can cause cancer
and other health problems in animals, but the effect of low exposures on humans
is not known.

The study concluded that the group that did the spraying had undergone
''significant'' exposure to dioxin but said no health problems had been traced
to it.

Veterans' groups have contended that former servicemen and their children have
suffered health problems from exposure to Agent Orange. The groups have called
for compensation payments from the Government.

In 1979 the Air Force decided to start a 20-year ''epidemiological
investigation'' to compare the health and mortality rates of 1,257 officers and
enlisted men who worked on the spraying, which was designated as Operation Ranch
Hand, with a group of more than 6,100 men of similar age, occupation and
background.

The study began in 1982 with a medical examination of the spraying group and
more than 1,100 people from the comparison group to establish basic information.


Into the Next Century

In 1985 the service conducted another round of extensive medical examinations.
It is those results that were summarized in the latest report. The Air Force
monitoring of the two groups is scheduled to last until the year 2002.

''The 1985 examination results provide reassuring evidence that the current
state of health of the Ranch Hand participants is unrelated to herbicide
exposure in Vietnam,'' the study said.

In releasing the new report, the service disclosed that it had joined the
Federal Centers for Disease Control in broadening the work ''to determine
whether blood dioxin levels vary significantly in the Ranch Hand population.''

''Initial serum analysis indicates clear and meaningful dioxin exposure did
occur in the Ranch Hand group,'' the Air Force said.

The Air Force study does not include any ground troops who fought in areas that
were defoliated, only men who handled the chemical on the ground or dispensed it
from the air.

Too Soon to Judge

Nonetheless, the 1985 medical examinations turned up few differences in the
health status of the two groups. Those differences that did appear were judged
at this point to be statistically insignificant, it said.

Indeed, it said, the latest results actually demonstrate ''a subtle but
consistent narrowing of medical differences between the Ranch Hands and
comparisons since the baseline study in 1982.''

The Air Force work comes at a time when scientists at the Centers for Disease
Control have concluded they cannot proceed with a Congressionally ordered study
of the effects of Agent Orange on ground troops who served in Vietnam.

The said a month ago that it had been unable to find enough soldiers who were
exposed to significant levels of the herbicide to conduct the study.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Withdrawal Agonies in Afghanistan

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 501 words


Mikhail Gorbachev continues looking for a relatively painless way out of
Afghanistan, just as Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon looked for a way to escape
Vietnam. He wants to leave without seeming to abandon a vulnerable client
regime. Thus Soviet diplomats talk about forming an interim regime including
Afghanistan's former King, and with non-Communists holding half the cabinet
posts. They also talk about United Nations peacekeepers to monitor compliance
with a U.N.-brokered peace as 120,000 Soviet troops return home.

These are negotiable propositions. They deserve sympathetic consideration. But
as past American Presidents will attest, getting out of quagmires has to be
painful - and probably can't be accomplished without running the risk of losing.

That Mr. Gorbachev wants out and is willing to pay some price is evident from
telltale shifts. First, Soviet theologians determined that the Communist regime
in Kabul wasn't really Communist. It was then hinted that the former Afghan
King, Mohammad Zahir Shah, might return in an unspecified role - but with Afghan
Communists being in the dominating ''vanguard.'' Now it's said the regime could
be split evenly with Communists.

The U.S., the U.N. and others would be well advised to help Mr. Gorbachev
establish a decent interval between Soviet withdrawal and whatever happens next.
But the difficulties loom large. Insurgent groups themselves are deeply split,
and some hate one another almost as much as they hate the Communists. How are
they to be unified? How can many of them be persuaded to share power with the
Communists? This savage war has claimed a million lives and driven five million
Afghans, one of three, into refugee camps in Pakistan and Iran.

It might be possible to seek out former ministers in earlier Afghan regimes,
thereby avoiding the need of choosing between the Iranian-style fundamentalists
and secular nationalists in a fragmented resistance. U.N. mediators who have
helped shape the withdrawal agreement might be go-betweens in shaping an interim
coalition.

This assumes the Soviet Union is willing to chop its timetable for withdrawal
from 16 months to less than a year. If that happens, Pakistan has already
signaled its willingness to let U.N. peacekeepers monitor the cease-fire and
seal off its borders to foreign help for insurgents. The foundation might then
be laid for a settlement providing autonomy for Afghans and guaranteeing
nonalignment to satisfy Moscow.

Even then, Mr. Gorbachev would have to accept the probability that the Afghan
Communists would lose power as soon as their Soviet protectors had withdrawn. In
Vietnam, the United States had to face the prospect that its unpopular,
ineffective allies could not survive American departure. If America's painful
parting from Vietnam can teach Moscow anything, it is this: Once the likelihood
of losing is accepted, it's wise to seek settlements sooner rather than later,
and then remove truly endangered allies quickly from harm's way.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Founder of Weekly Reader Dies at 94

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 9


Eleanor M. Johnson, founder of The Weekly Reader, which has brought the news of
the world to schoolchildren for nearly six decades, died of cancer Thursday at a
nursing home in Gaithersburg, Md. She was 94 years old.

Miss Johnson, a dedicated and energetic educator for half a century, produced
the first issue of the newspaper on Sept. 21, 1928, and remained active in
planning its contents until 1978, when she was 85.

Originally called My Weekly Reader, the slim periodical, typically four or eight
pages an issue, was read by two-thirds of today's American adults when they were
in elementary school, according to the publisher, Fields Publications of
Middletown, Conn.

With its clear, straightforward prose, The Weekly Reader has explained to
generations of American children the compelling events of the day: the
Depression, World War II, assassinations, the Vietnam War, civil rights
struggles and the Iran hostage crisis.

'They Were Missing Knowledge'

''Part of Eleanor's genius was she knew how to connect kids to the world,'' said
Terry Borton, The Weekly Reader's editor in chief for the last 10 years.

Miss Johnson conceived the idea of a newspaper for elementary school pupils in
1927, when she was an administrator overseeing curriculum in the public schools
of York, Pa.

''In her work with kids,'' Mr. Borton said, ''she noticed most of the reading
they did was fairy tales and fantasy, which she felt was fine, but she felt they
were missing a knowledge and understanding of the real world, which she thought
they would like.''

She proposed the idea to William Blakey, president of American Education
Publications, which already published a newspaper for high school students. He
agreed.

Hoover vs. Smith

The cover article of the first Weekly Reader profiled the two principal
candidates in the 1928 Presidential election, Herbert Hoover and Alfred E.
Smith, focusing on their childhood. Its headline said, ''Two Poor Boys Who Made
Good Are Now Running for the Highest Office in the World.'' The leading articles
in two of the most recent Weekly Readers discussed a controversy over cigarette
advertisements and the growing concern about air travel.

Circulation reached 100,000 the first year and grew to a high of 13 million in
the late 1960's and early 1970's, when The Weekly Reader expanded to seven
editions, one for each grade level from preschool to sixth grade. Nine million
schoolchildren subscribe today, at a cost of about $2 for the 27 issues of the
school year.

All the while, according to the newspaper's publisher, The Weekly Reader has
retained its original aim: ''to present selected, well-written news of interest
and value to children with accuracy and fairness, colorful but uncolored.''

A Farmer's Daughter

Eleanor Murdock Johnson was born Dec. 10, 1892, in Washington County, Md., a
daughter of a farming couple.

Miss Johnson, a fragile-looking woman who stood about 4 feet 10 inches, began
her career in education as a first-grade teacher in Oklahoma. She worked as a
consultant to The Weekly Reader during its early years while continuing to hold
administrative jobs in York and then in the Lakewood, Ohio, school system.

In 1935, she left public schools to preside over the magazine full time as
editor in chief, a job she held until 1961. Then, after retirement, she
continued to serve the paper as a consultant until 1978.

Miss Johnson, who held master's degrees in education from the University of
Chicago and Columbia University, was also a co-author of several children's
books, including the Child Story Readers and the Treasury of Literature Readers,
and wrote more than 50 elementary school workbooks that offered exercises in
reading, arithmetic and geography. She also wrote numerous articles in education
journals and was an active public speaker.

Miss Johnson, whose cancer was diagnosed about a month ago, is survived by a
sister, Maria Johnson, with whom she lived at the Herman M. Wilson Health Care
Center of the Asbury Methodist Retirement Center in Gaithersburg.

A memorial service will be held Monday afternoon at St. Marks Lutheran Church in
Wolfsville, Md.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION;
WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO MY SONS?

BYLINE: By SARAH CLAYTON; Sarah Clayton lives in Ridgefield.

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 40, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1559 words


OVERLOOKING the World War II invasion beaches of France, I stood and
contemplated how differently I viewed war now that I was the mother of two boys.

Directly below me was Omaha Beach, the scene of the most gruesome confrontation
of D-Day - June 6, 1944 - when the allies began their long-awaited advance on
Europe that eventually brought World War II to an end. On this particular summer
day 43 years later, the sea grasses waved a gentle pattern down the slopes to
the blue channel waters washing peacefully in and out under lazy skies.

But, a notice board, neatly painted and kept nearby, told a different story - of
the more than 2,000 young men who died on that beach one day in 1944.

Thinking of my two young sons, I couldn't merely accept that number as a mass
statistic and move on. Two thousand sons, 2,000 babies grown up, had died on
that beach so far from home and their mothers. I was overwhelmed with loss and
sadness and fear.

Stories of World War II, as mostly told by my parents - my English mother taught
radar in East Anglia; my American father was a fighter pilot - had always
thrilled me. My parents met during the war. They fell in love. Through their
stories, war became romance and passion and winning, and at 13 years old, I
wanted it all.

A shift occurred in me at 17, during the height of the Vietnam War. I left the
gentle world of the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia where my only brush with
violence had been a routine kill during a fox hunt, and went to college close to
Washington, D.C. Here I encountered militant women organizing peace marches on
the Capitol and candlelight vigils on the campus great lawn. I went - barefoot,
faded jeans held together for the sake of fashion by numerous patches - and
listened to the songs and to the poems. But I couldn't cry the tears of
conviction that flowed all around me. I felt a bit foolish, like a jester at a
funeral. I wondered if I were passionless, or merely uninformed.

So, I began to seek information about this ''war'' that sparked such feeling in
others. But the picture that slowly developed was murky, unfocused, with too
many grays and not enough black and white. This wasn't war as my parents had
described it. Why, we couldn't even call what was going on in Vietnam - the
deaths, the missing limbs, the missing sons, the destroyed lives - a war. It was
a conflict.

A conflict to me is two harried drivers vying for the same parking space. You
don't die for it. And yet, in this conflict of Vietnam, brothers and sons and
husbands and fiances were dying by the thousands. Boys from Iowa and New York
and next door. But not next door to me, so it all still seemed somehow outside
me and far away. I was trying to sort through the conflict of my own life;
determine career and future.

Then, when I was 18, my beloved brother of 20 came up number 33 in the draft
lottery. I hitchhiked to the coast of North Carolina and walked the deserted
beaches trying to understand that Vietnam was a real war, despite all that the
politicians were saying to the contrary. But then, I argued to the open skies
and salt-refined air, why wasn't someone doing something to stop it? Why were
conscientious objectors and protesters called ''radicals,'' and considered
outcasts?

I walked and walked, at one with the lone gull above the curling waves, and
listened to Otis Redding, and for a moment felt anger about the wrong of
Vietnam. Well, Otis Redding died soon after in a plane crash and my brother went
on to fly the first load of Vietnamese refugees out of Saigon to the United
States. He was alive and a pilot and risking his life to bring desperate
oppressed people to freedom.

Now this was passion! What a hero!

After Vietnam, the world simmered down; they even abolished the draft. The
United States was at peace. And what did Angola and Cambodia and Lebanon have to
do with me? My world sank back into a vaguely concerned idealism on the subject.

Then, on Oct. 13, 1983, my son Nicholas was born. Two and a half weeks later,
240 American marines were blown to bits by a terrorist bomb in Beirut. These
boys were 19 and 20 years old and they were dead. My son was barely 2 weeks old
and he was lying safely in my arms. Out across America, 240 mothers had lost
their babies, 240 babies who had cried their mothers awake at night, had said
their first word, taken a first step, gone to school for the first time, had
their first girlfriend, dreamed their dreams of what their life would be - just
as my son, this helpless bundle of protoplasm, sucking securely at my breast,
would do. Now I felt passion - deep, deep in my gut. What was this madness
called war that ate babies.

A growing child is a full-time occupation and two years later I had my second
son, Simon, so life became focused on home and altogether hectic. Most mothers,
even the transformed lawyers and corporate executives, say that with young
children around one can only think tangentially, in fragments. I concur. Thus,
contemplation of war got shelved until early this summer.

In an act of pure self-preservation, I left hearth and home and traveled alone
to France to wander unchecked through the lavender fields of Provence, the
medieval towns and chateaus of the Dordogne, and finally on to Normandy. My
train rattled through the fields of blue flax and golden wheat, past the
half-timbered cottages, around the imposing cathedral of Lisieux to the coast -
to Omaha Beach.

The weather was superb - clear skies, soft blue seas, wildflowers galore. On
June 6, 1944, the weather was miserable - cold, foggy, death-filled. My father,
a dashing 27-year-old pilot, had flown his P-47 fighter plane through the clouds
and mist and smoke overhead all day on lookout for German aircraft.

''Occasionally we could see down through breaks in the clouds,'' he recalled
recently. ''There were so many ships the sea looked like a pool with pine
needles floating on it.''

My mother, 22 years old, was at her radar sation, R.A.F. Bawdsey, on the east
coast of England, when news came that the invasion had begun. ''We were just
glad it had started,'' she recalled. ''It was thrilling.'' She said she never
thought to be afraid for my father's life: ''He had a job to do. I had utmost
confidence in him as a pilot. He knew what he was doing.''

They were in love and fighting for a noble cause. Things had to work out. And
they did, sort of. My parents eventually got married and eventually got
divorced, the passion of the war all used up. But they had five children and one
of them was standing on Omaha Beach thinking about them and how lucky they'd
really been. At my back were the graves -row upon row upon row of plain white
crosses - of the almost 10,000 Americans who died during the invasion. Their
mothers and fathers had spent years getting these sons through the various
stages of childhood and adolescence and over the border into adulthood. I
thought of all the time and energy it had taken my husband and myself just to
get our two boys out of the infant stage. And then to lose them forever on some
foreign shore. I felt consumed by the agony human beings can inflict on other
humans.

Did the mothers of these dead sons believe, when they kissed them that final
time, that their babies might not come home? Before they even left England in
the first hours of June 6, many of those boys were only given a minimal chance
of coming back. What mother would give her son up to those terrible odds? And
yet these mothers had, because they must have believed it was right, that the
cause was just. The mothers of Vietnam don't have even this comfort.

And what comfort do I have, the mother of two sons growing up in this world
armed to the teeth with nuclear weapons? Where do I seek assurance and comfort
when the two most powerful leaders in the world bicker back and forth on just
how many weapons they will allow each other, when the concept of zero nuclear
arms is something to debate, not a concrete goal we spend every waking moment
on, when our President tosses off so lightly terms such as ''limited nuclear
war'' and believes that turning space into a giant antiballistic-missile pinball
machine will help us rest better at night? Who is idealistic now?

I stared in deep sorrow at all those white crosses, which march with the
glorious precision of soldiers on parade down to the once blood-soaked beach,
and read the words in the memorial chapel eulogizing the deaths of these
thousands of young men, and knew, as I stood there on that clear summer day,
that young boys, some just into the chaos of puberty, were dying by the hundreds
in Iraq and Iran, in Lebanon, Chad, Nicaragua, Northern Ireland, El Salvador,
Chile, Peru. All that random death of specific lives. All that tragic loss of
those children growing up. What a primitive, stupid method of ''solving''
problems. It's as if we haven't evolved very far from our Paleolithic days when
our brain wasn't sufficient enough to solve problems any other way.

Cornelius Ryan, in his book ''The Longest Day,'' which chronicles the events of
June 6, 1944, quotes a soldier who observed another, sitting amid the carnage
''throwing stones into the water and weeping as if his heart would break.''

Finally, I, too, can weep. What will my sons, who will be draftable in 2001 and
2003, respectively, have to face? And what will I?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of graveyard at St. Laurent-Sur-Mer (A. E. Woolley)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SONO CINEMA STRUGGLES TO SURVIVE

BYLINE: By JACK CAVANAUGH

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 35, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1259 words


WHEN Brian Fox converted what had been a pornographic movie theater into an art
cinema in 1979, not many people thought he would succeed because of the location
- on Washington Street in South Norwalk.

The large restoration project near the Norwalk waterfront, intended to turn much
of the Washington Street area into a tourist attraction, had not yet begun.

But Mr. Fox succeeded in drawing patrons to his SoNo Cinema by dint of an
eclectic format that included foreign and so-called alternative films and
American-made classics from the 1930's and 40's. The audiences arrived not only
from lower Fairfield County, but also from northern Westchester County, Danbury
and New Haven.

After reaching a high point in 1981 and 1982, when the theater drew an average
of 1,275 patrons each week, business began to decline steadily, even though Mr.
Fox continued to screen films that could not be seen elsewhere between Manhattan
and New Haven.

Now, with attendance dropping to 800 patrons a week, Mr. Fox said he would be
forced to close down the house unless he could raise at least $35,000 to pay
debts by Nov. 6.

''Unless I can raise the money to pay off a lot of bills that include rent and
movie rentals and just about everything else that goes with operating a movie
theater, I won't renew my lease when it expires at the end of November,'' Mr.
Fox said.

According to Mr. Fox, 41 years old, of Norwalk, his only hope of survival is the
support of longtime patrons and others interested in preserving the theater,
including city officials who have expressed a willingness to help.

As part of a fund-raising effort, Mr. Fox has mailed 1,400 letters to regular
patrons about the problems and soliciting memberships that range in price from
$25 to $1,000. Within a week after he had mailed out the first 800 letters,
which are accompanied by a letter from Mayor William A. Collins urging support
of the SoNo Cinema, more than $3,000 had been raised, according to Mr. Fox.

''That we got that much money that quickly is a good sign,'' he said one recent
evening as 15 people watched the 7:30 P.M. showing of the British comedy ''Rita,
Sue and Bob, Too'' in the 350-seat theater.

Although the city will not help Mr. Fox financially, it is trying to aid in
other ways.

''We owe a lot to what Brian has done,'' Mr. Collins said. ''The SoNo Cinema was
a pioneer in the revitalization of South Norwalk. They came in before any of the
construction and renovations began and attracted people who otherwise would not
have come in to that section of the city.

In a way, they fired the opening gun to draw attention to our restoration
efforts. And the theater has been a great boon to South Norwalk. If they close,
it would be a painful loss.''

Mr. Collins said he also planned to send a separate letter to past campaign
supporters seeking their support.

The executive director of the Norwalk Redevelopment Agency, Janice Hannert, said
the city was considering sponsoring a benefit for the theater.

''The theater provides a diversity, an ambiance and a dimension that you don't
find in many towns,'' Ms. Hannert said. ''It's entirely consistent with what
we're trying to do in South Norwalk. And it helps attract people to shops and
restaurants on Washington Street. We definitely would like to see it remain.''

A business group, the SoNo District Association, is also expressing support for
the theater.

''The cinema has been one of the major underpinnings of the restoration,'' David
Gannalo, a developer anad president of the group, said. ''Brian has contributed
to the the flavor the artistic community in the area. And the theater has been a
viable entity.

''Some of what he's shown has been controversial. But his selection is one of
the best around. He's been a strong influence on the area.''

Oddly, attendance at the SoNo Cinema has declined in a period when new
businesses have opened about a block east on Washington Street, the heart of the
restoration area. The new businesses include restaurants.

Mr. Fox attributed the drop in attendance to cable television, videocasette
recorders and changing demographics.

''We're still showing movies that you can't see anywhere else in the area,''
said Mr. Fox, who earned a degree in cinema studies at New York University and
operated an off-season foreign-film series at the Westport Country Playhouse.
''But video rentals and cable have hurt us, along with the increased number of
screens in Fairfield County. Some of the multiplex theaters are showing films
such as 'Room With a View' and 'Jean De Florette,' which we also have on our
schedule. And that hurts, too.

''Also, I'm convinced that a lot of the young people we used to draw are raising
families now and watching video rental films at home. And we're not getting as
many young people as we did in the past.

''Not being a university town hurts. But I also think that college-age kids just
aren't into foreign films as they were in the 60's and 70's, although they will
come out for quirky cult-type movies like 'Blue Velvet' and 'Down by Law.' ''

To help offset the losses, Mr. Fox has been renting video movies in the lobby.
Asked whether he was competing with the theater, he said:

''Not at all. People are going to rent them out anyway. And besides about
two-thirds of our rentals are foreign films that are not available at typical
video rental stores.''

To keep the SoNo open, Mr. Fox is offering seven types of memberships with
inducements that include free popcorn, SoNo T-shirts and, for the $1,000 Star
class, free lifetime movies for two and a free booking for a private screening.
The money will be place in an escrow account and returned if the theater closes.

As the SoNo struggles, executives at two multiplex art houses said they were
doing well. One, Leonard Sampson, co-owner of the York Square Cinema in downtown
New Haven, said business had remained fairly consistent at the three-screen
complex, which he estimated draws about 35 percent of its patrons from Yale.

The manager of Cinema City in Hartford, Andrew Rosetti, said 75 percent of the
films on his four screens were art films.

''We've done well,'' he said. ''And we've been attracting a lot of young
people.''

Mr. Rosetti said the complex planned to expand to six screens by the end of the
year.

''What makes us particularly unique is our concession area,'' he said. ''I think
we're the only art cinema around that sells Perrier, Orangina, gourmet coffee
and a wide variety of foreign candies. But we have popcorn and soda, too.''

The other art cinema in the state, Cinema 4 in Bantam, tends to show more
commercial films. Last weekend, it offered two Vietnam war films, ''Full Metal
Jacket'' and''Guardians of Stone.''

Recently at the SoNo, several patrons said the theater was a valuable cultural
asset.

''Before Brian opened up, we would have to go to New York to see the type of
film he shows,'' said James Flora, a commercial artist from Rowayton who goes to
the SoNo up to twice a week ''He offers something that's not available anywhere
else nearby. It's a shame more people don't support the theater, and it would be
a greater shame if it closes.''

Norman Brenner said he and his wife often drove over from Mount Vernon, N.Y.

''It takes 40 minutes, but it's worth it,'' said Mr. Brenner who was accompanied
to a recent performance by his wife and two sons, 2 1/2 years old and 5 weeks.
''Brian's got great taste in films that we can't get anywhere else. He shows
great films, and it would be very sad if he had to close down.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Brian Fox, SoNo cinema owner; the SoNo Cinema, Norwalk
(NYT/Judith Pszenica)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SITE RULED OUT FOR WAR MEMORIal

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 20, Column 4; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 782 words

DATELINE: PENNSAUKEN


NEXT year, when this Camden County township dedicates its memorial to the
veterans and dead of four wars, it will be on a site other than the one
originally proposed - a traffic island - because, according to veterans here, no
one wants to dodge traffic to get to the memorial.

In August, township officials, responding to veterans' protests, withdrew their
plans to erect the memorial to World Wars I and II and the Korean and Vietnam
wars on the traffic island on Route 130. They promised to find a spot more
accessible to the public, as well as to veterans in wheelchairs.

Lewis Chaplick, an Army veteran and critic of the site, said that to have placed
the monument on the island, as well as near a supermarket, would have been
''inappropriate, not well thought out and a little bit inconsiderate.''

Mr. Chaplick and fellow veterans protested the proposed site for nearly two
months, even holding demonstrations on the island on weekends.

Although some township officials and longtime residents say Mr. Chaplick and
other veterans are making a big issue out of something ''inconsequential,'' Mr.
Chaplick disagrees.

''On one hand, they [officials] want to honor us and our contributions,'' he
said. ''On the other, their idea of a place of prominence is a little
demeaning.''

He likened the proposed site to the inside of a broom-closet door.

The memorial, said Mayor Hugh O'Connell, will be built in a more public,
accessible spot once the township's Veterans Memorial Committee reconvenes.
Other proposed sites include Liberty Park here, a grassy knoll adjacent to a
junior high school, and the front of the township's Municipal Building.

The $50,000 memorial - it will be financed through private donations, of which
nearly $15,000 has been raised - will be of carved marble 15 feet high. It was
commissioned earlier this year and is expected to be in place next spring.

Veterans say the memorial issue here underscores the difficulty some veterans
and veterans' groups sometimes encounter over monuments.

Throughout the state, in large cities and small towns, there are thousands of
war memorials, but erecting a large-scale monument with state and Federal help
can be difficult, according to William L. Caubet, a Korean veteran and official
at the Veterans Administration office in Newark.

He explained that monument proposals had to go through tedious site planning,
design and financing preparations before even ''a glimmer of hope is realized.''

Mr. Caubet was instrumental in organizing support and financing for the proposed
Vietnam Veterans Memorial at the Garden State Arts Center in Holmdel. The
project, in the planning stages for three years, is expected to be formally
dedicated by Governor Kean next Veterans Day.

Besides requiring the Governor's consent, Mr. Caubet said in a recent interview,
''the toughest part in getting all of this together was finding a location upon
which everyone involved agreed.''

In the case of the New Jersey chapter of the American Ex-Prisoners of War, a
memorial and its proposed site were too costly.

Christopher Morgan of Old Bridge, a spokesman for the 600-member state chapter,
said that it had sought to have a monument built at the newly restored Central
Railroad terminal at Liberty State Park in Jersey City but that unexpected ''red
tape'' made his group realize ''we were in for a tough time.''

To have had a permanent memorial built there would have required lengthy state
approval - since the park is a state facility - and nearly $5 million in design
and construction costs, Mr. Morgan said.

''Even with outside donations and private contributions, there is no way we
could have come close to that figure,'' he said, adding that the group's plans
were soon scrapped.

For Eli S. Belil, an Air Force veteran who served in Korea, playing the waiting
game has been frustrating. Mr. Belil, Deputy Mayor of Marlboro, said that his
decade-long effort to spark interest in a Korean war memorial in Washington had
been exasperating.

Although memorials for other wars have been established in the nation's capital,
only recently was a national commission established for a Korean war monument. A
site and financing sources have yet to be finalized.

''If they can't make up their minds, we can just as easily make them up for
them,'' said Mr. Belil, half-heartedly threatening to have a memorial erected in
Marlboro and bill the Government. He said that he already had permission from
the Township Council and had a site in mind.

''At least we'll have one standing,'' he said. ''It might not be in Washington,
but Marlboro isn't that bad, either. And when it comes down to it, it's the
thought that counts.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of traffic on Route 130 in Pennsauken (NYT/Frank C. Dougherty)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

25 YEARS OF UNIVERSITY PRESS BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 58, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1901 words



FROM CAIRO TO CATTLE RAISING

Celebrations are for letting go, so on the 50th anniversary of the Association
of American University Presses, The Book Review relaxed its usual method of
gathering best-seller data and called for nominations from the publishers
themselves. We asked each of the 90-some members of A.A.U.P. to name two books
that have done best for them over the past 25 years. What we got was an
education.

Last year college presses turned out 3,500 new titles, one out of 10 new books
brought out in this country. Regional titles give a warm, family feeling to
lists of these presses. Local flowers, wild and tame, are hot items for several
of them, as are hometown heroes and battles -even prisons. And photographic
paeans to neighboring landscape abound from coast to coast. How-to and advice
books lead many lists, as you might expect from institutions with a mission to
teach. Anyone posted to the Sun Belt, for instance, could put together a dandy
survival kit. First, build your house with ''Adobe: Build It Yourself''
(Arizona), then whip up some ''cheese grits'' courtesy of ''The Mississippi
Cookbook'' (University Press of Mississippi) and serve them up on ''Santa Clara
Pottery Today'' (New Mexico), then explore epistemology with the cow-next-door
using ''The Lasater Philosophy of Cattle Raising'' (Texas at El Paso).

The 70-odd presses that responded to our request are mainly in the continental
United States, but there are a few offshore operations. The American University
in Cairo, for instance, alerted us to their handy ''Cairo: A Practical Guide.''
We eliminated the glorious and commercially successful catalogues of the
''Treasures of Tutankhamun'' show and the Vatican collections on the grounds
that the Metropolitan Museum of Art, like a handful of other publishers, is not
strictly a university press, though it belongs to A.A.U.P.

A word on sales figures: the numbers you see to the right of each listing
reflect combined paperback and hard-cover sales over the past 25 years. In the
case of the two starred items, the total sales are not for the set, but for
individual volumes in it.

It should be remembered that many books we think of as mass-market best sellers
have done better after they were bought by mainstream publishing houses.

          Total
          Sales

FICT
ION

 1     900,500
                LONG DAY'S JOURNEY INTO NIGHT, by Eugene
                O'Neill. (Yale, Paper, $5.95.) Written in 1940 and
                based on O'Neill's own family - a tragedy of drug
                addiction, alcoholism and destructive love. (1962)

 2    358,000
                THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy.
                (Naval Institute, $14.95.) The high-tech thriller
                about the search for a defecting Soviet submarine.
                (1984)

 3    304,278
                METAMORPHOSES, by Ovid. Translated from the
                Latin by Rolfe Humphries. (Indiana, Cloth, $20;
                Paper, $6.95.) Myths of transformation. (1955)

 4    240,000
                THEIR EYES WERE WATCHING GOD, by Zora
                Neale Hurston. (Illinois, Paper, $6.95.) A young
                black woman's journey of self-discovery first
                published in 1937. (1978)

 5    234,024
                FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts.
                (Naval Institute, $15.95.) Navy pilots in the
                Vietnam War. (1986)

 6    160,000
                A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman
                Maclean. (Chicago, Cloth, $15; Paper, $7.95.) Tales
                based on the author's life in Montana explore the
                meaning of manhood and the mysteries of religion,
                sex and trout fishing. (1976)

 7    145,000
                THE YELLOW WALLPAPER, by Charlotte
                Perkins Gilman. (Feminist Press at the City
                University of New York, Paper, $4.50.) A study of a
                woman's descent into madness, based on the true
                experiences of this 19th-century writer. (1973)

 8    129,640
                THE BOOK OF MERLYN, by T. H. White. (Texas,
                out of print.) King Arthur's last night on earth.
                (1977)

 9     55,000
                A CONFEDERACY OF DUNCES, by John
                Kennedy Toole. (Louisiana State, $14.95.) A wildly
                comic novel set in New Orleans, posthumously
                published and winner of the 1981 Pulitzer Prize for
                fiction. (1980)

10     52,000
                OUT OF THIS FURNACE, by Thomas Bell.
                (Pittsburgh, Paper, $8.95.) Three generations of an
                immigrant Slovak family and their lives in the steel
                mills of Pittsburgh. (1976)

          Total
          Sales

NONF
ICTI
ON

 1
     *1,126,000
                THE COLLECTED WORKS OF C. G. JUNG, edited
                by Gerhard Adler, Michael Fordham and Herbert
                Read. Translated from the German by R. F. C.
                Hull. (Princeton, Cloth, 20 volumes, $963.50; Paper,
                32 volumes, $430. Individual volumes priced
                differently.) An archetypical university press
                publication of mythic proportion. (1968)

 2    500,000
                THE LONELY CROWD, by David Riesman with
                Nathan Glazer and Reuel Denney. (Yale, Paper,
                $10.95.) A look at how the American character
                changed in the 20th century, it set us all to
                wondering whether we were ''tradition-directed,''
                ''inner-directed'' or ''other-directed.'' (1961)

 3    292,000
                BEYOND THE MELTING POT: The Negroes,
                Puerto Ricans, Jews, Italians, and Irish of New
                York City, by Nathan Glazer and Daniel Patrick
                Moynihan. (MIT, Paper, $10.95.) Contrary to old
                cliches about immigrant groups blending, ethnic
                roots die hard and resist melting. (1964)

 4    *196,000
                SOURCES OF CHINESE TRADITION, edited by
                William Theodore De Bary, Wing-tsit Chan and
                Burton Watson. (Columbia, Paper, Volume One,
                $16; Volume Two, $14.) An introduction to the
                background of contemporary Chinese civilization
                brings together translations from ancient and
                modern sources. (1964)

 5    148,340
                PARTIES AND POLITICS IN AMERICA, by
                Clinton Rossiter. (Cornell, Cloth, $29.95; Paper,
                $6.95.) A key to the system. (1964)

 6    137,042
                ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.
                (Harvard, $10.) A remarkable account of the
                novelist's mostly uneventful Mississippi childhood,
                told with her usual wit and grace. (1984)

 7     80,000
                THE ART OF LOVE, by Ovid. Translated from the
                Latin by Rolfe Humphries. (Indiana, Cloth, $22;
                Paper, $7.95.) The getting and keeping of a
                mistress. (1957)

 8     75,958
                BLACK MOSES: The Story of Marcus Garvey and
                the Universal Negro Improvement Association, by
                E. David Cronon. (Wisconsin, Paper, $9.95.) An
                appraisal of Garvey and the forces that made
                possible his meteoric rise. (1955)

 9     65,000
                THE GUTENBERG GALAXY, by Marshall
                McLuhan. (Toronto, Paper, $13.95.) The book that
                helped establish McLuhan as the original media
                guru. (1962)

10     56,000
                ORIGINS OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION,
                1915-1949, by Lucien Bianco. Translated from the
                French by Muriel Bell. (Stanford, Cloth, $25; Paper,
                $8.95.) Why and how the Communists took over
                China. (1971)

          Total
          Sales

ADVI
CE,
HOW-
TO
AND
REFE
RENC
E

 1   6,000,000
                A MANUAL FOR WRITERS OF TERM PAPERS,
                THESES, AND DISSERTATIONS, by Kate L.
                Turabian. Revised by Bonnie Birtwistle
                Honigsblum. (Chicago, Cloth, $20; Paper, $7.95.)
                The bane of every graduate student's existence -
                all ye know and all ye need to know about ibid., id.
                and op. cit. (1937)

 2    800,850
                BETTER FARM ACCOUNTING, by H. B. Howell.
                (Iowa State, Paper, $1.45.) How to account for your
                chickens after they are hatched. (1946)

 3    684,000
                THE NEW COLUMBIA ENCYCLOPEDIA, fourth
                edition, edited by William H. Harris and Judith S.
                Levey. (Columbia, out of print.) The world in 3,052
                pages. (1975)

 4    659,800
                THE STUDENT PILOT'S FLIGHT MANUAL, by
                William K. Kershner. (Iowa State, Paper, $17.95.)
                Takes the reader to new heights. (1961)

 5    600,000
                THE I CHING, translated from the Chinese to
                German by Richard Wilhelm, from the German to
                English by Cary Baynes. (Princeton, $18.50.) The
                ancient Chinese book of divination. (1967)

 6    417,783
                THE HARVARD DICTIONARY OF MUSIC, edited
                by Willi Apel. (Harvard, $30.) From A major to
                Efrem Zimbalist in 1,000 pages. (1944)

 7    200,000
                THE 36-HOUR DAY, by Nancy L. Mace and Peter
                V. Rabins. (Johns Hopkins, Cloth, $19.50; Paper,
                $7.95.) Coping with Alzheimer's disease, dementing
                illnesses and memory loss in later life. (1982)

 8    170,000
                ILLUSTRATING BASIC, by Donald G. Alcock.
                (Cambridge, spiral bound, $12.95.) How to talk to
                your computer in its own language. (1977)

 9    169,435
                READER'S CHOICE, by E. Margaret Baudoin,
                Ellen S. Bober, Mark A. Clarke, Barbara K. Dodson
                and Sandra Silberstein. (Michigan, Paper, $8.95.)
                For students of English as a second language.
                (1977)

10    150,000
                THE JOHNS HOPKINS ATLAS OF HUMAN
                FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY, edited by George D.
                Zuidema and illustrated by Leon Schlossberg.
                (Johns Hopkins, Cloth, $25; Paper, $14.95.) Where
                the heart is and other useful information (1976).
                Plus, at $69.50, an 18-inch skeleton that has sold
                45,000 copies.


*Sales of individual volumes in a set.

AND BEAR IN MIND

(Editors' choices of other books of particular interest)

THE OXFORD COMPANION TO ENGLISH LITERATURE: Fifth Edition, edited by Margaret
Drabble. (Oxford, $35.) The whopping (1,155 pages) latest version of the famous
compilation concisely and usefully describes almost everything and everybody.

THE AGELESS SELF: Sources of Meaning in Late Life, by Sharon R. Kaufman.
(Wisconsin, $22.50.) This careful, dignified study by a medical anthropologist
finds age a phase of the body but not the mind, which carries on the same as
ever it did.

THE ICE: A Journey to Antarctica, by Stephen J. Pyne. (Iowa, $37.50.) An
audacious exploration in time and space of the planet's underside, including its
historical, geological and economic dimensions, by a professor of history at
Arizona State.

HABITS OF THE HEART: Individualism and Commitment in American Life, by Robert N.
Bellah, Richard Madsen, William M. Sullivan, Ann Swidler and Steven M. Tipton.
(California, $20.) An argument, supported by interview data, that Americans have
lost both the religious and the civic languages of moral analysis.

NOVUS ORDO SECLORUM: The Intellectual Origins of the Constitution, by Forrest
McDonald. (University Press of Kansas, $25; paper, $9.95.) A witty and energetic
study of the ideas and passions of the Framers, and of their ideological
predecessors.

LITERARY THEORY: An Introduction, by Terry Eagleton. (Minnesota, $29.50; paper,
$11.95.) A Marxist critic's concise and lucid survey, quite accessible to
nonspecialists, of the major modern theories, from structuralism to
deconstruction.

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Ohio State, $50.)
Still in print from its original publisher, Mrs. Santmyer's novel is a detailed
and affectionate ethnography of the genteel, educated women of an Ohio town from
1868 to 1932.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES OF A NAG AND A ROISTERER

BYLINE: By LINDA BLANDFORD; Linda Blandford, who writes a weekly column from the
United States for The Guardian of London, is the author of ''LSO: Scenes From
Orchestra Life.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 931 words



THE MADWOMAN'S UNDERCLOTHES
Essays and Occasional Writings. By Germaine Greer. 305 pp. New York: The
Atlantic Monthly Press. $17.95.

GERMAINE GREER has never truly been a writer. Her spirit has illuminated her
written word as if the very act of expressing herself were but a brief, rushed
gathering-up of her living. She is, perhaps, one of the marvelous letter writers
of an age that no longer trifles with them much. Her essays, columns and books -
transcripts as they are of a heroic heart and intellect - seem to have been
dashed off in the fire and dispatched to her many sisters. Feminism as a
literary family.

To come unawares upon ''The Madwoman's Underclothes,'' a collection of her
essays from 1968 to 1985, is to intrude unexpectedly into another's family
reunion. All those private jokes, shared memories, intimate confidences, demands
and contradictions: a noisy, emotional, overbearing, lusty family, loving and
cursing across the dinner table. Incomprehensible, or simply an embarrassment,
to those who are not of it and hungering for its warmth. It is not, after all,
the madwoman's collection of hats that is at stake here but her underclothes.
(''In Australia,'' Ms. Greer has said elsewhere, ''if you leave your room in a
terrible mess, your mother says: 'Look at this room . . . it's like a madwoman's
underclothes.' '' The journey of woman's life defies order and good taste - if
she is lucky.) It is not possible, in short, to read these essays
dispassionately, to approach this as a book per se. Here are our history, our
gladdened days, our shame and disappointments. Germaine Greer is nearing 50 now.
She lives in a farmhouse in the English countryside: rain boots by the back
door, everything wind-weathered and drizzle-gray. Her public and youthful
randiness settled into big-heartedness, perhaps.

This collection - arbitrary, quixotic, untidy -starts when Germaine Greer was a
lecturer in English at Warwick University, a dull and worthy town, a good third
choice for the best undergraduates. She was Australian - a synonym then in
middle-class, prim-lipped parlors for being brash, vulgar, easy. Being an
outsider gave her freedom, however. She wrote, largely unpaid, for Oz (as in
Ozzie, Aussie, Australian), an underground paper in England that was then being
prosecuted under the obscenity laws and became a famous counterculture rallying
point.

In 1970 came ''The Female Eunuch'' - denouncing the image of woman unable to
love, only to bargain, worship or be worshipped, an object, a sexual marionette.
It was a clarion call and was followed by the debates in New York's Town Hall
with Norman Mailer -much of the tension of which, we see now in wiser days,
hinged on her sexuality. It mattered that she was so desirable, he so used to
desiring.

There were many such battles over the years, most of which are chronicled here:
about abortion, rape, pornography, seduction as ''a four-letter word.'' She
wrote for The Sunday Times of London at its most trendy, before Rupert Murdoch.
There was, most of the time, a sexual roistering to her writing. But also,
appropos of abortion: ''The compelled mother loves her child as the caged bird
sings. The song does not justify the cage nor the love the enforcement.''

Her strengths and weaknesses, successes and failures are all here; they are the
human stumblings of feminism itself, wanting it all while wanting none of it.
There was the lure of becoming a celebrity, a television personality, a pop
expert and thereby colluding with the censors about The Acceptable. The Sunday
Times, in the end, started to spike her riskier, more controversial columns. She
was a nag when she was meant to amuse. She still is. Fortunately. It is hard to
quote much of her early writing here: her usual expletives could hardly be
Acceptable. It is the language not of the family breakfast table but of the
women's baths. In truth, much of her early writing is also irritating. How
innocent it seems now, gamboling over naked bodies and others' beds. How
irrelevant after AIDS, how childish after Chernobyl.

UNLIKE most collections of journalism, it is the later writing that is the
finer. Here is what she did not grow into: a whiner or wimp, embittered, tired,
smug or even very rational (a point with which she might disagree). She, as
others, in the end turned to embrace the wider world. Vietnam, briefly, but
later Brazil, Ethiopia (drawn by disgust at ''the media binge on pictures of the
dead and dying'').

It will be said, of course, that she is politically naive. (''The Cubans are
involved after all in a much bigger adventure than sex, speed and smack could
possibly supply. Their morale is towering.'') But at heart, she is on the side
of neither regimes nor ideology but of individuals. The best essay of all
describes, in the long introduction, her time in a poor village in the south of
Italy: Mariuzz', her 8-year-old ''escort''; Rosetta, the young unmarried woman
waiting for marriage; the Mafiosi bombing the fish. Not a word of invective and
each word convincing.

''The Madwoman's Underclothes,'' like the feminist movement, is nevertheless
about being white, middle-class and well-educated. The empathy with those who
are poor, black, brown, in terror or dying is, in the end, that of a traveler
from another, bountiful land. We cannot help it. It is the condition of
privilege. At least, let it be said that Ms. Greer is not afraid to look, to
care. Poverty, hunger, oppression, despair: here is Death's dominion. And to
attack Germaine Greer would be to betray one's own to the enemy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Germaine Greer (Jerry Bauer)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IRAN BOATS HIT;
A RISING TIDE OF VIOLENCE IN PERSIAN GULF

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 393 words


UNITED STATES helicopters sank a small Iranian vessel and damaged two others in
the Persian Gulf last week, killing at least two Iranians and heightening fears
that the conflict may be widening.

The Pentagon said three Army helicopters were fired on Thursday night as they
tracked four Iranian boats near the Farsi Island base used by Iranian
Revolutionary Guards. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger said the
helicopters then strafed the Iranian craft, sinking a speedboat and immobilizing
two smaller craft. A 160-foot-long Iranian patrol boat escaped.  Iran accused
the United States of ''unprovoked miitary action.'' It said, ''Iranian forces
aboard speedboats shot down a U.S. helicopter with surface-to-air Stinger
missiles and damaged an American vessel.'' Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati
said, ''The region is on the verge of turning into another Vietnam.'' Arab
countries in the gulf, however, have been quietly providing the United States
forces with military and intelligence support, in hopes of containing Iranian
threats to shipping.

The Pentagon said none of its warships were damaged and no helicopters were
missing, but it conceded that the Iranian boats may have carried ''Stinger
equipment.'' American Stingers, one of the world's most advanced weapons, have
been sent to Afghan rebels, who have used them to shoot down Soviet helicopters.
Some Afghan rebels have close ties to Iran.

''Now one of our worst enemies may have one of our best weapons,'' said Senator
Dennis DeConcini, an Arizona Democrat.

Mr. Weinberger predicted a series of sporadic ''separate incidents'' that, he
said, the United States would cope with ''appropriately'' in the gulf. ''We
don't want to deal with them by a full-scale war or by hostilities of a
continuing nature,'' he said.

Critics of Administration policy in the gulf, where dozens of United States and
allied naval vessels are escorting tankers and searching for Iranian mines, have
been trying to invoke the War Powers Act. The law would require the
Administration to obtain Congressional authorization after 60 to 90 days, if
American troops were involved in hostilities or likely to be.

The Administration, like its predecessors, contends that the 1973 law is
unconstitutional, and also inapplicable. The Senate, however, voted, 52 to 37,
last week to continue a debate on the issue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
IRAN EMBARGO: THE MAIN IMPORT IS POLITICAL

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THERE are no illusions either within the Reagan Administration or on Capitol
Hill that an embargo against Iranian imports will have a serious economic
impact. Since 1981 the United States has bought an average of three per cent of
its foreign oil from Iran, and with Iran's attractively low prices and
high-quality crude, other customers are certain to come forward and buy.

But foreign policy is driven by political reality. And when an American
helicopter caught Iranian sailors as they laid mines in the Persian Gulf, and
there were reports that American imports of Iranian oil soared last summer, it
became harder for policymakers to justify doing any business with Iran. Last
week, after Congress approved an embargo on such imports, the White House was
poised to announce an embargo on Iranian oil, which accounts for most of the
trade between the two countries.

Some policymakers are concerned that the embargo moves could jeopardize the
adjudication of several billion dollars' worth of claims by both the United
States and Iran at a special tribunal at the Hague and that it might be legally
challenged by Iran. They also fear that such unilateral action will make it more
difficult to win approval of an American-led initiative at the United Nations to
impose a global arms embargo on Iran.

Since World War II, the United States has used economic sanctions as a foreign
policy weapon about 60 times, more than any other nation. Countries as diverse
as Vietnam, Cambodia, Libya, Iraq, Iran, South Yemen, Syria and South Africa
have been the targets. Despite the appeal of sanctions as simple, nonlethal
means for one nation to exert pressure on another, they are more important for
political symbolism than economic impact.

The Embargoes on Cuba

Unless other countries join in sanctions, they quickly lose their sting. One of
the oldest and strictest American trade and financial sanctions is the one
against North Korea, which dates to 1950. But it has had no dramatic economic
effect and North Korea has managed to balance its trade almost evenly between
Communist and capitalist countries.

When the United States imposed its trade embargoes on Cuba in the early 1960's
it hoped the action would help force the Castro Government to turn away from
Marxism. But America watched in dismay as Havana moved closer to the Soviet
Union and its Eastern bloc allies and as Japan, Canada and Spain became Cuba's
largest non-Communist trading partners.

When President Carter stopped American grain sales to the Soviet Union after
Moscow sent troops into Afghanistan in December 1979, Argentina, Canada,
Australia and other countries quickly filled the void.

And President Reagan was forced to abandon plans to prevent the sale of American
oil and gas pipeline equipment to Moscow to protest the imposition of martial
law in Poland in 1981 after a number of European governments opposed the move.
His 1985 economic embargo of Nicaragua has inflicted only modest economic damage
to its economy and has been widely regarded as a tactical political mistake
because it failed to attract international support or to shake the Sandinistas'
hold on power.

Similarly, trade sanctions imposed last year on Libya have had a minimal effect
on its oil and petrochemical industry, according to a recent General Accounting
Office analysis. After Libya began to market oil previously produced and sold by
American firms, it was American firms that suffered the greatest financial
losses.

When sanctions are voluntary, their practical effect is even weaker. When the
United States urged American oil companies to cease operations in Syria last
November because of that nation's support for international terrorism, the
Marathon Oil Company did not comply and the United States did not punish the
Ohio-based company for its defiance.

But sanctions do send strong signals to the target country that its activities
and policies are not condoned and to domestic audiences that some action is
being taken against another country whose behavior has given offense.

Although sanctions may not force an economy to crumble, they can make the cost
of doing business more expensive. In the case of both Cuba and Nicaragua, for
example, the American embargo deprives their economies of much-needed hard
currency and drives up the cost of transporting trade goods while forcing the
Soviet Union and its Eastern bloc allies to tender sizable subsidies to help the
economies of these nations.

In some cases, sanctions are the only way short of military intervention to
oppose a country's policies. ''Trade sanctions don't solve all your problems,''
conceded Paul Freedenberg, an acting Under Secretary of Commerce. ''They're
often the last resort before you resort to warfare, and should be used
judiciously. They should be regarded as just one of the weapons in our foreign
policy arsenal.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of U.S. imports and exports to and from Iran from 1978 - 1987
(U.S. Department of Commerce)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

TV VIEW;
Television Tests Its Limits

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1813 words


INGENIOUS. THAT'S ONE WORD FOR THE NEW television season. Efforts by the three
commercial networks to get around once-rigid taboos in what is supposed to be
family entertainment have become terribly inventive. On CBS's ''Jake and the
Fatman,'' for instance, William Conrad plays a crotchety district attorney who
is partial to salty language. The solution is to let him say what he wants while
bleeping the possibly offending words on the soundtrack. Minimum skills in lip
reading will leave no doubt as to what he is actually saying. The words are
clearly there for those who want them, but, presumably, no one can accuse CBS of
being, shall we say, duplicitous.

Indeed, although the current batch of new series contains some of the more
innovative shows to come along in years, several efforts to the expand the
boundaries of subject matter have cheerfully taken on the banner of calculated
tastelessness. Consider the case of the flatulent pooch, brought to you courtesy
of ABC's ''Hooperman.'' The second episode of the new series, created by Steven
Bochco and Terry Louise Fisher, the team behind NBC's ''L.A. Law,'' featured
John Ritter being terribly embarrassed in public by his rather nasty little dog,
Bijoux. Thus, the noisy dog joins network TV's ongoing crusade to become just a
bit more outrageous, a little more permissive, so that somewhere down the line
ABC, CBS and NBC can compete openly with the relatively uncensored, unedited
products that can already be found on cable TV.

Oddly enough, despite these awkward lurchings toward more ''adult'' fare,
prime-time entertainment remains wary of certain national realities. Granted, a
definition of reality can be elusive. A Lily Tomlin character may have been on
target when she saw reality as ''nothing but a collective hunch.'' But with
young yuppie families in favor this season, on shows like ABC's
''thirtysomething'' and NBC's ''A Year in the Life,'' poor folk elsewhere in the
social spectrum are just about ignored. Ironically, the unsettling contemporary
phenomenon of the homeless is alluded to, and then in the most glancing way,
only on CBS's ''Beauty and the Beast,'' which describes itself as a fable
(''Once upon a time, in the city of New York . . .''). American blacks will
continue to get middle-class role models in ''The Cosby Show'' and its spinoff
''A Different World,'' in which a Huxtable daughter goes away to college. But
the vast majority of blacks living in urban ghettos will fail to see any
reflection of their lives in prime time, apart from the thugs and hoodlums who
are required to provide the element of menace on cop-private-eye-lawyer shows.
''Frank's Place'' is a welcome addition to the schedule, but not too many black
youngsters are likely to identify with a Harvard-educated black man who inherits
a swell restaurant in New Orleans.

By far the most astonishing denial of reality can be found in the CBS series
''Tour of Duty,'' a revisionist version of the Vietnam War. Ignoring such
sensitive subjects as the extensive war protests at home and the problems of
drugs among soldiers at the front, this show wants to offer tidy inspirational
essays on kinship and brotherhood. Clearly encouraged by the success of films
such as ''Platoon,'' the producers are apparently convinced that viewers are
ready for a more comforting interpretation of what surely was one of the most
divisive conflicts in the history of the country. The result is history in the
World War II mold of John Wayne, complete with a Rambo-like sergeant who each
week performs enough heroics to merit any normal ''grunt'' several Medals of
Honor. The sociologists will be picking over the significance of this one for
years to come.

Elsewhere, there is the usual quota of fairly safe productions, the kind that
break no barriers but perform respectably in the ratings. These now tend to
feature veteran actors in lawyer or detective roles. Last year, it was Andy
Griffith in ''Matlock.'' This year, we have Dale Robertson in ''J. J.
Starbuck,'' Dennis Weaver in ''Buck James'' and Mr. Conrad in ''Jake and the
Fatman.''

The yuppie series are generally earnest and pleasant, but it is disconcerting to
find both ''thirtysomething'' and ''A Year in the Life'' starting the season
with identical crises about hiring the proper babysitter for their infants. A
question: Do yuppies, ever striving to acquire the better things in life, have
time to watch TV? And if they do, are they interested in watching themselves?

But some half-dozen of the more than 20 new series this season do seem to be
pushing in new and often promising directions. Certainly ''Beauty and the
Beast,'' an updating of the mythical tale, is attempting something different, as
the attractive Catherine Chandler (Linda Hamilton), representing the city's rich
and powerful echelons, meets the strange, disfigured Vincent (Ron Perlman),
living underground with people who ''live simply and take care of each other.''

Coming from Hollywood's Witt/Thomas studios, the premiere turned out to be
surprisingly absorbing. But where does the concept go from here? The second
episode hovered uneasily on the edges of confused vigilantism (the killer was
described by Catherine as having ''so much courage, empathy and passion - but so
little mercy'') and mushy sentimentality (''Vincent, forgive me, my heart knows
how gentle you are''). An admirably unusual idea may be in danger of
self-destructing. I hope not.

Violence is back in vogue, and two of the more bloody new efforts perversely
happen to be among the better productions of the year. Each features a darkly
handsome hero with a fashionable Don Johnson stubble, and both are steeped
heavily in cynicism. CBS's ''Wiseguy'' stars Ken Wahl as Vinnie Terranova, a
Federal agent who has infiltrated the ''mob'' in New Jersey under deepest cover.
He has spent 18 months in prison establishing his credentials, and not even his
sick mother can know the truth. There is a problem here. Vinnie joins the
Steelgrave family, which is run by Sonny, who is played to nasty perfection by
Ray Sharkey. Sonny is half the show, at least. How long can Vinnie go on fooling
Sonny? And what happens to the show if Sonny goes? Meanwhile, though, the
machinations, devised by Stephen J. Cannell (''The A-Team'') are not only
diverting but informative for anyone following newspaper accounts of ''pizza
connections.''

NBC's ''Private Eye'' goes back to the mid-1950's and is done in the style of
the kind of film noir that used to star Dan Duryea. Created by Anthony Yerkovich
(''Miami Vice''), the show is constructed around Michael Woods as Jack Cleary, a
World War II veteran and former cop who inherits his murdered brother's
private-investigator business. His assistant is young Johnny Betts (Josh
Brolin), described as ''son of a roadhouse tramp and your average redneck.''
Betts is very much into the new sounds of rock-and-roll. Working in and around
Hollywood, they know the rules of a town that has ''been bought and paid for''
by assorted gangsters and hustlers. So far, Jack has got involved with vicious
mobsters, scheming studio heads, aging actresses desperate to keep their young
boyfriends, a roller-derby star and even a has-been actor who winds up as
president of the Screen Actors Guild. All the while, Jack wears a suit and tie
and smokes cigarettes. Capturing some of the glossy mystery of those fashion ads
that are so popular nowadays, ''Private Eye'' frequently looks better than it
plays. But it has its own special personality.

And then there are the ''comedy dramas,'' sort of serious sitcoms distinguished
immediately by their lack of a laugh track. The three top contenders in this
category are ''Hooperman,'' ''Frank's Place'' and ABC's ''The 'Slap' Maxwell
Story.'' ''Hooperman'' has the enormous advantage of Mr. Ritter's skills in
switching from farce to pathos, but the show could be felled with a case of
terminal cutes. The gay cop constantly being propositioned by the eager female
cop, the gorgeous young woman who is employed by Hooperman as the plumber for
his newly inherited building, the profusion of crying scenes - too much is being
stuffed into these weekly 21 minutes.

And ''Frank's Place'' has yet to settle down to a smooth format, although the
basic mix of characters is encouraging, from Tim Reid's Frank to Bubba, the
Jewish lawyer, to the Reverend Tyrone Deal, who is ''into real estate and
everything else that's got an entrepreneurial bent to it.''

''Frank's Place'' is almost sweet, which is precisely what ''The 'Slap' Maxwell
Show'' aims to avoid. Slap is a 50-ish sports writer who boasts that ''I can
back up anything I write, half the time.'' Sweet? Snarls Slap: ''Look, my uncle
is sweet, but he spends most of his time on a porch trying to remember where his
shoes are.'' The show was created by Jay Tarses and stars Dabney Coleman, the
same team responsible for the memorably snide ''Buffalo Bill,'' now something of
a cult series on cable's A&E Network.

Usually wearing a fedora, Slap infuriates his boss, amuses his hip new
girlfriend, irritates the wife he left 15 years ago and, living in a dumpy
apartment decorated in what someone calls Early Flophouse, refers to the little
Japanese girl next door as Dragon Lady. He is not, heaven be praised, a glossy
yuppie or sulky private eye. He is, irrepressibly, his own miserable self. On
prime-time TV, that is decidedly refreshing.

Finally, not trying to be new but attempting to revive something old, there is
ABC's ''Dolly,'' a one-woman campaign to bring back the music/variety format
that once was a dominant staple of network television. The once gloriously buxom
Dolly Parton has gone on a diet and, with the very capable Don Mischer as her
executive producer, is stuffing herself into an eye-popping array of fancy gowns
in order to sing a few songs, perform with some guests and chat with the studio
audience every Sunday evening.

Topped with one of the more extraordinary blond wigs in show business, Ms.
Parton is an anomaly of Mae West suggestiveness and gushing, little-girl
sincerity. The result is a kind of country-western version of Lawrence Welk,
complete with sign-off homilies: ''If there's something you really, really
believe in, well, you stand up for it - and then duck.'' Dolly is delightful and
works harder than anyone else on prime time. Can she pull it off? First time
out, the show wound up No. 5 in the weekly ratings of 68 programs.

With their share of viewer totals on a downward curve over the past several
years, the networks seemingly will try anything. Last season, ''L.A. Law'' gave
us the Venus Butterfly, a sexual feat of apparently awesome dimensions. This
year, ''Hooperman'' brings us the gaseous canine. And these are two of the
better series on the schedule. Certain kinds of progress, obviously, must be
measured in millimeters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture caption on page 35 in some copies of the Arts and Leisure section
today misidentifies the actor who plays Vincent in the CBS-TV series ''Beauty
and the Beast.'' He is Ron Perlman.

A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about the new
television season includes an outdated passage about the CBS-TV series ''Jake
and the Fatman,'' derived from a videotape of the pilot episode supplied by the
network for review. In episodes that have been broadcast, the dialogue has been
rewritten to use language that is not offensive; no words are bleeped out.

GRAPHIC: Photos of Ron Liebman in ''Beauty and the Beast''; Dabney Coleman in
''Slap Maxwell''; Tim Reid in ''Frank's Place (pg. 35)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Reagan Sends Letters on Gulf to Congress Leaders

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 10


President Reagan sent letters to Congressional leaders today advising them that
American military forces in the Persian Gulf took ''limited defensive action''
last week when they fired on Iranian gunboats.

The letters, to House and Senate leaders, said, ''We regard this incident as
closed.''

The letters were ''consistent'' with the terms of the War Powers Resolution, but
were not sent to fulfill the formal notification requirements under the
resolution, said B. Jay Cooper, a White House deputy press secretary.

The incident in the Persian Gulf last Thursday, in which American helicopters
hit several small Iranian naval craft, has prompted a Congressional debate in
the Senate over the question of whether the fighting should trigger
implementation of the resolution.

Similar Messages in Past

Under the measure, which dates to the Vietnam era, the President is required to
notify Congress when American forces are deployed to areas where hostilities are
''imminent.'' In such an event, Congress has 60 to 90 days to vote on whether
the forces should remain.

Mr. Reagan has sent other messages similar to today's letters, according to Mr.
Cooper. He did so last month after an Iranian mine-laying vessel was seized by
American forces, and last May after an Iraqi missile attack on the frigate
Stark.

Mr. Reagan has refused to invoke the formal notification procedures required
under the War Powers Resolution, saying it is unconstitutional.

''Although they will remain prepared to take any additional defensive action
necessary to protect U.S. forces and U.S. lives, there has been no further
hostile action by Iranian forces and we regard this incident as closed,'' Mr.
Reagan's letters said.

Senator Alan Cranston, a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said
the letters appeared to be an attempt by the Reagan Administration to ''defuse''
Congressional debate over whether the resolution should be put into effect.

''This will not satisfy the concerns of those of us who believe that the War
Powers Act should be triggered by the activities of U.S. forces in convoying the
re-flagged ships,'' said Mr. Cranston, a Democrat from California.

Democratic leaders in the Senate have backed away from a demand by some members
for a direct vote on the Administration's policy of employing military forces to
escort Kuwaiti oil tankers through the gulf. A new proposal has been offered by
Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia. Under it, the House and
Senate could vote on a resolution early next year that could sidestep direct
approval or disapproval of the Administration's policy.

The proposal is milder than one supported by the Democratic leadership last week
that would have required specific Congressional approval of the escort policy.
The vote on whether to continue escorting tankers would have had to be held
within 90 days of the enactment of the legislation.

The proposal had the support of a majority of senators, but the leadership
dropped it because the measure faced the threat of a Republican filibuster and
President Reagan threatened to veto it.

Mr. Reagan said in the letters that he was sending them ''in accordance with my
desire that the Congress continue to be fully informed in this matter.''

He went on, ''While mindful of the historical differences between the
legislative and the executive branches of government, and the positions taken by
me and all my predecessors in office, with respect to the constitutionality of
certain provisions of the resolution, I look forward to cooperating with
Congress in pursuit of our mutual, overriding aim of peace and stability in the
Persian Gulf region.''

In an interview with the Cable News Network, Mr. Reagan warned Congress against
meddling in American policy in the Persian Gulf, saying that it would shake the
confidence of allies in the region. The interview was conducted Friday and aired
today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

High School Graduates Revive Volunteer Force

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 42, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1346 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 10


For five years in a row, more than 90 percent of the young men and women
enlisting in the armed forces have been high school graduates. Sergeants and
generals alike argue that this the best evidence that the ranks can be filled
with good people without a draft.

The young people joining the services now are in sharp contrast to those
entering in the 1970's, when the enlistment of dropouts left a wide public
perception - which continues to this day - that the services recruited poorly
qualified people who couldn't shoot straight.

American military leaders have long contended that high school graduates make
better soldiers than do dropouts. Young people with diplomas have shown they can
learn, are perserverent and can absorb discipline. Thus they are easier to
train.

Questions About Weapons

During the last years of the draft, which ended in 1973, barely 70 percent of
those entering the service were high school graduates. When the volunteer force
was started, the figure was even lower. The services also suffered from breaches
of discipline, racial strife, and low retention of experienced noncommissioned
officers.

Even after recruiting improved in the early 1980's, critics of the volunteer
force pointed to the earlier experience and predicted the turnaround would not
last. In particular, they said, young people could not learn to operate the
sophisticated weapons of a modern force.

But a far different portrait has emerged recently, not only from recruiting
results but from interviews around the country with more than 80 senior
sergeants in the Army, Marine Corps and Air Force and chief petty officers in
the Navy. They are generally considered the best authorities on life in the
ranks.

The vast majority of the senior noncommissioned officers, who averaged 25 years
of service, attested to the vitality of the volunteer force. In particular, they
said young men and women today have shown that they can operate and maintain
their advanced weapons.

Recruiting and Unemployment

They also said drug abuse is far less prevalent than that in civilian life, and
Pentagon reports support this. Racial tensions are also said to be less severe
than in American society as a whole, an observation supported by academic
specialists. Signs of poor discipline, such as absence without leave and
disobedience, are at record lows.

Defense Department officials said they will soon make public the annual
recruiting results for the 1987 fiscal year, which ended on Sept. 30, which will
show that more than 90 percent of the recruits were high school graduates.

The five-year trend in recruiting, moreover, coincided with a steady decline in
unemployment, according to Government reports. Earlier, recruiting specialists
inside and outside the Government had thought that unemployment caused young
people to enlist.

First Sgt. Claude Foreman, an artilleryman at Ft. Sill, Okla., said: ''There's
no comparison between the soldiers of today and the soldiers of the 70's.''
Before, he said, many could not read well. Now, he said, ''we're getting
soldiers who can read and write and, not only that, they can think.''

Testimonials to New Recruits

Master Chief Petty Officer Stanley G. Westover, the command master chief at a
submarine base in San Diego, said: ''We've become much more selective in the
volunteer force.'' The top sergeant of the 1st Marine Division at Camp
Pendleton, Calif., Sgt. Maj. Frank Riojas, added, ''High school kids have had
training on computers and they have the ability to handle our weapons and
equipment.''

At Dover Air Force Base in Delaware, Senior Master Sgt. Richard J. Porkorny
supervises maintenance of C-5 cargo planes. ''The caliber of people coming in
the Air Force now has really improved,'' he said. He said it once took a year to
train a new mechanic, but it takes only three months now.

Not everything is perfect, of course. The volunteer force has problems that many
noncommissioned officers thought reflected American society.

Physical Fitness a Problem

Despite their education, some recruits do not read well enough to learn quickly.
They have been ''socially promoted through school,'' the noncommissioned
officers said, and must take remedial classes.

Others are not physically fit. Army sergeants said some recruits could not do
the required 13 pushups while Marine sergeants said some recruits could not do 3
chinups. The sergeants blamed this on fiscal cutbacks in physical education and
on jogging, which does not build upper body strength. Recruits who cannot
qualify are given remedial training.

The noncommissioned officers also said many young people have not been taught to
take responsibility because their parents were young in the permissive 1960's.
''The parents have had 18 years to spoil them,'' growled a top sergeant, ''and
they expect me to straighten them out in 18 months.''

For the future, a projected decline in the number of young men keeps alive
prospects of a draft. (The Supreme Court has ruled that women may not be
drafted.) While there were 8.6 million men 18 to 21 years old in 1981, there are
7.4 million this year. The Census Bureau has said that will drop to 6.6 million
by 1995.

Revival of Draft Discussed

Despite the decline, Secretary of De fense Caspar W. Weinberger contends that
recruiting will succeed so long as Congress keeps pay and benefits comparable to
what is available in civilian life. But the newly revised budget-balancing law
may require military spending cuts that could threaten military salaries,
Pentagon officials said.

Advocates of the draft, including two Democrats, Senators Sam Nunn of Georgia
and Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina, say the shrinking pool of young men,
plus a need to hold down costs, may lead to conscription.

Over the last three decades, the United States has had three quite different
armed forces.

During the war in Vietnam, the draft brought men into the Army, and a few into
the Marine Corps, and induced others to enlist in the Navy or Air Force. But
many evaded it.

Better Pay and Benefits

In the early volunteer force, the services were demoralized by poorly edu cated
and ill motivated recruits. That was compounded by public indifference, low pay,
inadequate equipment and unrealistic training. The Army's Chief of Staff in
1980, Gen. Edward C. Meyer, told Congress that his was a ''hollow army.''

During the Reagan Administration, an improvement in personnel has been
accomplished with pay raises, educational benefits and better training.
Recruiting quotas have been filled easily with qualified people, except for two
years when the Navy cut its recruiting budget.

Perhaps the most critical question has been the ability of young people to
master high-tech weapons. Martin Binkin, a specialist in military personnel at
the Brookings Institution, a research organization here, wrote last year that
many observers believe ''the technologies embodied in today's weapons systems
have already extended them beyond the abilities of the volunteers that the armed
forces can reasonably expect to attract and retain.''

The View From the Ranks

Top sergeants and chief petty officers disagree.

At Ft. Bliss, First Sgt. Roy J. Amerson trains recruits to shoot Stinger
missiles, an antiaircraft weapon fired from the shoulder that has been
criticized as too difficult for average soldiers. In eight months, Sergeant
Amerson said, ''I have not had anybody come through here who could not be
trained.''

First Sgt. Melvis L. Hall in a company of 415 soldiers who repair tank
transmissions, engines and laser devices said: ''Only a few duds get by the
recruiter, basic and advanced training and the tech schools. I have only two
people who shouldn't be in maintenance.''

In San Diego, Master Chief Petty Officer William T. Hunt pointed to sailors on
the frigate Stark, where 37 were killed after the ship was hit by Iraqi missiles
in the Persian Gulf. ''If those people were not doing things in the right
manner,'' he said, ''I don't think they could have saved that ship.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of percentage of enlistment for each branch of the service that
graduated form high school; 1980 and 1986 (Source: Defense Dept.)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Memorial Plan Disputed in Baltimore

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 651 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, Oct. 10


A proposed memorial to Vietnam veterans in a small but historic park here has
divided neighborhood residents and the project's supporters.

Residents say they support the idea of the memorial, an 18-inch-high wall of
pink granite and white marble running the 340-foot length of Federal Hill, but
they are afraid that it is too big for the hilltop park overlooking Baltimore's
harbor. The names of more than 1,000 Maryland residents killed in the Vietnam
War are to be engraved on the wall.

''This is such a small park,'' said Laurie Alcock, a nearby resident. ''The
question is, if they go through with this, What is going to be left?''

Tom Shaner, a Vietnam veteran who is the project's chief fund-raiser, sharply
disagreed, saying ''the priorities are to build a memorial, not to save a
park.''

''If they would stop and think about it they would realize what an honor it
is,'' Mr. Shaner said. ''They do not have a right to interfere with the way this
state honors its Vietnam veterans.''

Federal Hill Park marks the site where 4,000 citizens gathered in 1788 to
celebrate Maryland's ratification of the Constitution. The area played a role in
the Civil War when it was occupied by Union troops. The Federal forces fortified
the hill and aimed their cannons at Baltimore, which sympathized with the
Confederate cause.

Withholding Endorsement

Last week the Federal Hill Neighborhood Association withheld its endorsement of
the project, saying the Maryland Vietnam Veterans Memorial Commission had
reneged on making the improvements it promised three years ago for the popular
but neglected park.

''The problem is the memorial design got increasingly grandiose and the
fund-raising efforts didn't follow suit,'' said Jerry Wachtel, president of the
neighborhood association.

Despite reservations about the size of the memorial, Mr. Wachtel said the
association would approve it if the veterans memorial commission agreed to
provide new walkways and landscaping and remove a dilapidated bandstand and
restroom.

However, veterans commission officials say projected excess costs on the project
are likely to force the use of some of the money that had been designated for
such park improvements. The state has contributed $2.5 million to the project,
and $500,000 has been raised from donations.

''We don't have any problems on Federal Hill that can't be solved with money,''
said Fred Wineland, the chairman of the memorial commission. ''However, where
that money is going to come from I have no idea.''

Ms. Alcock and others believe the monument would obscure a plaque and monuments
to two men who played roles in Baltimore's defense in the War of 1812.

Grieving Mothers

But Mr. Shaner said that to place the monument anywhere else ''would send a
signal to Vietnam veterans that the importance of remembering them is not as
important as we have said.''

Some feelings were hurt when one longtime resident complained publicly, to the
embarrassment of many of his neighbors, that children should be able to play in
the park without having to look at grieving mothers.

The association is also concerned about worsened parking problems in the
harborside neighborhood, where developers are rushing to convert warehouses and
other large buildings into condominiums and apartments.

A compromise is being proposed by the neighborhood. But if an agreement cannot
be reached, an alternative site will have to be sought, Mr. Wineland said.

Alexander Wilson, who lives next to the park, and other residents of the area
said the community had unjustifiably been portrayed as narrow-minded.

''I certainly subscribe to the general notion these men were not treated the way
they should have been,'' Mr. Wilson said of the Vietnam veterans whose names
would be inscribed on the wall. But ''it's out of proportion given the
extraordinary importance of the hill in the history of Baltimore.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UNIVERSITY PRESSES;
WHEN SHARPENED PENCILS WENT TO WAR

BYLINE: By EDWARD SOREL; Edward Sorel's drawings and cartoons appear regularly
in The Nation, The Atlantic and GQ.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 60, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 690 words



HECKLING HITLER
Caricatures of the Third Reich. By Zbynek Zeman. Illustrated. 128 pp. Hanover,
N.H.: University Press of New England. Cloth, $25. Paper, $14.95.

WAR may bring out the worst in man, but it does wonders for political
cartoonists. Think of what the Napoleonic wars did for George Cruikshank and
James Gillray, or Vietnam for Jules Feiffer and Patrick Oliphant. It compelled
them - to use an old tennis phrase - to raise the level of their game. World War
II was no exception. Thus in ''Heckling Hitler'' we have an opportunity to see
the best political artists of the period at the top of their form, and a
smattering of hacks inspired at least to a level of mediocrity.

A book of this kind rises or falls on its selections, and in that regard, aside
from a quibble or two - I missed seeing William Gropper and Arthur Szyk -there
can be little argument about Zbynek Zeman's choices. David Low of The London
Evening Standard gets the lion's share of these pages, but George Grosz and Karl
Arnold are allowed plenty of space to display their artistry. John Heartfield
(born Helmut Herzfelde) is here, too, with his inspired photomontages that
created a new art form. And there's David Fitzpatrick, whose cartoons for the
St. Louis Post-Dispatch almost single-handedly represent the United States in
this collection.

''Heckling Hitler'' was originally published in England (Mr. Zeman teaches
European history at Oxford), which explains why the book is a bit top-heavy with
selections from the English press. This bias, however, gives us a rare chance to
see the sort of cartoons Punch was publishing during the war. They are
shockingly poor, belonging to the 19th century in style and concept. Low's work,
on the other hand, looks better than ever. Few editorial cartoonists today work
with a brush, as he did, so his drawings now have a period look to them, making
it somehow easier to view them in purely esthetic terms. They are masterly. Low
is the ultimate commentator on the Hitler years, much as Daumier is on the
period of Louis Philippe and Napoleon III.

The text that accompanies these drawings is all that it should be. Mr. Zeman
does a good job of detailing the political events that inspired the cartoons and
tells us just enough about the artists themselves. It was interesting to learn,
for example, that Georg Grosz and Helmut Herzfelde Anglicized their names during
the First World War, not the Second, to protest German jingoism. It was also
surprising to see political cartoons by Paul Iribe, one of France's best
illustrators. He is remembered now only for his elegant art deco drawings, yet
his delicate style expresses his rage at the Nazis.

Delicacy of line was also the hallmark of Karl Arnold, whose drawings in the
German satirical weekly Simplicissimus ridiculed the Nazis as early as 1923. His
sophisticated, amusing attacks concentrated on the absurdity of their ideology.
After Hitler took power and the magazine was turned into another organ for
National Socialism, Arnold's earlier cartoons were banned, but the artist
himself was allowed to remain on the staff - providing he change his views, of
course. Thomas Theodor Heine, who had been a contributor to Simplicissimus since
1906, did not have that option. He was a Jew. Suddenly, at the age of 66, he was
forced to flee, first to Prague, then to Oslo and finally to Stockholm. There,
in 1944, he drew ''German Autumn,'' a bitter final comment on the Third Reich.
It appears near the end of ''Heckling Hitler,'' and seems not only a last word
on Nazism, but a farewell to the Simplicissimus style of line drawing, which
Heine exemplified. After World War II no one ever drew quite like that again.

Cartoon buffs - happily, an increasing tribe - will welcome ''Heckling Hitler''
to their libraries, but they will probably skip Mr. Zeman's introductory history
of caricature, which he begins with the 18th dynasty of Egypt. And some readers,
such as myself, will take a dim view of the gothic typeface used throughout the
book and set with insufficient space between lines. Its look on the page would
make any typographer wince.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing by Thomas Theodor Heine, 1944

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UNIVERSITY PRESSES;
HE'LL ALWAYS BE WHO HE USED TO BE

BYLINE: By DIANE MCWHORTER; Diane McWhorter is a journalist and critic.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 55, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 842 words



WANDERER SPRINGS
By Robert Flynn. 340 pp. Fort Worth: Texas Christian University Press. $19.95.

''WANDERER SPRINGS'' is one of those ambitious, almost very good novels that
remind you how hard it is to write fiction. The premise is promisingly
dialectical: Will Callaghan, sardonic small-town expert at a big-city institute
on Texas culture, returns to his ''prairie eyesore'' of a birthplace to confront
his disgrace -''not as a coward, which was unforgivable, but as inept, which was
almost as bad.'' The hometown lives he re-encounters, plain and Gothic as
country music, particularize grand American themes, from manifest destiny to
Vietnam. For all the strong ingredients, however, Robert Flynn - a skilled
hard-boiled epigrammatist and the author of three previous novels - never quite
produces a meal. Will's story fails to gain tragic intensity adequate to the
writerly garnishes.

Fifty years old and a widower, Will Callaghan has been a decade gone from
Wanderer Springs when the funeral of Roma Dean Tooley's mother summons him back
to lay his shame to rest. More than 30 years earlier, Roma Dean, his high school
sweetheart, drowned while in his company at Turtle Hole, and her naked corpse
became a nationwide scandal-sheet sensation. The drowning will provide the
climactic revelation at the end of his odyssey, but in the meantime the novel
concentrates on Will's co-protagonist, the evanescent Northwest Texas town based
on the author's native Chillicothe.

Tracing the region's evolution from a warrior frontier state to McTexas, homely
family histories cascade through the text in Faulknerian repetitions.
Eccentricity is the commonplace of this genre. In addition to the cowboy who
lassoed his own horse and the town masher shot in the face by the postmaster
while peering into his post office box, there are - fantastical shades of Garcia
Marquez - a boy who speaks in Latin and a girl with turtle eyes. Mr. Flynn's
agrarian vision is satirical, winking at the Vaseline-lensed pluck-and-grit
celluloid paeans of former rural Texans such as Robert Benton and Horton Foote.
In Wanderer Springs ''rugged individualism'' means social-Darwinist greed at its
most exuberant. Hard work is rewarded by subsistence, and prestige and influence
- money - come by fluke or knavery.

The young Will and his peers have found community in badlands-style Babbittry,
''willing to sacrifice everything, values, beliefs, individuality to be part of
the team.'' The high school football team, that is, standard-bearer of the
town's hilarious lopsided rivalry with the ''usurper, the bastard prince who had
stolen our kingdom,'' the county seat. Along with Roma Dean's nudity, Will's
dropping the winning pass against Center Point his senior year sealed his
ignominy.

That Will (''Don't call him 'Will,' call him 'cain't' '') is Exhibit A of the
soul-breaking experience of Wanderer Springs crosses him up with the reader.
Describing in flashback his return to the family farm after college, Will says,
''I had escaped Wanderer Springs and then returned there to teach school, out of
loyalty. . . . Or maybe to exact the retribution I thought I wanted to escape.''
But perhaps he is confusing masochism with sadism. At his insistence, his
Mexican-American bride, Delores (the novel's lone case for melting-pot
idealism), forfeited a college scholarship and left her cozy San Antonio habitat
so that Will could mope over having to sell high school students on suicidal
bravery a la Alamo. ''What was I doing in a doomed town, teaching the virtues of
independence, self-reliance, and public spirit to boys and girls whose lives
were controlled by forces of which they were scarcely aware, industrial and
financial and communication empires that transcended governments?'' he asks with
typical expository moroseness. What he ended up doing was betraying Delores's
mature, tolerant love in a vanity-greasing affair with a home economics teacher.
When Will then acts the victim in recounting Delores's death in a car crash and
his mercy-bludgeoning of poor Roma Dean's pet dog, the reader may have rudely
joined the locals in wishing he would just be a man.

LATE in the book, the narrative catches up with the present and Will arrives in
Wanderer Springs, where the modern growth industry is the Wanderer's Rest
nursing home, profit center for the town doctor / shyster. Mr. Flynn has done a
fine job of conveying the irrational drive called sense of place, a ''love
[that] must be ranked with patriotism and mother love for sheer willfulness to
refuse to believe what one knows.'' But Will's drama has mustered no moral
command over the galumphing jocularity of the local color. When the dreadful
truth of Roma Dean's drowning unfolds during the reunion of old classmates for
Mrs. Tooley's funeral - and affirms that ''everything you are and do from
fifteen to eighteen,'' as F. Scott Fitzgerald once advised his teen-age
daughter, ''is what you are and will do through life'' - it's not that one
doesn't believe it. One just can't feel it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Washington Talk: Briefing;
Women's Memorial

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 255 words


For more than two years, the Vietnam Women's Memorial Project has been asking
that a statue of a woman be added to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in the
capital to reflect the service of more than 10,000 women, mostly nurses, in the
long conflict in Vietnam.

The women first needed the approval of a veterans' group led by Jan Scruggs and
John Wheeler that was primarily responsible for bringing into being the Vietnam
memorial. The memorial, a long, black wall sunk into the earth near the Lincoln
Memorial, contains lists of the names of the thousands of Americans who died in
the war or became missing in action.

The women obtained the approval of Mr. Scruggs and his associates 18 months ago.
And now they have won the support of the Secretary of the Interior, Donald P.
Hodel, who sent a letter last Thursday to the Commission on Fine Arts and the
National Capital Planning Commission urging them to approve the women's idea for
an addition to the memorial. The fine arts commission has scheduled a hearing
for later this month; the planning commission has not yet acted.

Donna-Marie Boulay, a representative of the women's project, said in a telephone
interview from Minneapolis that the goal was to have a bronze statue of a woman
placed near a grove of trees about 150 feet from the eastern end of the
memorial's V-shaped wall.

The statue of the woman would balance the statue of three soldiers, each seeming
to scan the wall for names of fallen comrades, that stands about 150 feet from
the western tip of the wall.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Could Supply Agent Orange Subjects

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 133 words


To the Editor:

The Congressional Office of Technology Assessment has concluded that too few
American ground troops in the Vietnam War were exposed to Agent Orange to form a
data base to determine if the defoliant caused physiological harm (news story,
Sept. 30).

However, an adequate number of people for a data base might be found among
Vietnamese who were exposed to the chemical. Given the large quantities of the
herbicide that were sprayed on the countryside of Vietnam, there clearly are
enough exposed Vietnamese soldiers and civilians to draw on for a study.

Approaching the Vietnamese with such a proposal and an offer to share in the
results could also help heal some of the still-festering wounds between our
nations.

WILLIAM J. VOLONTE
  Dunellen, N.J., Oct. 3, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

COSTA RICA LEADER WINS NOBEL PRIZE FOR PEACE PLAN

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1314 words

DATELINE: OSLO, Oct. 13


President Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica, the driving force behind the
regional peace plan signed by five Central American countries two months ago,
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize today.

The selection of Mr. Arias and the explicit endorsement of what has become known
as the Guatemala accord were a potential setback to President Reagan's efforts
to win Congressional approval of $270 million in aid for the contras, the
American-backed guerrillas fighting the Nicaraguan Government. [In Washington,
Representative Jim Wright, the House Speaker, said the award insured that
Congress would not approve new military aid for the contras. Nonetheless,
Secretary of State George P. Shultz said President Reagan would demand that
Congress provide new aid before Thanksgiving. Page A14.] Main Architect of
Accord The Norwegian Nobel Committee cited Mr. Arias, who was elected President
only last year, for his ''outstanding contribution to the possible return of
stability and peace to a region long torn by strife and civil war.'' Costa Rica,
unlike many of its neighbors, enjoys a functioning democracy and broad civic
freedoms.

The citation described Mr. Arias as the main architect of an accord signed Aug.
7 by Nicaragua, Guatemala, Costa Rica, El Salvador and Honduras to resolve their
conflicts. The plan is scheduled to take full effect on Nov. 7, but its
prospects are uncertain.

The accord broadly followed proposals made by Mr. Arias to the other leaders
early this year. When it was signed Mr. Arias declared, ''We have committed
ourselves to fight for peace and to eradicate war.''

Past Nominations Disputed

The endorsement of a continuing political process is not without precedent in
the history of Nobel peace prizes, although not every effort so recognized has
succeeded.

Past recipients in this category would include Willy Brandt, who was rewarded
for his efforts to build detente with the East while Chancellor of West Germany;
Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho for the Vietnam peace accord, which proved ill
fated, and President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menachem Begin
of Israel for the peace pact they signed.

Those selections generated some controversy at the time. But Egil Aarvik, the
chairman of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, said it was a function of the prize
to contribute to peace, not just to recognize those who serve it.

Nominated by a Swede

What was unusual about this year's award, however, was that Mr. Arias was
rewarded for very recent achievements, most of them since the Feb. 1 deadline
for nominations. Mr. Aarvik acknowledged that unlike most past laureates, the
Costa Rican President was nominated by only one person, Bjorn Molin, a member of
the Swedish Parliament. Mr. Molin is a member of the centrist Liberal Party,
which belongs to the opposition coalition.

''We in the committee do not operate in a vacuum,'' Mr. Aarvik said by way of
explaining why the committee had used such recent developments for its award.
''We saw that the Central American problem has been in focus over the last
months and the past year. I think it is important that the Peace Prize can be
given to a person who is currently active, that the prize can have an
influence.''

Since the agreement was signed, Nicaragua has declared a monthlong unilateral
cease-fire in three areas, has loosened press censorship and has released some
prisoners. Guatemala has opened peace talks with rebel leaders in the first
formal effort to end that country's 26-year-old guerrilla struggle. In El
Salvador, President Jose Napoleon Duarte recently renewed peace talks with rebel
factions.

'Fatally Flawed,' Reagan Says

President Reagan and his aides at first described the Guatemala plan as
''fatally flawed.'' But as it gathered support in Congress and abroad, Mr.
Reagan declared that he too supported it, although he remained concerned by
''loopholes and omissions.''

In a speech to the Organization of American States this month, Mr. Reagan said
he was seeking additional money for the contras to ''guarantee'' that the
Sandinistas live up to the Guatemala accord. He said he welcomed the steps
Nicaragua had taken to comply with it, but maintained a skepticism ''born of a
long record of Sandinista deceit and broken promises.''

Reports from Costa Rica said Mr. Arias was awakened with the news of the award
by a local reporter. ''I am happy, immeasurably happy, about this news,'' he was
quoted as having said. ''I have no idea what the committee based the decision
on. As an individual I have not earned this prize. I believe that the academy
intended the prize for Costa Rica, the people of Costa Rica.''

Mr. Aarvik, a former vice president of the Norwegian Parliament, said that while
the Nobel panel was not seeking to make a political statement with its
selection, it did hope that the prize would contribute to the peace process.

When asked whether the choice could prove controversial, Mr. Aarvik smiled and
said: ''Not more than usual. We always have to expect a bit of that.''

Controversy is hardly new to the Norwegian Nobel Committee, which was criticized
last year for giving the prize to an anti-nuclear physicians' organization whose
Soviet co-chairman, Dr. Yevgeny I. Chazov, had once joined in a public
denunciation of the physicist Andrei D. Sakharov. Before that, the committee had
been denounced by Moscow for choosing Dr. Sakharov.

Mr. Aarvik said there had been 93 nominees. He declined to name any of them, but
speculation in the Oslo press in the days preceding the award had focused on
Nelson Mandela, the imprisoned South African black nationalist; President
Corazon C. Aquino of the Philippines; President Raul Alfonsin of Argentina, and
the World Heath Organization. Mr. Arias was also mentioned, but some
Nobel-watchers thought his work was too recent.

Behind the Selection

Committee members gave no indication of how the discussions had gone, and the
Norwegian committee has traditionally been scrupulous in following the precept
of the founder of the prizes, Alfred Nobel, against disclosing its
deliberations. Mr. Aarvik did acknowledge that the committee had preferred to
select an individual rather than an organization like W.H.O.

The five members of the Norwegian committee are selected by the Parliament. In
addition to Mr. Aarvik, a former leader of the Christian People's Party and a
respected writer, they were Oddvar Norli, a former Labor Prime Minister; Dunnar
Staalset, former head of the World Council of Churches; Gidske Anderson, a
journalist, and Francis Sejersted, a history professor.

Mr. Arias, who is 46 years old, held his first meeting with the leaders of
Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua shortly after he was elected
President last year. The initial discussions centered on proposals made by the
Contadora Group of Latin American governments, but early this year Mr. Arias
called a new meeting at which he submitted his own plan, which led to the
agreement signed in Guatemala on Aug. 7.

The plan specifically bars outside aid to guerrillas and their use of foreign
territory. The plan set a deadline for cease-fires in all regional conflicts and
called on the governments to open discussions with ''unarmed oppositions,''
which would exclude the contras.

The Nobel citation said the committee ''attaches importance to the fact that the
accord is the result of responsible cooperation between the five signatory
states.

''As such, it lays solid foundations for the further development of democracy
and for open cooperation between peoples and states,'' it added. ''A
prerequisite for lasting peace is the realization of democratic ideals, with
freedom and equality for all. In the opinion of the committee, Oscar Arias is a
strong spokesman for those ideals. The importance of his work for peace will
extend beyond Central America.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 16, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition and October
15, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An Oslo dispatch on Wednesday about the awarding of the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize
misidentified one member of the prize committee. He is the Rev. Dr. Gunnar J.
Staalsett, general secretary of the Lutheran World Federation. He is not a
former head of the World Council of Churches.

An Oslo dispatch yesterday about the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize misstated the year
in which the prize was given to an anti-nuclear physicians' organization. The
group, the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, received
the prize in 1985.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Pres. and Mrs. Oscar Arias Sanchez in San Jose after
announcement of prize award (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Russians Again Vote to Oust Israel From the U.N.

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 13


The Soviet Union, despite overtures to Israel on other fronts, voted again today
to exclude Israel from the General Assembly.

Iran and most of the Arab world have been seeking since 1982 to end Israel's
membership in the United Nations.

In recent weeks there had been intense speculation that Moscow might soften its
stand against Israel, since it is currently pressing for a United
Nations-sponsored Middle East peace conference to resolve Israel's dispute with
its Arab neighbors. Moscow also has a consular mission visiting Tel Aviv.

But the Soviet Union cast its own vote - as well as those of the Ukraine,
Byelorussia and Mongolia, which are treated as separate countries here -against
accepting the Israeli delegation's credentials when they were challenged by Arab
members today.

East Germany Backs Moscow

In the first ballot, Israel won 80 votes. A total of 39 countries voted against
Israel, 10 abstained and 29 countries were absent. Five of the absent countries
later said they wanted to be recorded as voting in Israel's favor and one as
abstaining.

That gave Israel 85 votes, the same as it received after similar switches last
year. On the first tally last year Israel won 77 votes, with 40 against, 16
absentions and 26 countries absent. It would take a two-thirds vote of those
countries present and voting to exclude Israel. There are 159 countries in the
United Nations.

Voting against Israel were virtually the whole Moslem world, together with such
Soviet allies as Cuba, Angola and Vietnam. East Germany was the only Eastern
European country to support Moscow by casting a negative vote. For the first
time Czechoslovakia joined Poland, Hungary and Bulgaria in refusing to take part
in the voting, while Rumania and Yugoslavia supported Israel's admission, as
they did last year. Jordan also absented itself this year, after voting against
Israel in 1986.

Israeli officials said tonight that they hoped three more absent countries would
register votes in favor of Israel.

Israel's representative at the United Nations, Benjamin Netanyahu, said he was
''disappointed but not surprised'' by the Soviet Union's decision to again vote
against Israel, a move he described as ''self-contradictory.''

Some diplomats speculated that Moscow voted against Israel because the Israeli
Government turned down Moscow's offer of a partial restoration of diplomatic
relations through the establishment of Russian and Israeli ''interest sections''
in embassies of third countries in each others capitals. Israel said such a move
was insufficient.

RUSSIANS EXTEND STAY IN ISRAEL

JERUSALEM, Oct. 13 (Special to The New York Times) - A Soviet consular
delegation dispatched to Tel Aviv three months ago, ostensibly to check on
Russian church property in Israel, has asked to extend its stay for another
three months. Israel has granted the request, the Foreign Ministry said today.

The move could indicate that Moscow may be planning to keep its consular
delegation in Israel on an open-ended basis, as low-level Soviet diplomatic
representatives, Israeli officials said.

The Soviet Union broke diplomatic relations with Israel after the 1967 Middle
East. It had no diplomatic presence in Israel until the arrival of the consular
mission July 12.

In renewing their visas, the Soviet delegates told Israeli officials that the
extension of their stay was part of an effort by Moscow to slowly and gradually
prepare for some kind of diplomatic relations with Israel, a senior Israeli
official said.

''They said they were trying to pave the way with public opinion both in the
Soviet Union and in the Arab world,'' the official said. ''The fact that they
were here for three months and the sky did not fall, and Soviet embassies in the
Arab world were not attacked, seems to have encouraged them to extend.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Wright Says Award for Arias Dooms Aid for Contras

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 13


Representative Jim Wright, the House Speaker, said today that the awarding of
the Nobel Peace Prize to President Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica today
insured that Congress would not approve the Reagan Administration's request for
new aid for the Nicaraguan rebels.

''I can't conceive of providing any military aid in a time of peace,'' said Mr.
Wright, a Texas Democrat.

He said it was his view that the Administration's proposal to provide $270
million in new aid for the rebels, known as contras, was probably destined to
fail anyway. But, he added, the symbolism of the award to Mr. Arias meant that
''there will be no support for the contras at this time.''

Nonetheless, Secretary of State George P. Shultz told the House Foreign Affairs
Committee later in the day that President Reagan will demand that Congress
provide new aid to the contras before Thanksgiving.

'Necessary' for Agreement

Mr. Shultz argued that the aid would enhance the prospects of the agreement for
which President Arias was given the award. The $270 million, he said, was
''necessary to support the agreement and insure that it endures.''

At the same time, some Republicans grumbled about the award to Mr. Arias.
Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the House Republican leader, said
it remained to be seen whether the Arias plan would bring peace and freedom to
Nicaragua.

''The award may be premature,'' said Mr. Michel, who has often spoken for the
Administration on the issue.

Representative Newt Gingrich, a Georgia Republican, was even harsher. He said
the Peace Prize decision was ''premature and saddening.'' Mr. Gingrich compared
it to 1973, when the Peace Prize was awarded to Henry A. Kissinger, then the
Secretary of State, and Le Duc Tho of North Vietnam, for negotiating what was
supposed to be an end to the Vietnam War.

Military and Nonmilitary Uses

''This is the same committee that gave the award to Le Duc Tho two years before
he turned South Vietnam into a Communist prison,'' he said.

Under the Administration plan for aid to the contras, the money would be
available for both military and nonmilitary uses. Mr. Shultz said the money
could later be applied solely to nonmilitary purposes if the peace plan were
proceeding.

Democratic leaders in Congress have said that they might later appropriate a
smaller amount of money to help in resettling the contras. But they have been
adamant in their opposition to the Administration's proposal for $270 million in
aid.

Under the peace accord, of which Mr. Arias was the chief architect, five Central
American Governments - Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Guatemala, El Salvador and
Honduras - are to carry out cease-fires with rebel groups by Nov. 7.

Other Provisions

At the same time, each of the Governments is to insure that several other
provisions are in place, including freedom of the press and amnesty for
political opponents and insurgents. The agreement also calls for an end to all
outside aid to insurgent groups.

In an appearance in Washington last month, Mr. Arias urged Congress to refrain
from providing new aid to the contras while the peace process was under way.
There was widespread agreement today that the naming of Mr. Arias as the Peace
Prize recipient enhances his prestige and his request to suspend contra aid.

''Now people will pay more attention to the request from Central America that
aid to insurgent forces should be ended,'' said Guido Fernandez, the Costa Rican
Ambassador to Washington. Congratulations From U.S.  The White House and the
State Department offered congratulations to Mr. Arias today, but the event
signals a shift in the Administration's fortunes on the issue. Administration
officials have complained with increasing frequency that the Arias plan favors
the Government in Nicaragua.

In his testimony today, Mr. Shultz seemed to be setting out the conditions to
allow the Administration to declare that Nicaragua has failed to comply with the
accord by Nov. 7.

He criticized President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua for saying he would
not negotiate a cease-fire with the leadership of the contras. Mr. Ortega said
last week that he would seek to comply with the peace accord's requirement for a
cease-fire by negotiating with contra field commanders.

''He should negotiate directly with the resistance for a cease-fire,'' Mr.
Shultz said. ''The Ortega regime has so far refused, trying instead to divide
the fighters from their political leaders.''

At another point in his testimony, Mr. Shultz said of the peace plan: ''If any
part fails, the entire structure fails. If no cease-fire is negotiated, if no
full amnesty is implemented, the other measures are in abeyance.''

Representative Dante B. Fascell, a Florida Democrat and chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee, said it appeared that the Administration was setting
conditions difficult to meet by insisting that everything be accomplished by
Nov. 7.

Earlier, Mr. Wright told reporters that the Nov. 7 date should not be considered
a true deadline. ''I don't think you set up an arbitrary time limit,'' he said.
''It's not like a football game.'' ---- Nicaraguan Copter Shot Down MANAGUA,
Nicaragua, Oct. 13 (AP) - Contra forces have shot down a Soviet-made MI-17
helicopter providing ground support to Sandinista troops, the Defense Ministry
said Monday night. There was no word on the fate of its four crew members.

The ministry said the helicopter was shot down Sunday by a United States-made
Redeye ground-to-air missile about 11 miles west of a military training base in
Jinotega Province, about 200 miles north of Managua.

The site lies outside three war zones where the Sandinistas on Oct. 7 called a
30-day unilateral cease-fire as part of the Central American peace plan.

The Government declared a fourth cease-fire zone today, in a 240-square-mile
area in central Zelaya province, 165 miles northeast of the capital.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Secretary of State George P. Shultz with Representative Dante
B. Fascell (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Prizing Peace, and Promoting It

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 492 words


Bernard Shaw once lamented that Nobel Prizes were like life preservers thrown
long after the recipients had escaped drowning. That reproach surely does not
apply to this year's Peace Prize. The award honors, and furthers, the cause of
peace in Central America.

It's perfectly true, as nettled American conservatives complain, that Oslo is a
long way from Central America. Doubtless the Nobel Committee of the Norwegian
Parliament knew it was taking a chance in bestowing the prize on President Oscar
Arias of Costa Rica. After all, the regional peace plan he put forward doesn't
even go into effect until Nov. 7. Still, the committee's timing makes this award
especially important.

The prize goes to the elected leader of an exemplary democracy whose citizens
decided four decades ago to abolish their armed forces. Costa Ricans as a people
have long since earned this prize. How much better if President Reagan had said
as much, instead of his grudging three words for Mr. Arias, ''I congratulate
him.''

As those cold words suggest, the new pact needs all the outside help it can
muster. It calls for cease-fires, an end to all foreign support for insurgent
forces, restoration of freedoms and democratic elections in five republics. But
in Nicaragua, democrats charge that the Sandinistas are already evading promises
to restore full civil rights. And in Washington, Mr. Reagan vows to press for
continued aid to the contra rebels, which would give the Sandinistas a pretext
for dishonoring, if that is their aim, promises to democratize their Government.
Still, neither Managua nor the White House can ignore the plan's popularity in a
region that so yearns for an end to civil wars and an economic rebirth. Acclaim
for the plan, now enhanced by the Nobel Prize, exerts pressure on Nicaragua and
blunts the campaign for renewed American funding to the contras. Now Mr. Arias
will have that splendid pulpit in Oslo to make his case - especially to European
democracies, whose weight increasingly counts in Central America.


There remains the objection that the prize is premature or constitutes meddling
by the Norwegian Parliament. In 1973, the Vietnam War bled on despite the Nobel
awards to Henry Kissinger and Le Duc Tho. In 1971, there were cries of foul in
West Germany when Oslo bestowed its laurels on Chancellor Willy Brandt as his
Government was heading into elections.

Does this year's award fall into the same category? The reproach might have
weight if the Norwegian Parliament had tilted consistently eastward or leftward.
That's not the case. Nobody in Washington carried on about timing or meddling
when the prize went, over Soviet protests, to Andrei Sakharov in 1975, or to
Lech Walesa of Poland, the leader of Solidarity, in 1983.

In those instances, too, the prize committee stuck its neck out, and in both
cases advanced the cause of peace and freedom. Mr. Arias, his country and his
peace plan deserve this prize.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. Demands Vietnamese Leave Cambodia

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 274 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 14


The General Assembly overwhelmingly adopted a resolution today that deplores the
Soviet-backed Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia and demands Vietnam's withdrawal
from that nation.

The resolution has been adopted annually by the Assembly since 1979. But the
vote of 117 to 21 marked the largest majority ever to support the measure,
despite a major effort by the Soviet Union and Vietnam to divert criticism.

Moscow and Hanoi participated in debate on the resolution this year for the
first time since 1983. Also, in recent weeks, Vietnam announced several
diplomatic initiatives, including support for informal talks with factions of
the Cambodian opposition and an offer to give Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the
former Cambodian leader, a post in the current Cambodian Government.

But the Vietnamese and Soviet moves apparently failed to convince any countries
to change their votes or dampen criticism of the Soviet Union. Scores of
speakers criticized the Soviets and the Vietnamese for offering what the
American chief delegate, Vernon A. Walters, said was the ''image of
flexibility.''

The Soviet delegate, Aleksandr Belonogov, praised what he called the ''political
wisdom'' of nations opposed to the Vietnamese occupation and those that support
talks among Cambodian factions.

''It is our view that favorable opportunities now exist for making progress in
the Kampuchean settlement,'' Mr. Belonogov said.

But, Vietnam's Deputy Foreign Minister, Nguyen Dy Nien, criticized the
resolution, saying it would ''compound the stalemate'' because it ''fails to
devise measures to insure the non-return of the genocidal Pol Pot regime.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

For U.N. Chief, Diplomacy Suddenly Gets Hotter

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 14


As the United Nations grapples with the Persian Gulf war and other regional
conflicts, the Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, suddenly finds
himself engaged in active and significant diplomacy at a level highly unusual
for a secretary general of the last 20 years.

But while the cautious and somewhat bland 67-year-old Peruvian seeks to
accomplish his mandate from the Security Council to bring the seven-year-old
gulf war to an end, debate has arisen among those involved in United Nations
affairs as to whether he is well suited for the task by style and temperament.

After failing for decades to live up to its founders' expectations, the United
Nations has been thrust unexpectedly into a more active role in several trouble
spots.

The Security Council is trying for the first time to use its considerable powers
to end the gulf war and create a precedent for similar action on conflicts like
the one in Afghanistan. The Soviet Union is being slowly nudged into disengaging
from Afghanistan at United Nations-sponsored peace talks.

Soviet Call for Peacekeeping

At the same time, the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, appears to be
reversing traditional Soviet suspicion of the United Nations by calling for a
strengthening of its peacekeeping role in the world.

The questions about Mr. Perez de Cuellar's effectiveness arise largely from his
style of leadership, which appears cautious and consistently unexciting. Some
specialists in United Nations affairs say this is exactly the kind of leadership
the organization needs; others, inside and outside the organization, have
criticized it.

A lawyer of aristocratic background, Mr. Perez de Cuellar is a seasoned diplomat
who has served as Peru's Ambassador in Switzerland and the Soviet Union. But
while he has a reputation for being intelligent and honest, he recoils from the
limelight and appears reluctant to take initiatives.

Predecessors like Dag Hammarskjold, the Swede who was the most active and
visionary Secretary General, sought vague instructions from the member
governments to increase their scope for personal initiatives. As Mr. Perez de
Cuellar tries to coax the Iranians toward peace, he insists on the tightest of
mandates from his Security Council masters.

''A quiet, highly intelligent and civilized man with a wide knowledge of the job
he was undertaking'' is how Brian E. Urquhart, the recently retired Under
Secretary General for Special Political Affairs, describes Mr. Perez de Cuellar
in his autobiography, ''A Life in Peace and War.''

Doubt Worries Many

But the doubt Mr. Urquhart then raises worries others, too. ''Whether he was too
civilized, or too lacking in ego or cutting edge, remained to be seen,'' he
wrote, without offering a final verdict.

''Relentless passivity'' is the description used by a Western chief
representative to the United Nations, who said he wished Mr. Perez de Cuellar
would provide more public leadership on such issues as apartheid, the
environment and human rights.

Yet many experts contend that Mr. Perez de Cuellar's caution is the only style
of leadership that can preserve a role for the United Nations at a time when the
major powers have shown they will not tolerate an individualist.

''We have the Secretary General that times dictate,'' said Prof. Richard N.
Gardner of Columbia University, a former Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for
International Organization Affairs, who also served as United States Ambassador
to Italy. ''He's doing a superb job keeping the big powers united, and without
that the U.N. is nothing.''

What Superpowers Want

Lincoln P. Bloomfield of the Massachussets Institute of Technology, who served
as adviser on global issues for President Carter's National Security Council,
said: ''The Secretary General must mirror the political atmosphere to be
effective. The superpowers don't want an activist, but by working with them he
can accomplish a lot.''

Elected in 1981 as a compromise candidate after 16 rounds of balloting, Mr.
Perez de Cuellar was unanimously elected to a second five-year term last year.
Margaret Thatcher, the British Prime Minister, noted then that ''he didn't cause
us any trouble last time.''

The United Nations Charter gives the Secretary General a vaguely political role,
assigning him to keep the world alert to threats to peace and requiring him to
be ''exclusively international.''

Past holders of the office have built the post into one of considerable
prestige, dealing directly with Government leaders and taking a wide range of
initiatives on their own authority. Along with the job go a $200,000 annual
salary, a Volvo limousine with telephone (donated by the maker) and a private
house at 3 Sutton Place in Manhattan.

The Predecessors

The experience of some of Mr. Perez de Cuellar's predecessors suggests why he
might not try to play as independent a role as they did.

The first, Trygve Lie of Norway, who served from 1946 to 1953, left under Soviet
pressure for supporting the United Nations involvement in the Korean War. Even
Mr. Hammarsjkold, as Secretary General from 1953 to 1961, quarreled bitterly
with Moscow, over the Congo peacekeeping operation. In his case, the quarrel was
so fierce that the Russians tried to abolish the post altogether.

U Thant of Burma, who had the job from 1962 to 1971, fell afoul of the United
States when he tried to mediate in the Vietnam War. Only during the tenure of
Kurt Waldheim, from 1972 to 1981, did the Secretary General start to cast
himself in what Thomas M. Franck of the New York University Law School has
called ''a functionary role,'' acting more as adviser and emissary of the big
powers.

Even so, aides contend that Mr. Perez de Cuellar has played a more independent
role than he is credited with.

A Mediator Iran Trusts

He keeps close to the big powers in the gulf now because seven years of private
diplomacy got nowhere, they say. But a nine-month truce on civilian targets that
he negotiated in 1984 and his investigation of claims that Iraq was using poison
gas have left him as the only mediator Iran will trust today.

Another reason that the Secretary General must act cautiously, many diplomats
argue, is that the present improvement in the fortunes of the United Nations is
fragile and could easily break down.

While Moscow is warming toward the United Nations, the United States is
continuing to withhold funds - apparently jeopardizing third world support for
moves to revamp the organization's administration and procedures - and has
boycotted or sent low-ranking representatives to many meetings.

''Perez de Cuellar has a chance to improve the U.N.,'' Professor Gardner said.
''But we're not giving him much help.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Javier Perez de Cuellar (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words


HISTORY IN SHERMAN PARK. An American Family and the Reagan-Mondale Election. By
Jonathan Schell. 133 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.

NINETEEN SIXTY-EIGHT. A Personal Report. By Hans Koning. 194 pages.

W. W. Norton. $15.95.

WHATEVER happened to the 1960's? Or, to cite a telling vignette in Jonathan
Schell's ''History in Sherman Park'': How could it be that one of the people he
interviewed -who in 1968 had voted for Senator Eugene McCarthy, who in 1972 had
voted for Senator George McGovern, who in 1976 had voted for Peter Camejo, the
candidate of the Socialist Workers Party, who in 1980 had voted for Barry
Commoner, the candidate of the Citizens Party - decided in 1984 to vote for, of
all candidates, Ronald Reagan?

Both the Schell book and Hans Koning's ''Nineteen Sixty-Eight'' explore in their
respective ways the extraordinary transformation we appear to have undergone in
the past two decades. Mr. Schell - a former reporter for The New Yorker whose
best-known previous book is his meditation on nuclear catastrophe, ''The Fate of
the Earth'' - does so by getting to know a particular American family during the
1984 Presidential campaign between the incumbent, Mr. Reagan, and the Democratic
Party challenger, Walter Mondale.

Hans Koning, who has also contributed to The New Yorker and has written some 16
previous books, 7 of them under the name Hans Koningsberger, measures the
distance we have traveled since the 1960's by celebrating the year 1968 for the
''clarity of perception'' it brought. ''It was as if a curtain had been raised,
a veil lifted. The cliches, platitudes, and myths of our public life, what may
politely be called our Fourth of July rhetoric, were suddenly seen as such, and
not just by a handful of lefties in small magazines, but by the people at large,
many of them.''

Of the two, Mr. Schell's report is the more thoughtful and thought provoking.
Combining his probing yet informal interviews and his reflections on recent
American history, he wends his way to a theory of why the present times seem so
out of whack. The only problem with his unorthodox approach is that it lacks
dramatic inevitability. The people he gets to know remain somewhat indistinct as
characters, and the conclusions he reaches from talking to them do not always
follow with irresistible logic.

For instance, it is often Mr. Schell who raises the question with his subjects
of nuclear Armageddon in our lives, which is predictable enough considering his
deep concern with the issue. In response, his subjects shrug and say, in so many
words, yes, that's a problem all right, but what are you going to do? The result
is that Mr. Schell's concluding emphasis on the importance of nuclear war in the
contemporary psyche has about it a certain gratuitous quality. It's a little as
if he had gone into the woods in search of mushrooms, and once having found a
mushroom or two, pronounced the woods to be full of mushrooms.

Compared with Mr. Koning, however, he is a saint of objectivity. In Mr. Koning's
vision, there isn't much room for what lies beyond his beliefs. ''Looking back
now from the winter 1986-87, I see that throughout those wild and calm times,
the year 1968,'' in which everything from the civil-rights movement to the
protest against the Vietnam War came to a climax, ''was the most meaningful to
me, and still remains so. Meaningful in a political way, that is. But politics
and personal emotions have always been intertwined for me.''

Although he quickly adds that for him emotions don't ''take the place of
thinking,'' he neither explains his personal feelings nor bothers to define a
system of values against which to measure the benefits and drawbacks of that
tumultuous year. For instance, while trying to show how Vietnam was connected to
the French student strikes of 1968, he writes that ''they were significantly
like the American student actions. Our students had been set in motion by the
catalyst of the Vietnam War. The French students, and the way they were beaten
up by the police, acted as a catalyst on the men and women working in the
factories and on the land - in a sense, it was the Vietnam War again, twice
removed. It added up to a general unease, a desire for things to be done
differently: a highly moral motivation.''

But what the objective might be of this ''highly moral . . . desire for things
to be done differently'' - other than to overthrow the oppressive status quo -
Mr. Koning never bothers to define. The gist of his message seems to be that
1968 was good because it was revolutionary, and every year since then has been
bad because it wasn't 1968. ''SDS itself has vanished,'' he writes in a
typically tendentious passage. ''And in Sproul Plaza, where that childhood dream
blockage of a police car took place when a student was arrested for handing out
CORE leaflets, there are now tables for the Republican party, American Express
cards, and the Campus Crusade for Christ (an unchristian, belligerent Christ).''

Mr. Schell comes a little closer to explaining the sense of confusion both he
and Mr. Koning believe many people are suffering from these days. Dismissing the
1960's as an aberrant time when prosperity made us forget certain abiding
economic realities, he worries less about the decline of revolutionary activism
and more about what the bomb is quietly doing to us.

''If there is active complicity by the average citizen in the nuclear peril, it
may lie in this: We are ready to pay for our comfort and safety by accepting the
threat of our annihilation, and of the possible annihilation of mankind. The
point in the present context, however, is that the shape of the peril fits into
a broader pattern than our political life seems to have assumed. In this as in
other respects, the lines that connect the individual citizen to the body
politic and, beyond that, to the world at large, appear to have become
attenuated.''

Reality ''looks at us from behind the glass wall of the television screen,
leaving us free, if we so wish, not to think about it at all - at least until
such time as it bursts through the screen and vaporizes us where we sit.'' As an
explanation of our present reality, this, too, contains its subjective element.
But who can deny a plausibility to Mr. Schell's vision? Because who can finally
deny that the bomb is real?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Hans Koning (Magnum/Rene Burri)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ON MY MIND;
The Hypocrisy Industry

BYLINE: By A.M. Rosenthal

SECTION: Section A; Page 39, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 775 words


There is such a large measure of hypocrisy, falsehood and double-dealing in the
relations among nations that we hardly notice when one more case crops up.
That's life, so just walk on by.

Dictatorships call themselves democratic republics. States that live by
terrorism talk about the principles of freedom. Nations engaged in cutting each
other's economic throats make solemn pronouncements about free trade.
Ambassadors from countries that routinely torture their unfortunate citizens are
invited to dinner and called Your Excellency.

Simply in terms of volume, the world center of diplomatic hypocrisy is the
United Nations. This is not because the principles of international cooperation
and the organization that was founded upon them are worthless and should be put
in the garbage can of history.

The dream, the ideals and the Charter of the United Nations conferred grace upon
those who conceived and believed in them and those who still work for them. But
year after year, since the first days of hope 40-odd years ago, U.N. member
states have twisted and betrayed the dream, the ideals and the structure.

The other day a piece of arrogant, duplicitous hypocrisy was enacted at the
United Nations. It was routine and expected. Yet there had been hope that this
time one of the chief participants, the Soviet Union, would change and act with
honor. It did not.

For U.N. hands, it was an old story. The Arab states get together at the General
Assembly and introduce a resolution to kick Israel out.

And every year no less than about 40 countries from all over the world vote to
throw out of the U.N. the only democracy in all of the Middle East. No less than
about another 40 hide in abstention or absence.

Nobody introduces resolutions to throw out the Soviet Union for invading
Afghanistan, Iran for spreading a blanket of terror around the world, Cuba for
imprisoning poets or China for imprisoning Tibet. The world accepts the yearly
outrage with hardly a glance. Absolutely nobody is crude enough to mention
anti-Semitism.

The Soviet Union casts its automatic three votes against Israel - its own and
those of the Ukraine and Byelorussia, not even puppets, just provinces.

Of about 30 Moslem states throughout the world, only Egypt votes for Israel's
right to membership. East Germany can always be counted on to vote against the
Israeli villain as can such other opponents of Israeli imperialism as Vietnam,
Cuba, Zimbabwe and, of course, Nicaragua.

India wiggles out by abstaining, as do China and Turkey. Twenty-five countries,
including the Eastern Europeans, do not show up at all. At the U.N., abstaining
or hiding out on the Israel vote is called bravery.

But this year, for the first time, there was hope that the Soviet Union would
concede that Israel was as worthy of membership as, say, Libya and Democratic
Kampuchea. Emanations of glasnost was not the only reason. At the U.N. nobody is
naive enough to believe that glasnost is quite yet the basis of Soviet foreign
policy.

The hopeful hoped because Moscow was talking about an international peace
conference on the Middle East and about an increased role in the world for the
U.N. It did not seem entirely logical that the Kremlin, so keen on finding a key
role for itself and the U.N. at a Mideast peace conference, would begin the new
era by voting to kick Israel out of the U.N. Assembly.

That vote could eliminate any Israeli interest in the very idea of such a
conference. It would also damage Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel, who is
pushing for a peace conference with Moscow attending, and the American Jewish
Congress, which supports him.

But the Kremlin did vote against Israel and did not bother to explain its
action. Really, explanations are not necessary. Moscow knows the ouster of
Israel would utterly destroy the U.N. because part of the civilized world would
leave also. But it knew that there would be a majority of about 80 who would
vote against the Israel-haters and the absent or abstaining heroes.

If and when Moscow decides it has sweated Israel sufficiently, or gets a big
enough role in the Middle East or some other advantage, then it will demonstrate
its growing contempt for Arab power by conceding that Israel should be in the
U.N. after all. Then the world will cheer this act of Soviet nobility and
change.

Mikhail Gorbachev, who has already demonstrated a sense of humor, should get a
chuckle out of that. He knows that glasnost is important but that Soviet
self-interest is more important and that the two do not necessarily coincide.

And, after all, what's a little hypocrisy among nations? Just walk on by.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Deal for Cable Company Shifts Focus of Its Chief

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 372 words


Steven B. Dodge was fresh out of the Navy and was unsure whether he wanted to
pursue a business career. Instead of going to business school he decided to join
a bank training program to see how things worked out.

They have worked out very well. Mr. Dodge joined the Bank of Boston and
eventually became a specialist in lending to the cable television industry. In
1978, after eight years at the bank, he formed his own company, American
Cablesystems Inc., with venture capital and bank loans.

This week, American Cablesystems, based in Beverly, Mass., signed a definitive
agreement to be taken over by Continental Cablevision Inc. for $46.50 a share,
or $481.7 million.

The deal will give Mr. Dodge, the 42-year-old chairman and chief executive of
American Cablesystems, financial comfort. American Cablesystems went public only
last year at $14.50 a share.

''It was very rewarding,'' he said yesterday, ''although I don't know that money
was the main motive involved with the process of building the company.''

Mr. Dodge wil not stay with American Cablesystems. ''I've been with cable now
for 16 years,'' he said. ''I'm ready from a professional and personal level to
try something different, although I love the industry and it's been good to
me.''

Mr. Dodge is thinking about trying to build a company that would own radio
stations. ''It's conceptual at this stage,'' he said. ''I guess I think it will
offer me an opportunity to have some more fun.''

As for building American Cablesystems, which grew rapidly through acquisitions,
Mr. Dodge said: ''We worked hard at it but also had a lot of self-confidence.
One thing I focused on was getting the best people I could find. I came into the
situation with some financial skills but needed help in marketing and other
areas.''

Mr. Dodge, who grew up in Cheshire and Madison, Conn., majored in English at
Yale and thought about being an architect or an advertising executive. After
serving as a Navy officer aboard a destroyer in the Vietnam War, he joined the
Bank of Boston training program.

He plans not to work as hard now and devote more time to his wife, Ann, and
their three daughters. ''But I'm not disposed to sit still for a long period of
time,'' he added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Ben Bassett, Ex-Editor Of A.P. Foreign News

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 243 words


Ben Bassett, foreign news editor of The Associated Press for a quarter of a
century, died of heart failure complicated by pneumonia Wednesday at New
Rochelle (N.Y.) Hospital. He was 77 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.

''He was an inspiration to a whole generation of correspondents who looked to
him for guidance, support and, when the occasion called for it, solace and
comfort,'' said Nate Polowetzky, who succeeded Mr. Bassett as foreign editor in
1973.

Known by staff members of The A.P. as a gruff and demanding chief, Mr. Bassett
would drop the hard exterior as soon as he stepped out to lunch.

Mr. Bassett started with the wire service in its Kansas City, Mo., bureau in
1930. He became foreign news editor in 1948, supervising coverage of such events
as the decolonization of Africa and the Korean and Vietnam Wars.

After retiring, Mr. Bassett contributed to Cleartime, a newsletter for former
employees of The A.P. and was editor from 1980 to 1984. He was a member of Sigma
Delta Chi, the National Society of Professional Journalists.

Born in a farming family in Topeka, Kan., Mr. Bassett began his career as a
reporter at The Topeka State Journal while in high school. He then became a
reporter at The New Bedford (Mass.) Standard, where he stayed three years before
joining The A.P.

Surviving are his wife, Eileen Grace Ewing; a daughter, Elizabeth, of Manhattan,
and two sons, Jonathan, of Denver, and W. Brian, of Easton, Conn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

The U.S. Military Needs to Think Small By DREW MIDDLETON; Drew Middleton retired
as military affairs correspondent of The New York Times in 1984.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 825 words


The United States has just had excellent advice from a wise and friendly
counselor, Oxford University's Sir Michael Howard. Sir Michael has seen more war
than most (he is a highly decorated World War II veteran) and has thought and
written about it with perception (his books include ''The Theory and Practice of
War'' and ''The Causes of War'').

After a recent visit, Sir Michael commented that America has made a huge
investment in preparation for an ''utterly improbable'' nuclear war and has not
concentrated sufficiently on the problems of the relatively small military
encounters that are likely to occur. There is much in history to support him.
Britain, after what for those days was an enormous expenditure of blood and
treasure, whipped Napoleon in 1815. For the next 99 years, no major conflict
disturbed Europe. The closest the powers came was the Crimean War in the 1850's,
when elderly British generals often referred to their Russian foes as ''the
French.''

Generally, however, Britain, the major power in the world at that time, was
engaged in minor wars in Africa and Asia. The most serious, the Boer War, at the
end of the century, was won but at considerable cost in blood and national
prestige.

Is America prepared for a similar succession of minor conflicts? Since the end
of World War II, America has been involved in two wars, in Korea and Vietnam.
Each provoked a major effort; neither tested America as did World War II.

If Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his policies last - that is an all-important ''if''
- it would appear that we face a period in which our armed forces must be
prepared to fight all over the world in relatively minor encounters.

Our Navy is engaged in one in the Persian Gulf and its performance has been
good. The same cannot be said for its readiness for that sort of operation. One
does not have to be a naval strategist to realize that any Gulf operation would
have to include minesweepers. Yet none were available. Finally, some are on
their way, but they are 40 years old. Meanwhile, we must rely on modern
minesweepers from the British Royal Navy to find and sweep the devices with
which the Iranians seed the Gulf.

Yes, we have plenty of aircraft carriers, but they are not suitable for minor
wars. The Navy is thinking of them in terms of a war with the Soviet Union, a
war that, considering the present political situation in Moscow, seems
increasingly distant.

All the military services tend to think of that distant war as a European
conflict. Certainly, if it comes, the Soviets will strike there. But the Soviet
Union is also a Pacific power, as is the United States. Any such war would be a
two-ocean conflict and the American response would necessarily be divided
between the Atlantic and Pacific theaters.

Since the end of the Vietnam War, the Army has, naturally enough, had to first
rebuild morale, which was sadly shaken by the political conduct of that
unfortunate conflict, and to concentrate on its armored divisions and its
antitank weaponry.

From what I have seen, however, the Army is more flexible in its thinking about
future engagements than is the Navy. There has been a major effort to form and
train light divisions that could be used in minor conflicts in third world
countries. It is difficult to believe that an armored division would be
effective against a guerrilla army in Latin America or Africa. But a light
division, properly led, could do a great deal.

The military is often accused of preparing to fight the last war again. To a
certain extent that can be said of the Navy. It appears to be less true of the
Army. The Marine Corps, too, although used in both Korea and Vietnam in roles
comparable to those of Army divisions, has not forgotten its basic role of light
infantry trained to go in and attack. Those are the sorts of troops and that is
the sort of military planning and thinking the country is going to need.

The Air Force, quite apart from its strategic nuclear missiles, has devoted
billions of dollars to various types of long-range bombers. It is now producing
the B-1b. This should be a great weapon in a war with the Soviet Union. Would it
be of any value in a conflict with an undeveloped country whose only resource
would be thousands of fanatic riflemen?

The Pentagon is committed to the B-1b and to Trident missiles with more
warheads. But isn't this the time for it to develop small, fairly cheap
ground-attack planes, along the lines of the British Harrier, that can follow
troops and give them the air support they need? The F-15 and the F-16 are
wonderful aircraft, but their true environment is the skies above an East-West
war, not over some steamy jungle or desolate mountain range.

Yes, Grenada was quite an achievement. But that operation used a sledgehammer to
drive in a tack. Even then, some minor things went wrong. The next time, and
there is likely to be a next time, it may not be so easy.

c 1987 Drew Middleton

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Cuban Defector Recalls Life as a Top Officer

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 24, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Shortly after the Communist victory in South Vietnam, a Cuban Air Force officer
visited Vietnam and was given an opportunity to fly one of the American-made F-5
jets that were among the spoils of war.

The officer, Rafael del Pino Diaz, who rose to become a brigadier general and
then defected to the United States five months ago, was impressed with the F-5,
though it is far from the fastest or most sophisticated of United States
warplanes.

In a long interview the other day, General del Pino said he later arranged to
test an F-5 in mock combat against the Soviet-made MIG-23, the best aircraft in
the Cuban Air Force, and was chastised by superiors when the American-made
plane's performance raised questions about the capabilities of the MIG.

A Test in Ethiopia

In the interview the 49-year-old general also told of his experiences with Cuban
forces in Angola, the privileges he enjoyed as a senior military officer, in a
land where austerity and rationing are the rule, and his first encounters with
American freedoms.

The general's comments could not be independently verified, but they seemed in
line with other information on Cuba.

General del Pino, short, stocky and graying, said he tested the F-5 in Ethiopia,
where Cuba has more than 5,000 troops and airmen, pitting two of Cuba's finest
pilots against an Ethiopian pilot, chosen at random, in an F-5. The Cubans, he
said, tried everything and could not shake the American-made plane.

''Headquarters told me not to do that again,'' General del Pino recalled,
''because it would give our pilots a bad impression. They would think American
technology was better than Soviet technology.''

General del Pino said he commanded Cuba's first air units in Angola in late 1975
and returned to the African country, where there are now about 30,000 Cuban
combat troops and advisers, three or four times a year until his defection. He
said that he was upset that the Cuban dead were buried in Angola rather than
sent home and that he became convinced that the Luanda Government was corrupt
and not worth fighting for.

Orders to Bomb Cooking Fires

General del Pino said he discovered several incidents in which Cuban troops
inflicted civilian casualties. Once, he said, Cuban bombers killed ''hundreds of
people'' in a town near the border with Zaire in the mistaken belief that they
were attacking troops led by Jonas Savimbi, the United States-backed rebel
leader. At one point, he said, Cuban pilots were ordered to bomb any cooking
fires they spotted during night patrols.

General del Pino said that when he landed at a Navy base in Key West, Fla., on
May 28 in a light plane with his wife and three children, he was treated more
like a guest than an intruder. Later, he said, intelligence officers questioned
him extensively, but let him set the pace and never asked him to take a lie
detector test, a routine practice with defectors.

He was stunned, he said, by the televised Iran-contra hearings last summer.

''I'm not criticizing the Government or the Administration,'' he said, ''but
when I saw those hearings I said, 'Oh, my God, you have too much freedom.' Fidel
Castro does that every day and maybe 10 times more, and nobody says anything.''

Despite Cuba's contention that it has a classless society, General del Pino said
his rank protected him from Havana's severe housing shortage.

On the morning he planned to leave Cuba, General del Pino said, he received a
message from Mr. Castro, the Cuban leader, to report immediately to armed forces
headquarters.

''I thought I was caught,'' he recalled.

But, he said, a deputy to Raul Castro, the commander of the armed forces and
Fidel Castro's brother, told him, ''Raul has a gift for you: a new house.''

General del Pino thanked the aide, he said, then headed for the airport and his
getaway plane.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 50, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 980 words



WINTER IN MOSCOW, by Malcolm Muggeridge. (Eerdmans, $8.95.) Half journalism,
half fiction, this withering look at the Soviet Union was described by its
author, the British satirist, who was a correspondent for The Manchester
Guardian in Russia in 1932-33, as ''truth imaginatively expressed.'' ''It is
quite possible that Mr. Muggeridge is more than slightly mad,'' one reviewer
said in 1934, ''but his is the burning madness of a poet who has come to see the
fulfillment of a dream of Utopian equality and finds a hell of human
suffering.''

ADA: A Life and a Legacy, by Dorothy Stein. (MIT, $9.95.) As friend and patron
of Charles Babbage, who in 1833 designed (but never built) a sophisticated
contraption called the Analytical Engine, Ada, the Countess of Lovelace and the
daughter of Lord Byron, is sometimes revered as the world's first computer
programmer. So captivating is this myth that when the Defense Department began
developing a universal computer language - an Esperanto that it hopes will
someday supplant the babelesque variety of tongues now in use - it decided to
name it after her. Though Dorothy Stein's biography debunks the myth of this
heroine of computer science, our reviewer, Tracy Kidder, said he liked it
anyway. ''This book's cast of characters could easily sustain a novel,'' he said
in 1985. It ''evokes a historical period and sets a record straight.''

RETURN TO REGION, by Juan Benet. Translated by Gregory Rabassa. (Columbia
University, $9.95.) Old Dr. Sebastian is living a hellish life with his retarded
godson, whom he keeps medicated and under lock and key, when a mysterious woman
arrives. The haunting stories they tell each other make for a ''brilliant novel
by one of Spain's major writers,'' William Herrick said here in 1985. ''It is a
lovely, sad book, and the translation . . . is superb.'' The same publisher has
reissued another novel by a contemporary Spanish writer, translated by Helen R.
Lane. In EXTRAMUROS ($9.95), by Jesus Fernandez Santos, a religious cult forms
around a medieval nun who perpetrates a hoax: she has her hands pierced to fake
the stigmata, the wounds of Christ that are said to miraculously appear on
certain especially devout mystics. The novel won the Spanish National Prize for
Literature in 1979. Our reviewer, David Lodge, said in 1984 that while he was
put off by the ''mannered literary style,'' ''there is no doubt of the integrity
of the author's artistic intentions.''

A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Warner, $4.95.) Two corpses, their throats
cut, are discovered in the vestry of a London church, and the sardonic Comdr.
Adam Dalgliesh of Scotland Yard sets out to find the connection between the
victims - a Government minister and a derelict. This novel by the British writer
P. D. James ''is graced by one of the most felicitous prose styles I know,''
Robert B. Parker said here in 1986. ''Ms. James is simply a wonderful writer.''

LUISA DOMIC, by George Dennison. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $6.95.) A Maine poet's
circumscribed life is disrupted when he meets Luisa Domic, a Chilean refugee
whose family was killed in a right-wing coup. In 1985, our reviewer, Howard
Frank Mosher, said he admired the novel for its ability to ''celebrate rural
life in contemporary America, yet . . . transcend the limitations traditionally
associated with regional fiction.''

THE KOREAN WAR: Pusan to Chosin. An Oral History, by Donald Knox.
(Harvest/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $10.95.) Wedged in the history texts between
World War II and Vietnam, Korea may have been America's forgotten war, but not
for the people who fought it. This is ''a superb record of what war and battle
are all about . . . [told] in the blunt Anglo-Saxon tongue,'' Drew Middleton
said here last year. ''Because those telling the story are ordinary officers and
men, it has a force and reality that few historians writing today will be able
to match.''

THE PEDLOCKS, by Stephen Longstreet. (Primus/ Donald I. Fine, $8.95.) Written
before the invention of the television mini-series, this multigenerational saga
tells how a Jewish family settled in America around the time of the Civil War
and eventually established a dynasty. When it was first published in 1951, one
reviewer praised it as ''an opulent, crowded narrative, exuberant in its embrace
of Jewish customs, cookery, fervor and fertility. It is also, now and then, a
showcase for the novelist's display of sophistication.''

S. J. PERELMAN: A Life, by Dorothy Herrmann. (Fireside/Simon & Schuster, $8.95.)
As a recent collection of his letters showed, the humorist S. J. Perelman often
found his life more tormenting than amusing. Last year, our reviewer, John Lahr,
said Dorothy Hermann's biography ''amply documents [that] the writer was also
narcissist-nice and erudite-empty.''

!CLICK SONG, by John A. Williams. (Thunder's Mouth Press, $9.95.) In this bitter
indictment of the publishing industry, Cato Caldwell Douglass cannot get his
fiction published because he is black. When the novel appeared in 1982, one
reviewer criticized it for occasionally lapsing into ''stereotyping [and]
scattershot self-pity,'' but praised it as ''a novel full of truth, savage with
neurotic sophistication.''

MARY TODD LINCOLN: Her Life and Letters, edited by Justin G. Turner and Linda
Levitt Turner. (Fromm International, $12.95.) For those who would prefer a
tidier, G-rated American history, Abraham Lincoln's wife has always been an
embarrassment. By reading over her shoulder, the editors of this voluminous but
well-annotated collection of correspondence set out to establish whether she was
indeed ''a shrew, a spendthrift, a madwoman.'' The result, T. H. Williams said
here in 1972, is a book that offers ''countless insights into the life of the
period and will be a priceless source for historians.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration of Ada, Countess of Lovelace

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Rehearsal's the Thing

BYLINE: By FRANCIS KING; Francis King, drama critic of The London Sunday
Telegraph, is the author of the novels ''Voices in an Empty Room'' and the
forthcoming ''Frozen Music.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words



THE SHIFTING POINT
1946-1987. By Peter Brook. Illustrated. 254 pp. New York: A Cornelia and Michael
Bessie Book/ Harper & Row. $22.50.

WHETHER Peter Brook is one of the contemporary theater's most original and
creative directors, as his publisher claims, may be a matter for argument. But
that he is its most original and creative theoretician, who could deny? There is
hardly a piece in ''The Shifting Point'' that does not have something
fascinating to say - not merely to those who look to the theater for their
livelihood, but to those who go to it for enjoyment, instruction and, above all,
for the ''interest'' that, in his final essay, Mr. Brook interprets as taking in
all those aspects of living that are directly related to essential questions of
being and becoming.

In one of his briefest essays, ''Stereoscopic Vision,'' he suggests that one
must split the word ''direct'' down the middle. The function of the director is
to direct in two senses of the word: first, to take charge and issue orders, and
second, to act as navigator as the ship that is the company sets off on yet
another potentially hazardous voyage of exploration. Many of the most eminent
directors of the past have issued orders without feeling any need for
consultation with the people who must carry them out; they have stood alone at
the helm. In recent years, this has not been Mr. Brook's way. He does not, as he
often emphasizes here, arrive at the first rehearsal with a preconceived idea of
exactly how the ship is to reach its destination. Repeatedly he consults with
the crew.

Curiously, his method - as he himself recognizes in an affectionate and admiring
tribute, ''The Two Ages of Gielgud'' - is not dissimilar to that of his friend
Sir John Gielgud. Mr. Brook's summing-up of the Gielgud modus operandi is: ''He
will change and change indefinitely, in search of rightness - and nothing is
ever right.'' That might be applied to himself. Many actors enjoy this kind of
flux, in which they are treated as collaborators in the search for the perfect
performance. Others prefer the sort of director who arrives at the first
read-through of a play with moves all blocked out and a precise idea of what
will be the basic interpretation. ''One likes to know where one is,'' such
actors say. With Mr. Brook, so far from the actor knowing where he is, he might
be anywhere - doing exercises to loosen the muscles, listening to recordings of
the chantings of Tibetan monks to learn how to produce the voice from the chest,
discussing the political issues peripheral to theater pieces like ''US'' or
''The Ik'' or struggling to comprehend dharma, a concept that defies definition,
in preparation for performing ''The Mahabharata.''

The disadvantage of a method of infinitely extended rehearsal is, of course, a
financial one. Just as film producers usually prefer a director of talent who
keeps within the budget to one of genius who wildly exceeds it, so theater
producers prefer a director of talent who can be relied on to have a production
ready after a fixed period to one of genius, like Mr. Brook, for whom a
production is never ready, in the sense of being complete. Fortunately, Mr.
Brook has inherited a lot of his businessman father's acumen in finance, so that
in recent years he and his colleagues have been extraordinarily successful in
coaxing money out of governments, foundations and individuals. Unfortunately,
about this aspect of his work the book contains nothing.

As revealed here, Mr. Brook is a remarkable mixture of self-confidence and
modesty. The self-confidence is repeatedly exhibited in his reluctance to
concede that he has ever been guilty of any error or even miscalculation. How
idiotic, he implies, were the critics and the public to condemn the production
of Richard Strauss's ''Salome'' that he directed, with sets by Salvador Dali, at
Covent Garden in 1949. But, although he claims that this version was ''designed
more for singers than the traditional production,'' many of the performers,
among them the Salome, Ljuba Welitsch, complained that Dali's costumes were so
elaborate and cumbersome they made it extremely difficult to sing with any ease.
Again, in ''Tell Me Lies,'' an essay about the often hostile reaction to Mr.
Brook's 1968 film based on the Royal Shakespeare Company production of ''US,''
he exhibits a failure of empathy that is weird in someone who, elsewhere in the
book, shows so remarkable an ability to get inside people totally different from
himself. At that period, when the United States was still involved in the
humiliating war in Vietnam, how else did he expect the average American to react
to a film that said so much about atrocities committed by his country and
absolutely nothing about those, often far more terrible, committed by the
Vietcong? One of the most interesting pieces is ''Brook's Africa.'' This is
subtitled ''An Interview by Michael Gibson,'' even though, like the other
interviews included, it contains hardly a word spoken by the interviewer. Mr.
Brook describes how he took a group of 30 people on a three-month theatrical
safari in Africa in 1972. Here he had the perfect opportunity to put into
practice his stated belief that ''one doesn't, in the theater, create things for
a museum or a shop, but for the moment, in a totally expendable way.'' Each
performance was essentially an improvisation for an audience composed not of
officials, diplomats and university lecturers and their students in the cities,
but of ordinary people in the bush, illiterate and often close to starvation.
Whether the success of the venture can be ascribed to the quality of the
performances is more debatable than Mr. Brook would seem prepared to admit.
After all, a rapt crowd of onlookers will gather in remote places in Africa
merely to watch a man using a cordless electric razor or a woman a ball-point
pen.

INEVITABLY, in a book so original, there are a few things with which one
disagrees and many more that one questions. For example, is it really true that
''there is no spiritual difference between a revival of Ibsen and a musical''?
Or that ''nothing is so unimportant as comfort'' in the theater? (Every
theatergoer must have had the experience of being hindered from enjoying a play
by the discomfort of a seat and the difficulty of hearing and seeing from it.)
Mr. Brook has been the outstanding director of Shakespeare in our time (sadly,
the perfect tense seems to be necessary, since his Shakespeare productions in
recent years have been sparse and, like his 1979 ''Antony and Cleopatra,'' with
Glenda Jackson and Alan Howard, oddly lackluster). Each of his brilliant essays
on Shakespeare is an attack on the centuries-old idea that Shakespeare was
constantly obliged to redeem farfetched plots and perfunctory characterization
by his genius as a poet. It is essential, he insists, to see Shakespeare's work
as a seamless whole, in which each of his people has both a visible life of
getting and spending and an invisible one of feeling and thinking. Another of
his interesting observations is that, just as certain planets swing closer to
earth and others recede from it, so there are Shakespeare plays that draw near
to us and others that move away. He puts ''Timon of Athens'' in the first
category and, oddly, ''Othello'' in the second (surely ''The Taming of the
Shrew'' qualifies better).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Peter Brook (Martha Swope)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PEACE MARCH TO BE HELD SATURDAY

BYLINE: By PATRICIA SQUIRES

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 15, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 619 words


IN 1984, Louisa Whitlock, a soft-spoken Bernardsville resident, walked along the
Nicaragua-Honduras border with a New Jersey peace group.

''A presence for peace within view of a contra camp,'' she recalled, ''appeared
to deter the contras' attacks on Nicaraguan peasants in poor villages.''

That revelation and Mrs. Whitlock's other observations during a nine-day visit
to Central America as a guest of the peace group led her to join New Jersey's
large peace movement.

Since then, she has walked hundreds of miles to promote peace, written more than
600 letters to President and Mrs. Reagan, Federal officials and members of
Congress.

Last year, Mrs. Whitlock's activities with two groups - Somerset Peace and the
Somerset Fellowship of Churches' Bridges for Peace - led her to demonstrate with
18 other people at the Capitol against United States aid to the Nicaraguan
rebels, or contras.

The demonstrators were arrested, and in January were convicted by a jury of
three charges of illegal demonstration.

Mrs. Whitlock said that she still recalled the ''compassionate'' judge who
decided that each person would pay a $30 fine, undergo unsupervised probation
for six months and give 40 hours of community service.

The judge, she said, instructed each person ''to go back home and continue to do
what you were doing.'' Mrs. Whitlock did just that.  On Saturday, she plans to
join a five-mile peace walk from Morris County College in Randolph to the Dover
business area. The event is called ''A Walk Against the War,'' and it will be
part of a national ''walkathon'' sponsored by the Committee in Solidarity With
the People of El Salvador.

Peace coalitions in Essex, Morris, Somerset, Middlesex, Hudson and Mercer
Counties have planned events in Maplewood, New Brunswick, Jersey City and
Trenton to coincide with the one in Dover.

Individual sponsors can register to pay $1 or $2 a kilometer for a participant.
Proceeds are to benefit displaced Salvadorans in Central America, according to
Lynn Turner of Spotswood, coordinator of the walk for the Communications Workers
of America.

She estimated that 500 New Jersey peace activists, walking with marching bands,
could bring in $60 each, or $20,000 to $30,000.

''In addition to the funds, coordinators will seek signatures of walkers for an
advertisement to be published in a Salvadoran newspaper in support of human
rights and the right for Salvadorans to organize labor unions,'' Ms. Turner
said.  According to Ms. Turner, proceeds will be sent to the Salvadoran Medical
Relief Fund, which trains community health-care workers and provides medical
care, to the National Union of Salvadoran Workers and to a foundation for
Salvadoran repopulation projects.

Gilbert J. Corby, coordinator of the Jersey City walk, said that the City
Council there had endorsed the event and that Councilman Jaime Vasquez would
conduct an opening program with Maria Theresa Tula, a Salvadoran refugee who
lives in Washington, as guest speaker.

Ms. Tula, a widow, heads a human rights organization of Salvadoran mothers whose
children or relatives have ''disappeared.''

Mr. Corby said there had been increasing support among Hudson County groups of
Vietnam War veterans for the movements for peace in Central America.

''The walk is to create public awareness, as well as raise funds,'' he said,
''and peace activism here is at an all-time high, especially among blue-collar
workers.''

Schedules for the walks are:

Jersey City - 10 A.M. at Journal Square.

Maplewood - Noon at Memorial Park.

New Brunswick - 11 A.M. at Brower Commons, College Avenue, Rutgers University.

Randolph - Noon at Morris County College.

Trenton - 11 A.M. at the Campus Center.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 13, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 773 words


FAMILY MUSICALE The yearly chamber music concert scheduled at 4 P.M. today in
the Union Church of Pocantico Hills will be a family affair. Dr. Norman Smith,
chemistry and physics teacher at Fordham University and church organist for more
than 20 years; his son Stephen, a cellist; and Stephen's wife, Susan, who plays
the violin, will perform string duets with and without organ, and there will be
organ solos.

The young couple perform throughout New England as the Egmont Duo, and with
Kathleen Kongforgac, a pianist, as the Egmont Trio. After meeting as students at
Boston University's School of the Arts, the couple founded the Egmont Music
Center in Manchester, N.H. They are in residence at New Hampshire College in
Manchester and they perform a yearly concert series at Harvard University.

Today's program consists of Buxtehude's ''Prelude, Fugue and Chaconne'';
Handel's ''Courant''; ''Sonata for Violin and Cello'' by Ravel; ''Andante
Cantabile'' from Mendelssohn's ''D minor Trio''; ''Duet in C major'' by
Beethoven and works by Haydn, Gliere and Lemare.

The church is at 555 Bedford Road, and is renowned for its stained-glass windows
by Marc Chagall. Admission is by donation of $4. A public reception follows the
concert.

LOOKING AT THE EYE

The anatomy of eyes and theories of vision improvement are the subjects of two
workshops to be conducted at Wainwright House, at 260 Stuyvesant Avenue in Rye,
from 7:30 to 9:30 P.M. this Wednesday and Oct. 28.

Dr. Marc Grossman, who will conduct the sessions, noted that the eyes contained
more nerves than any other organ of the body. He will discuss concerns about
contact lenses, cataracts, sunglasses, visual hygiene and correct lighting. He
will also talk about yoga techniques; Chinese and Indian eye exercises; the
effects of nutrition, stress and emotion on vision; and the role of vision
therapy in sports, dance, arts and learning.

Participants will have an opportunity to try meditation and visual exercise
techniques, and they will be instructed on how to make eye-care equipment at
home. Tuition is $12 a session or $20 for two sessions.

Call 967-6080 to register or obtain more information.

CHOIRMASTER'S RECITAL

Stephen Rapp, organist and choirmaster of Christ's Church in Rye for the last
seven years, will give an organ recital at 5 P.M. today, celebrating his return
from a concert tour of West Germany. Mr. Rapp holds music degrees from the
Eastman School of Music and Yale University, and this year qualified for a
fellowship certificate from the American Guild of Organists. He continued his
studies this summer at the North German Organ Academy in Ostfriesland.

On the program today are works by Buxtehude, Mozart, Liszt and Vierne. Admission
is by donation. The church is at Milton Road and Rectory Street.

ART AND REACTION

The creations of public art and the delight or furor that it may generate will
come under scrutiny in a symposium scheduled from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. Saturday at
the Neuberger Museum of the State University of New York in Purchase. The
keynote speaker will be George Rickey, a sculptor whose public commissions are
the subject of an exhibition opening at the Neuberger today through March 13.

Four projects will be explored in the symposium, with the artists who were
involved speaking about their experiences. The Vietnam Memorial in Washington is
cited as indicative of the new direction such structures are taking, advocated
and financed by grass-roots efforts of the veterans themselves, their families
and friends.

A fountain project for the Grand Palais in Paris, approved by a previous city
administration and vetoed by the present one, is now in litigation. The artists,
Anne and Patrick Poirier, sued the Ministry of Culture for failure to install
the completed work. Moral rights of artists and how the law is applied to art
and artists will be discussed by an arts lawyer.

The Battery Park City pier, a model of cooperation among landscapers,
architects, artists and designers to produce a riverside idyll of art and nature
for the public in New York City, and the Equitable Building atrium, also in
Manhattan, where people without any connection to the corporation may come in,
sit down, take their lunch and admire the museum-quality collection of art, are
other examples ''of the change in perceptions of art and the public,'' said
George Calderaro, a publicist for the Neuberger Museum. ''Even if it is a
gesture prompted by public relations, these buildings are open to the public for
the express purpose of viewing art.''

Admission to the symposium is $20. Call 253-5133 for reservations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
TAMILS DASHING INDIAN HOPES FOR PEACE IN SRI LANKA

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 795 words

DATELINE: MADRAS, India


THE warfare in Sri Lanka last week turned the logic of India's original
intervention upside down.

Only four months ago, Sri Lanka's army pressed an offensive against Tamil
strongholds in the Jaffna peninsula. India stopped the Sri Lanka army offensive
by air-dropping food to besieged Tamil areas and by sending a message to the Sri
Lankan Government that it would not be allowed to achieve a military victory.

Now the supposedly neutral Indian troops are attempting to achieve just such a
victory on behalf of Sri Lanka. Both countries seem to have embarked on a road
with a completely unknown destination.

When Indian peacekeeping forces arrived in Sri Lanka last summer, officials
hoped they would be home in six months. Now the number of Indian forces in Sri
Lanka is estimated between 12,000 and 15,000; in the heavy fighting last week,
scores of Indians and hundreds of Tamil rebels were killed.

Some commentators as a result have begun to speak of Sri Lanka as India's
Vietnam. In an interview earlier this month, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi
said,''I don't see ourselves getting bogged down or stuck,'' and he noted that
India had been invited by Colombo to ''maintain the peace'' in Sri Lanka's north
ans east. ''As long as we are called to do that, we will do so,'' he said.

Last summer in Sri Lanka, President Junius R. Jayewardene had welcomed India's
intervention in his nation's ethnic conflict despite the fears of many of his
advisers that it could turn into a longterm prospect. The President appeared to
be convinced instead by those aides who argued that the Sri Lankan army had
failed to achieve a military victory and had become such a hateful presence in
Tamil areas that such a victory was no longer possible. ''The military promised
us that victory was always around the corner,'' a top aide to Mr. Jayewardene
said at the time. ''They never delivered, and finally we stopped believing
them.''

But when Indian army troops landed after the Indo-Sri Lanka peace accord July
29, more than one army official saw it as a tragedy of historic proportions.
''Once they come, we'll never get them out,'' said one officer, expressing the
fear that the result would be a de facto annexation of Tamil areas of Sri Lanka
by India, with the possibility that these areas could eventually even be
absorbed politically into the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu, which means
Tamil Homeland.

To many, absorption of part of Sri Lanka into India is an almost unthinkable
prospect, because of the repercussions in other nations in the region. But on a
reporter's tour of the Jaffna area in August, many Tamils said that if given the
choice, they would rather be part of India than Sri Lanka. In this sense, Sri
Lanka could become like Cyprus, permanently divided amid conflicting claims of
its neighbors. Most Tamils are Hindus, while the Sinhalese majority is
predominately Buddhist.

Other countries in South Asia have long been suspicious of India's motives in
intervening in the first place. But in the current situation, both New Delhi and
Colombo are under great pressure at home to end Indian involvement quickly.
Officials agree, however, that India can withdraw its troops gracefully only
after it crushes the Tamil rebellion, arranges for an interim civilian
administration and oversees elections in Tamil areas of the north and east.

After the Tamil guerrillas dropped earlier pledges to honor the accord, India
felt it had no choice but to use force to implement its terms. Now other
scenarios appear possible as the Sri Lanka fighting takes its toll on both
sides. There is, for instance, the chance that more than 15,000 Indian troops -
twice as many as originally contemplated - may achieve no greater success in
disarming the Tamil separatists than other forces have had in ending violence by
Sikh extremists in the northern Indian state of Punjab.

The siege of Jaffna by Indian troops was clearly more prolonged than India
wanted, according to reports from Colombo. Like the Sikhs, Tamil militants
appear determined and sufficiently well-equipped to continue pressing for an
''eelam,'' or separate nation for their people, whether or not the goal is
shared by other Tamils.

If a violent stalemate continues, many experts also agree that Prime Minister
Gandhi might have to escalate India's involvement, perhaps inflicting even
greater casualties on the Tamil population in Sri Lanka.

In the event of a stalemate, the other potential alternative for Mr. Gandhi
would be to withdraw from Sri Lanka in what would almost certainly be viewed as
a humiliating admission of defeat.

However uncomfortable Indians are becoming over the idea of a longterm
commitment in Sri Lanka, such a setback would likely be seen as even more
unpalatable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a member of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (Sygma/Michel
Philippot); Map of Sri Lanka

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Paperback Best Sellers: October 18, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 50, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 847 words

                                                                 Weeks
                                                                    On
     Fiction                                                      List
 1   A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James.  (Warner,                    3
     $4.95.) Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a
     brutal double murder.

 2   IT, by Stephen King.  (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)                      9
     Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman
     who grew up in a small Maine town.

 3   THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain.  (Dell, $4.95.)                 2
     Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New
     York family begun in "Evergreen."

 4   FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov.                          2
     (Del Rey/Ballantine, $4.95.) The hero of the
     "Foundation" series searches for the lost planet
     Earth.

 5   FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen                              1
     Coonts.  (Pocket, $4.95.) Navy aviators in the
     Vietnam War.

 6   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy.  (Berkley,                    14
     $4.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
     World War III.

 7   REGRETS ONLY, by Sally Quinn.  (Ballantine,                     7
     $4.95.) Two men, two women, passion and power-
     brokering in Washington.

 8   VALE OF THE VOLE, by Piers Anthony.  (Avon,                     3
     $3.95.) Esk, the son of an ogre and a nymph,
     defends the inhabitants of a paradise.

 9   DREAMS ARE NOT ENOUGH, by Jacqueline                            3
     Briskin.  (Berkley, $4.50.) A California family
     dynasty out to conquer the world.

10   THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen.                        8
     (Avon, $4.95.) Romance, power and greed mark
     an 18th-century woman's coming-of-age.

11   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom                               75
     Clancy.  (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
     brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

12   CALL TO ARMS, by W. E. B. Griffin.  (Jove, $4.50.)              6
     The Marines from Pearl Harbor to Midway;
     second volume of "The Corps."

13   O-ZONE, by Paul Theroux.  (Ivy/Ballantine,                      2
     $4.95.) In 21st-century America, eight people enter
     a forbidden land of aliens and nuclear waste.

14   THE BEET QUEEN, by Louise Erdrich.                              1
     (Bantam, $4.50.) Forty years in a small North
     Dakota town near an Indian reservation.

15   I AM THE ONLY RUNNING FOOTMAN, by                               2
     Martha Grimes.  (Dell, $3.95.) Scotland Yard's
     Superintendent Jury on the trail of a strangler.
                                                                 Weeks
                                                                    On
     Nonfiction                                                   List
 1   ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph                               2
     Wambaugh.  (Bantam, $4.95.) A case involving the
     1979 murder of a high school teacher.

 2   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.                     208
     (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
     spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 3   WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.                         50
     (North Point, $12.50.) A woman's adventures
     flying in Africa and across the Atlantic in the 30's.

 4   NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.                            34
     (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
     author says, and we must confront them to grow.

 5   KAFFIR BOY, by Mark Mathabane.  (Plume/                         7
     NAL, $8.95.) Coming-of-age in South Africa.

 6   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby.  (Berkley, $6.95.)                  25
     Anecdotes and ruminations by the television star.

 7 * HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley.  (Bantam, $4.95.) An                  8
     unauthorized biography of Frank Sinatra.

 8   ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett.  (Avon,                        1
     $4.50.) The comedian's autobiography, beginning
     with her impoverished childhood in Hollywood and
     taking her up to age 26.

 9   THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam.  (Avon,                     4
     $5.50.) The confrontation between America's Ford
     Motor Company and Japan's Nissan.

10   MAYFLOWER MADAM, by Sydney Biddle                              17
     Barrows with William Novak.  (Ivy/Ballantine,
     $4.95.) Tales of the world's oldest profession.

11 * DREAMGIRL, by Mary Wilson with Patricia                         6
     Romanowski and Ahrgus Juilliard.  (St. Martin's,
     $4.95.) A behind-the-scenes look at the Supremes.
                                                                  Weeks
      Advice, How-to and                                             On
      Miscellaneous                                                List
 1    BILLY AND THE BOINGERS BOOTLEG, by                              8
      Berke Breathed.  (Little, Brown, $7.95.) More
      "Bloom County" cartoon strips.

 2    THE BOOK OF QUESTIONS, by Gregory Stock.                       19
      (Workman, $3.95.) Provocative and challenging
      questions to ask yourself in order to learn more
      about yourself.

 3    WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin                              72
      Norwood.  (Pocket, $4.95.) How to avoid or end
      addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.

 4    CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson.                          26
      (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $6.95.) Cartoons
      about a boy, his toy tiger and his parents.

 5    DIANETICS, by L. Ron Hubbard.  (Bridge                         32
      Publications, $4.95.) Latest edition of a handbook
      by the founder of Scientology.




* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
Arms in an Emergency

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 209 words


Despite nearly seven years of the Reagan Administration's military buildup, a
senior official says the Defense Department has still not gotten producers of
weapons and equipment ready for an emergency.

The Pentagon's nominee as its new chief purchasing officer, Robert B. Costello,
says that it would take the arms industry three years to reach a level of
production sufficient to support the armed forces in a conflict on a level
similar to that in the Korean War.

That's a year longer than the Air Force determined in a 1984 study of the
military industry. A survey then of leading companies in the aerospace business
found it would take 12 to 24 months to reach wartime production levels.

Mr. Costello, in an interview to be published next month in National Defense
magazine, was asked how long it would take the industry to gear up. ''Three
years is not too far off,'' he said. ''Industry isn't anticipating that type of
war. We've got to be sure that industry understands their responsibility in this
area.''

In the magazine, published by the American Defense Preparedness Association, an
industry group, Mr. Costello said the arms industry could handle a conflict like
that in Vietnam, where the United States gradually slipped into war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TIBETANS ARE PRISONERS IN THEIR OWN COUNTRY;
Sikkim No Model

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 274 words


To the Editor:

''Stand Up for Decency in Tibet'' was correct in criticizing the
Administration's support of China's position in Tibet. However, the concluding
suggestion that Sikkim could be a model for China's relations with Tibet was
misguided.

In 1974, Sikkim had been virtually annexed by India. Six months later, as the
fall of Saigon dominated the world's headlines, a division of Indian troops
completed the job. Since then, Sikkim has been considered by India as merely
another Indian state. It does not have, as Tibet does, even a nominal suggestion
of autonomy.

In addition, Indian policies, while far less ruthless than those of the Chinese,
have been far more effective in eradicating the culture of their new subjects.
As a result, there is little to suggest that Sikkim is anything but a model to
be avoided.

In this context, it is worth noting that the Reagan Administration policy on
Tibet is based on the belief that Chinese-United States relations are more
important than the human rights of six million Tibetans. That is shocking but
not very surprising. The Sikkimese have not forgotten that the Ford
Administration sat silently in support of another large power, India, while
independent Sikkim was wiped off the map.

We Himalayans watch with resignation as the United States supports the
aggressors in Sikkim and in Tibet, all the while championing human rights
elsewhere. We hope that one day the United States will realize that the
international principle of self-determination is devalued each time it is
sacrificed for the demands of the moment.

YANGCHEN
Princess of Sikkim
  New York, Oct. 12, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION

BYLINE: BY TOM WICKER;
A HARD STEP UP

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 726 words


Richard Nixon learned it the hard way in 1960. Hubert Humphrey couldn't avoid it
in 1968. Now George Bush is getting a taste of the unpleasant truth: it's not
easy for a sitting vice president to be elected to the White House.

Not since 1836, in a far different political era, has a No. 2 man been able to
do it: Martin Van Buren, of whom John Randolph of Roanoke remarked that he
''rowed to his object with muffled oars.''

Even Walter Mondale, who lay low for four years after his Vice Presidency,
couldn't escape the taint when he became a Presidential nominee in 1984. Voters
remembered his role in President Carter's unpopular Administration, and Mr.
Mondale paid the price.

That problem affects any vice president who seeks to move up to the Presidency.
He can't honorably repudiate the Administration of which he was an official
part; but he can't make much of a case that in that Administration he was
anything but what Nelson Rockefeller once scorned as ''stand-by equipment''
(though Mr. Rockefeller later accepted the job).

Thus, a vice president campaigning for the Presidency can take little credit for
the achievements of the Administration he served, but may be held to account by
the voters for the failures and follies of that Administration.

Many of the issues an outgoing President dealt with - or didn't -still confront
the candidates seeking to succeed him. If the President has taken a politically
unrewarding position on such an issue, or ducked it, it's hard for his vice
president to take a different stance. Either he swallows and stands up for a
disadvantageous position, or he suffers accusations of disloyalty and desertion.

Finally, there's still a President to reckon with, a lame duck no doubt, but a
live person wielding the powers of the office and perhaps still popular. His
vice president, even though campaigning to replace him, can offend such a
President only at dire political peril.

Thus, in 1960, when Mr. Nixon attempted in his ''Pact of Fifth Avenue'' with Mr.
Rockefeller to call for more defense spending than President Eisenhower thought
necessary, the President forced his Vice President to back down. Earlier, Mr.
Eisenhower damaged Mr. Nixon's claim to vast experience by telling reporters
that ''if you give me a week,'' he might be able to think of an important idea
the Vice President had contributed to the Eisenhower Administration. Throughout
the campaign in which he ultimately lost to John F. Kennedy, Mr. Nixon had
little choice but to defend the Administration's apparent unconcern about Fidel
Castro - while Mr. Kennedy appealed for strong action against Mr. Castro.

In 1968, Hubert Humphrey finally differed with President Johnson's unpopular
position on Vietnamese peace negotiations - but not until the Vice President's
Presidential campaign had been all but mortally wounded by the peace movement's
shouts of ''Dump the Hump!'' When Mr. Humphrey pleaded with the President to
increase farm support prices that fall, Mr. Johnson refused, which Mr. Humphrey
thought cost him the election. That refusal may have resulted from Presidential
pique on the Vietnam question. Now Mr. Bush, at last an official Presidential
candidate, is trying to edge away from the liabilities of the Reagan
Administration without treading dangerously on Mr. Reagan's toes.

The Vice President said in his formal announcement that he would do more for
education and environmental protection, spoke approvingly of compassion, and
inveighed against ''influence peddling'' - apparently a euphemism for the high
sleaze quotient among Reagan Administration officials.

Mr. Bush also risked his hard-won foothold on the far right by withholding
mention of a constitutional amendment to ban abortion. But the next day, as if
to make it clear that he was still on the team, Mr. Bush defended the proposed
arms control treaty and proclaimed himself ''proudly'' a part of the Reagan
Administration. The day after that, he borrowed a page from Mr. Reagan's
campaign book with a proposal to cut capital gains taxes. Shades of voodoo
economics!

All this fast footwork shows that the Vice President recognizes his problem as a
Presidential candidate: to prove himself neither a Reagan clone nor a
backsliding opportunist. But history suggests it will be harder than he may
think to do either, without doing the other.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Attacks by U.S. in Gulf: Will Iran Get Message?

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 19


With the naval bombardment of two connecting Iranian offshore platforms in the
Persian Gulf today, the Administration intended to send a message to Iran: the
United States had restrained itself this time, but might respond with greater
force if Iran continues ''unprovoked attacks'' on shipping in the Gulf.

Whether the Iranians will get the message was not clear even to Defense
Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, who said there was no way of measuring the
deterrent value of such actions.

When the United States took 11 Kuwaiti oil tankers under the protection of the
American flag last summer, Administration officials said the naval escorts sent
to protect them would deter hostile Iranian action in the gulf. But events
during the first American convoy's journey through the gulf in July, when the
tanker Bridgeton struck a mine, showed that the Iranians responded aggressively
to this show of United States military might.

The attack on the Rashadat marine platforms eliminates an Iranian military
installation that reportedly posed a threat to Gulf shipping. Yet the strike did
nothing to eliminate the Silkworm missile sites from which the attack on the Sea
Isle City, an American-registered tanker in the main harbor of Kuwait, were
launched last Friday. That threat to oil installations and ships in Kuwaiti
waters remains intact.

Surprise at Choice of Targets

For that reason, many military officers in Washington were surprised that the
President decided to attack the offshore platforms rather than more significant
military targets like the Silkworm sites at either end of the Gulf.

Because of the revolutionary zeal of the Iranians, some American military
sources doubt that the attack today is likely to deter the Iranians from using
the missiles again.

Administration sources said there were a number of reasons why the Rashadat
marine platforms were selected for the American strike.

One was the President's desire for a low-key but significant response as a
warning to Iran. The platforms presented an easy target with little risk of loss
on either side.

'To End the War'

''The idea is not to kill people, but to end the war in the Gulf,'' one senior
Pentagon official said, explaining the choice of the platforms. Military
officials made it clear that if Iran did not heed the warning implicit in
today's attack, the United States could always respond more forcefully in the
future.

Another reason for striking the offshore platforms instead of the Silkworm sites
was that the missiles' firing sites are heavily defended, posing the risk of
losses to attacking forces.

What the Iranians will do now is unclear. Senior Administration officials
appeared less concerned about a military response than about a renewal of
Iranian-backed terrorism. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm.
William J. Crowe, said the Iranians ''don't have a lot of capability,
particularly where we are engaged, and that is at sea and in the air,'' but that
Iran would be more likely to try to respond with the ''silent hand'' of
terrorism.

Vietnam War Policy

Mr. Weinberger's explanation that the attack on the marine platforms was a
''measured and appropriate response'' that could be followed by stronger
measures appears similar to the Johnson Administration's policy early in the
Vietnam War.

In 1964, the United States sought to dissuade Hanoi from supporting the
Communist insurgency in South Vietnam by threatening it directly. But North
Vietnam was not intimidated and continued to intervene in the south.

Once the United States became directly involved in the war, it pursued a
strategy of gradually increasing air attacks, on the assumption that Hanoi would
yield to the increased pressure.

Intervention Enlarged

Again, the North Vietnamese matched the increasing American attacks by enlarging
their direct intervention in the south. Finally it was the United States that
quit.

Military officials say there is no comparison between Vietnam and the current
situation in the Persian Gulf, but many military officers say they do see
parallels. Senior officers, both in and out of Washington, say the original
deterrence policy of reregistering the Kuwaiti ships under the American flag did
not work in military terms.

These officers say they now doubt that the leaders in Teheran will be much
impressed by the subtle signal meant to be conveyed by attacking the offshore
platforms instead of the Silkworm sites. These officers say that at some point
the Silkworm missiles will have to be destroyed if the threat they pose to
shipping is to be eliminated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing;
Army's New Spokesman

SECTION: Section A; Page 32, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 140 words


When the United States Army was looking for a ''fine soldier'' with great
speaking ability to be its chief spokesman, it turned to Brig. Gen. Patrick H.
Brady.

As a medical service officer, he was awarded the Medal of Honor, the nation's
highest combat medal, in 1968 for rescuing 51 seriously wounded men in Vietnam
in one day even though two of the three helicopters he flew that day were shot
out from under him.

''General Brady has the kind of skills a chief public affairs officer has to
have,'' said one high-ranking Pentagon official. ''He is a great public speaker,
a fine soldier and he has been a great representative for the Army.''

A native of Philips, S.D., General Brady began his new post Oct. 1. He replaces
Gen. Charles D. Bussey, who left the public affairs division to become deputy
chief of staff for personnel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

New York Revamps Social Studies

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1903 words


New York State has begun phasing in a revamped social studies program that
stresses 20th-century American history at the high school level and abandons the
topical methods of the 1970's in favor of a more chronological approach.

The new plan, which calls for a ''global perspective'' involving more attention
to Latin America and other non-European areas, also increases the number of
social studies courses required for a diploma and, for the first time, requires
students to pass tests in the subject in order to graduate.

The curriculum is being hailed by many educators who view the de-emphasis of
European history as fitting for an increasingly diverse student population. The
emphasis on 20th-century history, they add, addresses the perennial complaint of
teachers that the school year ends while they are leading students through World
War I. Students Shortchanged ''This is no minor issue,'' said Elliot Salow,
director of social studies for the New York City Board of Education. ''The
Vietnamese War to our kids is as remote as the American Revolution.'' Critics,
however, assert that the new course plan shortchanges students on the country's
European heritage and on key events before 1877.

The syllabus makes room for the new emphasis on recent history by calculating
that if students have studied the Revolution, Civil War and other key events in
the eighth grade, they do not need to cover the same ground in high school.

''We have lots of kids who weren't even in the country in the seventh and eighth
grades,'' said Alan Weiner, assistant principal for social studies at Hillcrest
High School in Jamaica, Queens. ''They'll never get in-depth treatment of the
Revolution, westward expansion or the Civil War.''

New York is one of two educationally influential states - the other is
California - to release new curriculum guidelines this year. Both were written
in response to criticism that students today are not studying enough history and
geography and that what they do get lacks a chronological coherence.

The two new curriculums also demonstrate the extent to which political and
social trends affect school curriculums and the tradeoffs that are inevitable in
a field such as social studies, which tends to be a lightning rod for social
controversy.

'Political Document First'

''Curriculums are political documents first, education documents second,'' said
Donald H. Bragaw, chief of social studies for the New York State Education
Department, which wrote the new syllabus.

Mr. Bragaw said that for the first time, 7th and 11th grade American history
guidelines include a discussion of a controversial theory that the Iroquois
Confederacy, a coalition of tribes, had considerable influence on the framers of
the United States Constitution.

Native American scholars have recently been lobbying to have this view
introduced into the curriculum.

Another politically charged issue is the role of religion in shaping American
history. Over the last year several national groups - both liberal and
conservative - have issued reports contending that American history textbooks do
not pay sufficient attention to religion.

''Society has sent a message that it's O.K. to deal with religion again,'' said
Frances Haley, executive director of the National Council of Social Studies.

The new California guidelines, which begin immediately and will take two years
to put into effect, require teachers to emphasize the influence of religion in
dealing with topics such as the Declaration of Independence, abolition and the
civil rights movement. Major Changes In the Curriculum By contrast, New York's
new syllabus takes a more anthropological approach to religion, focusing on it
primarily in relation to the pre-Colonial period. ''Once you finish Puritanism,
it certainly is not emphasized,'' Mr. Salow said.

The new syllabus in New York State replaces one that was published in 1979. It
is being used this year in grades 7 to 11 and next year in grade 12.

The changes take on increased significance because of the Regents Action Plan, a
three-year-old comprehensive school improvement package in which the Board of
Regents increased the number of years students must take social studies to four,
from three.

In grades 7 and 8, for example, the one-year courses on the ''cultural
heritage'' of New York State and American history have been consolidated into a
single two-year sequence running from pre-Columbian times to the present,
emphasizing history, geography and government. The content is essentially the
same, but the framework is more chronological.

At the same time, ninth graders used to study the cultures of Africa and Asia,
while 10th graders took a course in European Culture, from the ancient world to
the present, emphasizing themes like nationalism and democracy. Both courses
will be replaced by a two-year global studies program covering seven areas of
the world, starting with Africa and continuing with South Asia, East Asia, Latin
America, the Middle East, Western Europe and Eastern Europe, including the
Soviet Union.

In grade 11, the existing ''American Studies'' course, a largely
nonchronological examination of themes such as economics, foreign policy and the
nature of the American population, will be replaced by a United States history
course that opens with a unit on the Constitution and then focuses on the period
from the end of Reconstruction to the present. By skipping to the present,
educators expect the students to be able to study previously neglected topics
such as the Great Depression, the Vietnam War and Watergate, among other things.

And 12th graders will be required to take one semester of economics - already a
longstanding policy in New York City - and another on ''participation in
government.'' Currently there are no such statewide requirements. The government
participation program, which is still being developed, is intended to promote
civic values and get students involved in activities such as visiting a local
political club or debating public policy issues such as abortion.

The state syllabus sets out basic topics that teachers are supposed to build
into their own curriculums. In the past teachers have had wide latitude in in
this task, but under the new plan the state's curriculum ideas will be enforced
by tests. New Standardized Tests For Regents Diploma Tests designed to evaluate
programs rather than individual students will be added at the sixth and eighth
grades. In addition, a new Regents world history examination will be
administered in June 1989 for 10th graders. The 11th grade Regents Social
Studies Examination, which currently covers three years of study, will be
rewritten to emphasize United States history. Students not seeking a Regents
diploma will be required to pass a less demanding test in those two areas as a
condition for graduation.

Some educators vigorously oppose the new tests.

''This is the first time in New York State history that content has been
mandated at the state level and taken out of the hands of local teachers,'' said
Stephen E. Phillips, acting director of high schools in New York City.
''Everyone is talking about increasing teacher professionalism. Then they come
up with something like this that is diametrically opposed.''

Anne Allen, a teacher in Rochester, likes the academic seriousness of the junior
high school sequence. ''Too much time was spent before in doing such things as
making candles to illustrate Colonial days,'' she said.

Others praised the shift from teaching themes or concepts to a more traditional
chronological approach, at least in grades 7, 8 and 11.

''The conceptual approach was good for the brightest students,'' said Ernest
Southworth, chairman of social studies at Tully High School, south of Syracuse.
''But average students couldn't grasp the relationship between, say, an economic
trend in the 1700's and an immigration trend from the same era. The
chronological approach is easy for kids to understand.''

Mr. Bragaw, the state social studies chief, said that the new approach assumes
that students will remember much of the pre-Civil War history that they learned
in junior high school - an assumption also made by the California planners.

Under the new California syllabus fifth graders will concentrate on the
pre-Colonial period up through the Westward expansion, and eighth graders will
concentrate on the founding of the country through 1914. The 11th grade course
will then review the Revolution, Constitution and Civil War and jump to the 20th
century. Different Levels Of Understanding Another trade-off faced by curriculum
planners is whether to cover a number of topics or only a few in depth. Both New
York and California have tried to solve that by concentrating on particular eras
in specific grades.

But this poses its own problems. ''Does it mean that students will end up with a
5th grade understanding of the founding of the country, an 8th grade
understanding of the Civil War and an 11th grade understanding of the present?''
asked Roger R. Rogalin, senior vice president of D.C. Heath and Company, a major
textbook publisher.

Mr. Weiner of Hillcrest High School illustrated the problem with regard to the
Emancipation Proclamation.

''We now teach eighth graders that Lincoln freed the slaves,'' he said. ''But in
reality the Emancipation Proclamation didn't free anybody. It was a political
document that only freed the slaves in the states that rebelled, which didn't
obey it. It did unify the North, and it kept England out of the war by giving
them a moral problem. But you can't teach that to a 13-year old. You have to
wait until high school.''

Another controversial aspect of the new New York State curriculum has been the
increased emphasis on Latin America and other areas, especially in the 9th and
10th grades. Critics assert that such a change would result in the loss of an
in-depth treatment of Western Civilization.

''A number of our assistant principals think that Europe should not be treated
as just another area of the world,'' said Mr. Salow of the Board of Education.
''They think that Western Europe is our culture, and we have to know more about
it.''

Mr. Salow called for more emphasis on ''multi-ethnic'' education within the
American history framework. ''There is a fair amount of Afro-history,'' he said,
''but some of the other groups, especially Latinos and Asians, don't have as
much as we would like.''

Most teachers and curriculum specialists applaud the 12th grade emphasis on
economics and participation in government, but many say they are concerned that
requiring those two courses will restrict the freedom of students to pursue
elective or advanced placement courses.

''Most of the high schools in Westchester communities have well established
senior electives, and for us to implement the Regent's Action Plan weakens the
program we already have,'' said Sandra Kolk, curriculum coordinator for social
studies in Ardsley Union Free School District. ''No senior graduates without an
understanding of economics, although the program is not a formal one.''

Others, however, argue that the government course in particular is much needed.

''Since the right to vote was given to 18-year-olds, we've seen the worst voter
apathy in that group,'' said John Osborn, social studies coordinator in the
North Salem school district. ''We must turn that around.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of U.S. Marines raising the flag on Iwo Jima (AP); the
evacuation of Americans from Vietnam (UPI); President Nixon (White House
photograph)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Juda H. Quastel, 88; Helped to Discover Common Herbicide

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 433 words


Juda H. Quastel, one of three scientists who discovered the herbicide 2,4-D, a
component of the wartime defoliant Agent Orange, died of peritonitis last
Thursday in the University of British Columbia Health Sciences Center in
Vancouver, British Columbia. He was 88 years old and lived in Vancouver.

Dr. Quastel began his career as a biochemist by studying enzymes and cell
metabolism. He focused on the metabolism of bacteria while working in the
laboratory of Sir F. G. Hopkins in Cambridge, England, in the 1920's.

Dr. Quastel was one of the first research biochemists to try to find chemical
origins of mental disorders. As director of research at the Cardiff City Mental
Hospital from 1930 to 1941, he studied the effects of drugs on the brain.

His work pointed to the essential role of glucose in supplying energy to the
brain. In 1936, he discovered that acetylcholine, which was already known to be
a transmitter in the peripheral nervous system, was synthesized in the brain.

In 1941, he began work on food production for the Agricultural Research Council.
With H. G. Thornton and P. Nutman, he discovered 2,4-D, a herbicide that has
since been widely used in increasing the yield of cereal crops.

Health Hazards Seen

The chemical has lately been thought to pose a health hazard. Last year the
National Cancer Institute and the University of Kansas said that farmers exposed
to the chemical for at least 20 days a year were far more likely to contract
lymphatic cancer than people who did not work with it. Agent Orange, an
herbicide sprayed in Vietnam that was the source of lawsuits filed by veterans
who say it caused serious health problems, contains 2,4-D.

Dr. Quastel left England for Canada in 1947. He became a professor of
biochemistry and director of the McGill University and Montreal General Hospital
Research Institute.

In 1966, he joined the University of British Columbia in Vancouver as its first
professor of neurochemistry.

Dr. Quastel was born on Oct. 2, 1899, in Sheffield, England. He studied physical
chemistry at the Imperial College of Science in London, where he earned his
bachelor's degree in 1921 and a doctor of science degree in 1926. He received a
Ph.D. in biochemistry at Cambridge in 1924 and was elected a Fellow of Trinity
College the same year.

He is survived by his wife, Susan; two sons, Dr. Michael R., of Beersheva, and
David M. J. of Vancouver; a daughter, Barbara Glick, of Vancouver; a brother,
Charles, of the Isle of Man; three sisters, Doris and Hetty, both of Sheffield,
England, and Anne, of Honolulu, and 11 grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

Films About Blacklist: Hollywood's Bad Old Days

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 993 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Oct. 19


The blacklisting that demoralized Hollywood during the 1950's was a taboo
subject for three decades. Now Hollywood is spotlighting the McCarthy era and
the redbaiting that barred hundreds of producers, directors, writers, actors and
technicians from working in the industry.

''The House on Carroll Street'' uses the era of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy as a
backdrop for a thriller about a Life magazine photo editor (played by Kelly
McGillis) who loses her job when she speaks freely about politics and human
rights.

''Season of Fear'' is a semiautobiographical script by a blacklisted writer and
director, Abe Polonsky. One character in ''Persistence of Vision'' is an elderly
blacklisted film maker who takes on a young protege.

Richard Brooks is trying to make a film about a dramatic fight within the
Directors Guild that he took part in as a young director in 1950. And ''Legacy
of the Hollywood Blacklist,'' a documentary that focuses on the families of the
victims, will be aired tomorrow night on many public television stations.

Times Inspire a Look Back

Both Judy Chaikin, who produced and directed ''Legacy of the Hollywood
Blacklist,'' and Irwin Winkler, who will produce ''Season of Fear,'' point to
the Iran-contra affair and the debate over the nomination of Judge Robert H.
Bork to the Supreme Court of the United States as reasons why blacklisting is
now considered a subject with increased commercial potential.

''The events of the last six months in the political life of this country have
made a receptivity beyond my wildest dreams.'' Ms. Chaikin said.

Mr. Winkler, the co-producer of ''Rocky'' and ''The Right Stuff,'' also thinks
the Vietnam War film ''Platoon'' opened the doors to an examination of the
painful past. ''We're looking at our scars,'' he said.

''Season of Fear,'' which is to be directed by Bertrand Tavernier for United
Artists, takes place in 1952. The leading character is a director who is called
to testify by the House Committee on Un-American Activities.

'The Shock of the Climate of Fear'

''It's a made-up story, but any story of that time would be
semiautobiographical,'' said Mr. Polonsky, who is just finishing the first draft
of the script. ''It deals with the shock of the climate of fear. It made no
difference to the committee if you had been a member of the party 15 years
earlier and left, like Budd Schulberg. You would still be named.''

Because of the blacklist, there was a 22-year gap between the first film Mr.
Polonsky directed, ''Force of Evil'' in 1948, and the second, ''Tell Them Willie
Boy Is Here,'' in 1970. Like many screenwriters, though, he was able to write
movies and television shows by using a false name and hiring a fellow writer to
meet producers and act as his front.

''Now,'' said Mr. Polonsky, chuckling, ''I'm visited by two Ph.D. candidates a
week. All over the country, they're writing Ph.D. theses about this.''

Books on the Subject

Book publishers became interested before the movies did. Three books on the
subject were published between 1980 and 1982: ''The Inquisition in Hollywood''
by Larry Ceplair and Steven Englund, ''Naming Names'' by Victor S. Navasky and
''The Hollywood Writers' War'' by Nancy Lynn Schwartz.

The screenwriter of ''The House on Carroll Street,'' Walter Bernstein, was also
blacklisted. Mr. Bernstein wrote his experiences as a comedy in ''The Front,'' a
movie that starred Woody Allen and was directed by Martin Ritt, who himself was
blacklisted. Released in 1976, ''The Front'' was a commercial failure.

''Marty Ritt and I tried to do 'The Front' directly,'' Mr. Bernstein said. 'But
we could only get someone to make it when we came at the subject sideways, as a
comedy. I think the liberals are getting a little braver today.''

''The House on Carroll Street'' was directed by Peter Yates and is to be
released by Orion in February. ''What matters is that two studios were willing
to make the movie,'' said the producer, Arlene Donovan.

Interest Among the Young

Mr. Bernstein said there was a continuing interest in ''The Front'' by college
students, ''who know more about ancient Greece than the 50's in America.''

That the blacklist is becoming casual currency is demonstrated by ''Persistence
of Vision,'' where an old director is given a history of being blacklisted just
as an interesting ''element in the story,'' according to the producer, Michael
Vanoff.

That Mr. Brooks should turn his memories of the Directors Guild fight between
Cecil B. DeMille and Joseph Mankiewicz over loyalty oaths into a movie was
suggested by David Puttnam as the head of Columbia Pictures. Mr. Puttnam has
since resigned.

Along with John Huston, William Wyler, Robert Wise and 21 other directors, Mr.
Brooks forced an open meeting of the guild that ended in a victory for the
liberals.

The Fallout From 'Crossfire'

''Crossfire,'' a 1947 movie that was the first Hollywood film with a theme of
anti-Semitism, came from a novel by Mr. Brooks, ''The Brick Foxhole.'' Strong
opposition to anti-Semitism was at that time associated with the political left,
and Mr. Brooks's connection to the movie made him suspect. The director of
''Crossfire,'' Edward Dmytryk, and the movie's producer, Adrian Scott, were 2 of
the Hollywood 10 imprisoned for contempt of Congress after they took the First
Amendment and refused to answer questions posed by the House Committee on
Un-American Activities.

''After Adrian came out of jail, Mrs. Scott came to me and asked if I could help
them with a little money because they were going to England but didn't have the
fare,'' Mr. Brooks recalled. ''She said, 'But don't give me a check because it
might get you on a list.'

''How do you dramatize that to people who get off buses by the score to get into
the movies, and who say, 'Who's McCarthy?' But if you can make the movie for
under $3 million, you can do it honestly, and no studio is going to get hurt
financially.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 26, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture caption last Tuesday, with an article about films on the Hollywood
blacklisting of the 1950's, misidentified the man at the left in a scene from
''The House on Carroll Street.'' He was William Sturgis.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mandy Patinkin & Jonathan Hogan (Barry Wetcher)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 21, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Surf City U.S.A.: 60's Beach Culture Rides a New Wave

BYLINE: By MICHAEL GROSS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1360 words


BAD weather stirs up the surf.

Late last month, a storm was making waves off Surfrider's Beach in Malibu,
Calif. One afternoon, 138 surfers on their boards vied for rides in the water.

But it is not only in Malibu that the surf is up; the sport is riding a chic
curl of revival. As the title of the summer movie ''Back to the Beach''
indicated, surfing is turning up everywhere, from theme bars like Big Kahuna and
Lucy's Surfeteria in Manhattan to MTV. There, the Fat Boys, a rap group, and the
Beach Boys, the rock group formed in 1962, are now seen and heard in their
collaborative remake of the old surfing song ''Wipe-Out.''

But it is surf fashion that is really making waves. According to Surfer
magazine, $1.5 billion worth of surfing-inspired clothes was purchased in the
United States last year. Europe is catching surf fever, too. Last summer,
several surf-wear shops sprouted in St.-Tropez, France, proving the dictum of
The Face, a fashionable London magazine, in its current issue: ''You don't have
to hang 10 to hang out.''

So it should be the best of times for California surfers. But the interest in
surf culture has, paradoxically, stirred up bad feelings and split the world of
surfers into factions. Their names are as colorful as a pair of surfer's shorts
known as baggies: soul surfers, shredders, weekend warriors and even a violent
cult calling themselves the Surf Nazis.

To many surfers, the new chic is as welcome as sand in the eyes. To put it in
current surferese, it's getting radical on the water, dude.

The problems stem in part from the profits being made on surfing-related
clothing and equipment. According to studies cited by Debbee Bradley Pezman, the
marketing director of Surfer magazine, retail sales of surfing goods, which grew
slowly from $70 million in 1960 to $200 million in 1970, jumped to $1 billion by
1980 and have doubled in the years since.

What bothers surfers is that only a quarter of that money is being spent on
surfboards. The rest is spent by people surfers call ''wannabes.'' They don't
surf but they want to, so they dress the part, as have nonparticipating fans of
tennis and skiing.

The clothes wannabes wear are often only inspired by surf culture. While surfers
will wear the latest wet suits and swimsuits, no self-respecting shredder would
be caught dead wearing the generic resort clothes and beach-theme T-shirts and
shorts that now pass for surf fashion.

At La Planche, a sail- and surfboard shop on Main Street in Santa Monica,
Calif., clothing accounts for 60 percent of sales.

''Right now, we could get rid of boards and make more money on clothes,'' said
Jeff Lengyel, the owner, ''which is not the way it's supposed to be.''

Surfing used to be a localized passion. From 1960, when rock musicians like Dick
Dale and the Del-Tones and Jan & Dean first sang its praises, until around 1966,
when the popular interest in surfing was superceded by the Vietnam War-era
counterculture, surfing-related goods were sold predominantly in California and
Hawaii, Ms. Pezman said.

Now, thanks in large part to fashion, which has glamorized the sport, only 25 to
30 percent of sales are made beside the Pacific Ocean. Customers east of the
Mississippi account for about 60 percent, and those in the Midwest buy the rest.

Surf wear is even sold in landlocked Nebraska. Leggoons, a surf-wear company in
Omaha, is about to open a boutique there.

''There really is a market,'' said Lori Blum, a manager at the company. ''You'd
be amazed.''

Across the street from Surfrider's Beach, Jefferson (Zuma Jay) Wagner shook his
head about surfing's newfound popularity, not so much in amazement as in
disgust.

Despite the fact that he, too, has cashed in on the surfing boom by modeling for
Ralph Lauren and acting in surfing movies, he remains a purist, boasting that
his shop, Zuma Jay's, still stocks more surfboards than clothes. But he lamented
that surfing ''has become respectable.''

''The sport is disappearing,'' he said. ''I don't laugh on the water anymore.''

Surfers like Mr. Wagner, who is 35 years old, once had the swells to themselves.
They do not take kindly to new bodies on the beach.

Thus, Surfrider's Beach has been split. At one end are the ''soul surfers,''
mature men (and a few women) like Mr. Wagner, Jimmy Ganzer, a co-owner of
Jimmy'z, a surf-wear company, and Robbie Dick, a legendary surfer of the 1960's,
who ride gracefully on 10-foot-long boards. Some have surfed long enough to have
gray hair. They are surfing survivors.

''We always lived on the fringe of normalcy,'' said Bo Baker, 35. ''Surfing is
so big now. It's too bad.'' Then he spat out the words ''surf fashion'' and
stuck his finger down his throat.

Just down the beach, shorter, more maneuverable six-foot-long boards reign. They
are ridden by younger, stronger surfers known as shredders because of their
hot-dogging surfing style. They might better be called Surf Yuppies.

Ricky Schaffer, 20, is a competition surfer. He wears a Body Glove wet suit and
OP-brand clothing and surfs on a T & C board bearing several product decals.
Each represents a sponsor that pays him with money and products.

A top competition surfer can earn as much as $300,000 a year by endorsing
products and using them while surfing, Ms. Pezman said. When sponsored surfers
win contests or appear in published photographs, they receive cash and products
from manufacturers.

''I'm a walking ad,'' Mr. Schaffer said proudly.

''The idea,'' said Bobby Kinzler, 20, another competition surfer, ''is that
younger kids will look up to hotter surfers and buy the clothes.''

Other types of surfers have beaches of their own. Boogie Board riders reign on
one portion of the beach in Venice, Calif., for example. Boogie Boards are
shorter, steerable plastic foam boards on which ''pre-surfers'' ride lying down.

They and skim-boarders, who toss circles of wood or plastic along the water
line, then leap on them for a ride along the slick sand, are considered
dangerous by their older brethren. Mr. Wagner called their crafts ''bother
boards,'' explaining, ''They're a bother when you're trying to surf.''

Almost all surfers also ride skateboards, both when they are starting out and on
''flat days'' when there are no waves.

''When you're not on the water,'' said Gary Atwood, 35, ''a skateboard is the
next best thing.''

The most extreme surfers are the gangs who rule strips of sand in beach towns
south of Los Angeles. Hollywood noted their existence in a recent film called
''Surf Nazis Must Die.''

''They're bringing punk attitudes into the water,'' said Mr. Lengyel.

At a Los Angeles nightclub, Art Ferguson, 21, of Huntington Beach, Calif.,
introduced himself as a Surf Nazi and carefully described the boundaries of the
beach where he surfs.

''It's our water,'' he said, adding that he and his friends, who live in a house
on the beach, will beat up outsiders who enter their surf.

''There's only so much space,'' he said. ''We've got to clean the waters. Now a
lot of people are scared to come into our water. I'm glad.''

Mr. Ferguson's attitude is extreme, but it is shared, if to a lesser degree, by
other surfers.

''It's crowded out there,'' said Mr. Wagner. ''That's created aggressive
attitudes.'' When one surfer cuts off another, it is known as being snaked.
''You snake or you get snaked,'' he said, adding, ''I'm called the King Snake.''

Serious surfers also take pains to verbally snake the fashion companies that are
developing the market for surfing clothes.

''It isn't design for surf,'' Chris Troy, 17, said with a sneer. ''It's just
style.''

Mark Price is the vice president for marketing of Gotcha Sportswear, a company
that makes $70 million a year selling surf and skateboard styles. Though he said
surfer style is hotter than ever, he also said he believes that ''the surf look
is a fad'' that ''may not be with us for long.''

For surfers, that will be a mixed blessing. Their cash-in time will be over, but
at least they will have the surf to themselves again.

''I'll ride it to the end,'' Mr. Wagner said of surfing's wave of popularity,
''and then I'll get off at the beach.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of surfers and surf-wear (NYT/Bart Bartholomew) (Pp. 1 and 12)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 21, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Malle Returns to Childhood Trauma

BYLINE: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 999 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Oct. 20


When the publicity people for Louis Malle's new film were kicking around slogans
for promoting it in France, one of them came up with, ''Hands off my buddy!''
The phrase is the truculent watchword of SOS Racism, an organization that
combats the anti-immigrant phobia that is being stirred up and exploited by the
ultra-right National Front.

Mr. Malle, an eclectic director whose films have rarely crested on the waves of
the Zeitgeist, said he was ''horrified'' at the idea of exploiting a political
slogan for artistic ends. But after a sip of his cafe au lait, he acknowledged
that a film he had made out of the most private of urgings had spontaneously
combined with some of the most public concerns in France today.

The public relations slogan was never used. But if record crowds are thronging
to see ''Au Revoir les Enfants,'' the story of three Jewish boys taken by the
Gestapo from a Roman Catholic boarding school in occupied France, it is not only
because some critics have suggested it may be Mr. Malle's masterpiece.

The film had its Paris premiere just after the National Front's leader,
Jean-Marie Le Pen, touched off a national uproar by dismissing the Nazi gas
chambers as ''a minor point'' in the history of World War II. It was to those
gas chambers that three of Mr. Malle's real-life schoolmates were condemned
after being betrayed in 1944, and his tribute to them in ''Au Revoir'' is a
powerful and moving rebuttal of Mr. Le Pen's anti-Semitic revisionism.

Opposed by Some in Industry

As he chatted in a noisy Paris bar, the diminutive Mr. Malle savored the irony
that when he had originally broached weaving a film around a central moment of
his own childhood, some people in the industry had discouraged him from
returning to such a well-worn theme of World War II. ''Fortunately,'' he said,
''some other people very quickly encouraged me, so that I decided to move
forward.''

''So I went from the threat of making this film in complete solitude, which
frankly would not have kept me from making it, to suddenly having the film
becoming so topical,'' he said, smiling. ''I don't remember ever making a
picture that's so ecumenical. It's unusual for me.''

An independently wealthy man who now lives in New York and is married to the
actress Candice Bergen, Mr. Malle has always defied categorization. His
cosmopolitan work is so varied that its only consistent thread seems to be an
inclination for the provocative and the unexpected; he has taken on third-world
poverty (''Calcutta''), incest (''Le Feu Follet''), child prostitution (''Pretty
Baby''), collaboration with the Nazis (''Lacombe, Lucien'') and American racism
(''Alamo Bay''), and, in ''Atlantic City,'' he has explored the provinces of the
heart in an American setting of exotic decadence.

Yet, he said, ''my secret, my painful memory,'' the Gestapo's eruption into his
Carmelite-run boarding school near Fontainebleau in 1944, has for years gnawed
at Mr. Malle's artistic consciousness. More than a decade ago, he said, he wrote
a five-page description of the events at the College des Carmes for a friend who
was writing a history of the anti-Nazi resistance.

'Through the Eyes of a Child'

''How to organize it and make it into a film was very difficult,'' said Mr.
Malle, ''and for years I thought it was not feasible. It had to become the
evocation of the period seen through the eyes of a child, but more than that an
evocation of childhood itself, with its fears and terrors and changes of mood. I
thought it was maybe going to be a series of short scenes.''

Then, in a rush of creativity at his country home in the summer of 1986, Mr.
Malle produced a longhand draft of a script that started with his departure for
school at a Paris railroad station and ended with three of his schoolmates and
the Carmelite principal being marched out of the school courtyard at Avon. The
script satisfied the necessity to ''slide from a chronicle to a tragedy,'' as
Mr. Malle put it.

''I could have done it earlier if it were not for my memory, because it almost
got in the way,'' said the director, who embroidered considerably on reality by
depicting a friendship between himself and one of the Jewish boys that in fact
did not occur. ''But each scene is completely nourished by memory.''

Confronting the past is something France has been doing a lot of lately. There
was the recent trial of Klaus Barbie, the Gestapo head of Lyons, and some five
million television viewers watched Claude Lanzmann's gripping documentary on the
Holocaust, ''Shoah.''

Painful Chapters of the Past

From his expatriate perch, though, Mr. Malle senses that both France and the
United States still have difficulties in dealing with painful chapters of their
more recent past. ''Alamo Bay,''in which South Vietnamese refugees are
transformed into ''Reds'' in America, ''certainly got on a lot of people's
nerves in the States,'' he said, just as ''Lacombe, Lucien'' did in France.

''One of the things that no one wants to deal with here is the Algerian war,
which is closer to what Vietnam was for America,'' he said. ''It was a colonial
war and the end was very bitter. It split the French, but there have been
practically no films about it.''

The critical and box-office triumph of ''Au Revoir les Enfants,'' which is to
open in New York in February, has ''utterly convinced the French that I am
coming back, the return of the prodigal son,'' joked Mr. Malle.

''It's quite possible that I could keep working here - it's certainly a lot
easier than working in the American film industry - but I'm going to live in the
States,'' he said. ''It's funny; I'm going back to New York and for me it feels
like going home these days.''

As the director and a reporter left the bar, the conversation turned to the
National League championships. Mr. Malle confessed that, when not rooting for
the dethroned Mets, he was a Cardinals fan.

''I like baseball,'' said this man of many worlds. ''It's a smart game.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gaspard Manesse and Raphael Fejto (Sygma/J.L. Bulliard M.
Rosenthal)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'Rock-Dwelling Predators,' on CBS

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 484 words


WHAT have we here? A fine wildlife documentary, for one thing; an interesting
choice for network prime-time programming, for another. ''Mysteries of the
Rock-Dwelling Predators,'' on Channel 2 at 8:30 P.M., pre-empts, as they say,
the CBS Vietnam series ''Tour of Duty.'' Lions, leopards and little furry
creatures replace grunts and Vietcong.

And for tonight, at least, this clearly is a good thing. The wildlife film may
be clumsily, even misleadingly, titled - there are no real mysteries - but it is
a first-rate piece of work. Alan Root pokes his camera in, around and over
granite outcroppings on the Serengeti Plains in Tanzania. Mr. Root, who also
produced the film, sees wonderful things.

One is a little furry creature, the hyrax, which looks like a cross between
muskrat and Lhasa apso. Hyraxes abound all over the outcroppings, although not
necessarily to happy old age. They are food for, among other predators, the
soaring black eagle. Mr. Root films airborne attacks. A hyrax's innocence is no
protection; an eagle swoops and it dies.

Meanwhile, we also get the caracal, assorted lizards, snakes and birds. The
caracal, a reddish-brown cat that weighs up to 40 pounds and has long ears that
end in black-tipped tufts, can leap six feet in the air. When it does, it may
pull down a bird. We see a caracal leap in slow motion: adagio over the rocks. A
flurry of feathers; a pigeon escapes. Another leap, another flurry; finally, the
caracal wins.

The rocks, of course, are full of life and death, although as seen by Mr. Root's
camera they are mostly places of beauty. If we must have mysteries, however,
they may be in the big boulders with the innumerable pockmarks. Strike one of
the boulders with a rock and it sounds like a chime.

Mr. Root, who is also the narrator, suggests that the pockmarks were made by
primitive man, who struck the big boulders over and over, and made the Serengeti
resound with the world's first music. That hypothesis may not be provable, but
it is fun to hear. Mr. Root, striking a boulder, says solemnly that the sound
''is, quite literally, rock music.''

The film - a Survival Anglia production - is the kind of work that once was seen
only on public television. Time marches on, though, and public and commercial
television increasingly look alike. Many commercial cable networks show films
like ''Mysteries of the Rock-Dwelling Predators.'' Tonight's program indicates
that CBS has come on board.

Well, why not? The film is a little self-conscious at the beginning - another
narrator, not Mr. Root, tells us that the film maker has been bitten by a puff
adder and a gorilla, and almost killed by a hippopotamus - but then it settles
down. At the end, it doesn't quite know what to do with itself, and so it offers
a slightly flat reprise. In between, however, is almost a full hour of
enjoyment. If you like wildlife films, you'll love this.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
It Is Time to Act

BYLINE: By FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 39, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: PARIS


There was no lack of warning, not just from Cassandras but from serious,
knowledgeable people.

A little over a year ago, a group of high-ranking government officials, bankers
and economists at an Aspen Institute meeting in Venice produced a very gloomy
consensus. Several even said they hoped for a sudden crisis to shock governments
into doing what all knew had to be done. Nearly two years ago, the New York
financier Felix Rohatyn said, ''I am frightened and utterly baffled.'' What he
sniffed in the air, he said, was ''1928-29 fever.''

Now the crisis has come in the stock markets. If any further proof were needed
that financial markets have been ''globalized,'' it is in the chain reaction
that swept through every financial center around the world in less than 24
hours.

The question has to be whether those with responsibility are at last prepared to
take the necessary concerted measures to stem the damage and prevent the losses
from spreading through the banking system and the world's economy.

There is a tendency here to blame the U.S. for its long failure to deal with
budget and balance-of-payments deficits. And there is good reason. As the
world's largest market and biggest political power, and the source of the
world's reserve currency, which also serves as the measure of most commodity
values, the U.S. is the only country that can lead in organizing cooperative
moves.

It has been dilatory and negligent for a generation. The beginning of its
misconduct was failure to pay for the Vietnam War with revenues, letting
inflation build up instead. Then came poor management of the 1973 oil crisis and
its tremendous impact on the terms of trade and distribution of available funds.
The banks were left to ''recycle'' petrodollars higgledy-piggledy, building up
mountains of bad debt whose servicing needs further skewed trade and dried up
purchasing power where it was most required.

The last seven years have added a jerry-built structure of deregulated and
speculative markets on the undermined foundations and made America the biggest
and most grotesque debtors' club member.

But it is not in anybody's interest to push the U.S. into brutal, abrupt
correction of its bad habits by depression. All countries would suffer. Those
U.S. foreign debts came as a result of other states' flourishing exports and
capital accumulations. Their growth could not be sustained if the U.S. economy
were left to falter, and the weak would simply collapse.

Unlike the 1929 case, there is an international pool of experts who know quite
well what governments must do. There are institutions to provide the forum.
Decisive action is possible and it is only up to the political leaders to take
the decisions that the markets are now punishing them for putting off.

The essential first step is to show at last a willingness to act together - in
the U.S. the Administration with Congress, in the world the seven leading
democratic industrial nations. There have been calls in Europe for an emergency
meeting of the seven, possibly at the summit but preferably finance ministers.
The annual seven-nation summit meeting has been so debased by show-biz imagery
and vacuum of substance that a hasty session would probably be more depressing
than stimulating to confidence.

But this time the ministers must do more than apply Band-Aids to prop up
currency and fiddle with debt schedules. They must proclaim what they well know
- that currency, trade, debt and aid are all intimately connected and
internationally interdependent -and draw the consequences.

That certainly does mean a willingness in the U.S. to cut the budget and raise
taxes; in Germany to spur growth, which would also help cut its high
unemployment, and in Japan to raise spending on domestic infrastructure and,
very substantially, on foreign aid to the third world. A far more schematic,
overall plan is required for dealing with third world debt so that impoverished
countries can renew their import schedules and continue developing. There must
be an early, clear signal that the surge toward protectionism will be stopped
and that trade can be expected to expand.

All this sounds vast and complex, but the studies have already been made, the
needs identified, the tools made available. They haven't been used because those
with responsibility have been avoiding accepting it. It isn't too late, but time
is running out.

The politicians will not be the last to feel the pain that is coming if they
refuse to act boldly and in concert. There is no way for one party or one
country to preserve an advantage. Everybody's in this together.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOLD DANCE PROGRAMS THAT EMBRACE SOCIAL ISSUES

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2052 words


DANCE, like life, has a way of swinging between extremes. In modern dance, for
instance, the socially involved choreography of the 1930's was very much a thing
of the past by the early 60's, when minimalism and abstract formalism came into
fashion. This weekend's varied dance offerings suggest there is a renewed
emphasis on work that looks to social issues, although there are performances
that range along the spectrum.

Some 120 experimentalist dance, performance-art and music soloists and groups,
as well as visual artists and writers, will participate in a marathon benefit
performance for the city's hungry tomorrow night at the Kiva Foundation. Dance
that touches upon such topics as nuclear waste, being young and growing old and
the American defense budget will be presented this weekend at Dance Theater
Workshop's Bessie Schonberg Theater by Liz Lerman and her Washington-based Dance
Exchange.

The Compagnie Maguy Marin will perform works that explore modern innocence and
love in two programs at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Kei Takei's mysterious,
minimalist evocation of the universe will sprawl across the stage of the Church
of St. Ann and the Holy Trinity in Brooklyn Heights. And programs by the Feld
Ballet at the Joyce Theater and the Martha Graham Dance Company at City Center
will offer both purely abstract works and dances that probe the human heart and
situation. The enduring art of folk and ethnic dancing will be represented with
a visit by the National Dance Company of Senegal to Davis Hall at City College,
and there will be dance throughout the city from companies that simply go on
doing their own thing in a variety of styles.

Tomorrow's performance at Kiva is part of a continuing six-week benefit at
theaters throughout the city, organized and presented by artists to raise money
for the Food and Hunger Hotline, which provides emergency food referral,
information and advocacy services for the homeless. But it is also a
one-of-a-kind event that has drawn some of the city's most popular performers
and artists for a marathon program that will last 24 hours.

''It's 25 hours, actually, because the clocks go forward Sunday morning,''
Daniel Wolf said. Mr. Wolf, a poet, and A. Leroy, a composer, helped organize
the continuing benefit, which runs through late November. Many artists, like Ms.
Lerman, chose to donate the proceeds of a performance. Renee Rockoff and Eileen
Jones of the Kiva Foundation decided to go further. Benefits are always the
same, they reflected. What could they do that would be a little unusual, and who
could they do it with? The marathon was born.

The idea for it came from American Indian dances that go on all night, and in
which the whole community participates. ''They go on because they need to,'' Ms.
Rockoff said. ''And this needs to happen. We need to educate ourselves and each
other. We need to communicate with each other.''

Hunger and homelessness are not just the problem of those on the streets, Ms.
Jones said. ''It's not just 'them' and 'us,' '' she said.

Among those appearing at the benefit are Rob Besserer, Johanna Boyce, Remy
Charlip, Bill T. Jones, John Kelly, Meredith Monk, Dana Reitz, Marta Renzi,
Susan Rethorst, Sarah Schulman, Spiderwoman Theater, the Stonewall Chorale and
Paul Zaloom. The benefit begins at 8 P.M. tomorrow and runs until 8 P.M. on
Sunday at the foundation, 309 Canal Street. There will also be a raffle of works
donated by visual artists. Admission to each 90-minute section of the benefit is
by a donation of at least $5. Art raffle tickets are $5 each. There will be no
reservations. Information: 966-1552 or 673-4968.

For those who cannot attend the marathon, Mr. Wolf said that tax-deductible
donations may be sent directly - earmarked ''Performing Artists' Hunger
Benefit'' - to the Food and Hunger Hotline, 17 Murray Street, New York, N.Y.,
10007.

Liz Lerman has called her pieces ''docudances,'' and in program copy for one
performance she included a bibliography that featured publications of the Soviet
Ministry of Defense and the Congressional Budget Office. But she is one of the
most articulate and compassionate of social commentators in the arts today, and
a vein of poignant concern runs through the satirical humor of her dances.

In ''Still Crossing,'' she uses men and women from her Dancers of the Third Age
company of elderly performers to create a simple, eloquent world - at once
visionary and practical - shared by the young and old. ''Still Crossing'' will
be performed tonight and tomorrow at 8 and Sunday at 3 P.M. as part of ''Atomic
Priests and Other Dances,'' one of three programs to be presented by Ms. Lerman
in a season that runs through Nov. 1 at the Schonberg, 219 West 19th Street.

''Atomic Priests'' also includes a dance based on an official report from the
Department of Energy about nuclear waste and how people 10,000 years from now
might deal with it. The second program, to be performed tonight and tomorrow at
11 P.M., is an anthology of Ms. Lerman's solos that includes ''Nine Short Dances
About the Defense Budget and Other Military Matters.'' ''Russia: Footnotes to a
History'' will be presented on Thursday, in a performance for the hunger
benefit, and next weekend. Tickets are $8 for early performances; $7 for 11 P.M.
performances; Theater Development Fund vouchers accepted. Reservations:
924-0077.

Marin and Civilization

Maguy Marin's ''Babel Babel'' is French modern-dance choreography at its most
advanced. The full-evening epic also offers nudity, summer camping and the
belting of rock songs in black leather. But Ms. Marin, a leading French
modern-dance choreographer, has a serious theme on her mind in ''Babel Babel,''
and a theme that has a good deal to do with the world around her. Performed by
Ms. Marin and her 12-member company in a debut season in the Next Wave Festival
of the Brooklyn Academy, ''Babel Babel'' deals imagistically with the rise and
fall - and loss of innocence - of civilization. Ms. Marin and her company will
perform the work tonight and tomorrow at 8 and Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn
Academy's Opera House, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place. Tickets are $12 to
$30. Information: (718) 636-4100.

For a strong dose of pure abstraction, a trip is in order to St. Ann's in
Brooklyn, which is rapidly making itself known as a lively and innovative center
for the arts. There, Kei Takei and her Moving Earth company will present a
six-hour retrospective look at ''Light,'' the epic dance piece she and her
company have been creating, section by section, over the past 18 years. In the
piece, the Japanese-born avant-gardist blends East and West to create a
mysterious macrocosm in which the landscape, the people, and the artifacts of
their daily lives have the look of objects carved with purposeful crudeness and
painted a blinding white.

The retrospective includes ''The Stonefields,'' ''Wheat Fields,'' ''The Second
Windfield'' and ''Diary of a Dream,'' choreographed between 1975 and 1985. It
will be performed tonight and tomorrow evenings at 6 and Sunday at 3 P.M. at St.
Ann's, 157 Montague Street, in Brooklyn Heights. Tickets are $10; Theater
Development Fund vouchers accepted. Reservations: (718) 834-8794.

The Versatile Feld

Judging by performances this weekend by the Feld Ballet, Eliot Feld might be not
one but five choreographers. There is the Feld of ''Aurora II'' and ''Medium:
Rare,'' a choreographer exploring the properties of movement as affected by
slanted boards and trampolines and the music of Steve Reich. There is the sunny
Feld, captured in ''Meadowlark'' and ''Harbinger,'' and the sardonically amused
Feld of ''The Consort.'' The romantic Feld is represented by two pieces new this
season - ''A Dance for Two'' and ''Embraced Waltzes.''

There is a Feld who is capable of rendering dark, dramatic subcultures with
distanced sympathy, as he does in ''Over the Pavement.'' And for Mr. Feld at his
most knottily interesting, there is ''Skara Brae,'' performed tomorrow night
with ''Meadowlark'' and ''Over the Pavement.'' This weekend offers a
wide-ranging view of Mr. Feld's work, performed by an engaging ensemble of
dewily fresh and skillful dancers, at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at
19th Street. Performances are tonight at 8, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 and 7:30
P.M. Tickets are $25. Information: 242-0800.

There are many worlds represented on stage at City Center this weekend, too,
where the Martha Graham Dance Company is performing. Chief among the attractions
is a hit revival after 50 years of Miss Graham's 1934 ''Celebration,'' one of
her last pieces to stress the spare formal purity of her early dances, which
will be performed tonight. In the same genre is ''Primitive Mysteries,'' a
landmark Graham piece created in 1931 that will be performed tomorrow and Sunday
nights, and the 1929 ''Heretic,'' a brief, brusque choreographic brushstroke
that is Miss Graham at her most harshly yet luminously profound. ''Heretic''
will be presented tomorrow and Sunday afternoons.

There is a good sprinkling of her mythological and story dances like
''Appalachian Spring'' through the weekend's fare, and for sheer exaltedness
there is the abstract last section of Miss Graham's ''Acts of Light,'' tonight
and Sunday night. Evening performances are tonight and tomorrow at 8 and Sunday
at 7:30, with matinees tomorrow and Sunday at 2, at City Center, 131 West 55th
Street. Tickets are $15 to $35. Information: 246-8989.

Senegalese Visitors

The National Dance Company of Senegal was founded in 1959 to preserve and
present the heritage of one of Africa's oldest cultures. Forty dancers,
musicians and singers will perform in exotic native costumes, with dances from
five ethnic groups of Senegal and music played on such traditional instruments
as the marimba-like balofon and the kora, a 12-stringed harp made from a giant
gourd. The company will perform tonight and tomorrow at 8, with a special,
abbreviated family matinee tomorrow at 2 P.M., at Davis Hall on the City College
campus, West 133d Street and Convent Avenue. Tickets for evening performances
are $18; $12 for students and the elderly; matinee tickets are $12; $7 for
students and the elderly. Information: 690-4100. Charge: 947-5850.

Ramzi El-Edlibi mixes Middle Eastern dance and culture with Western ballet in
dreamlike work to be presented tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Schimmel Center of Pace
University, Pace Plaza across from City Hall. Tickets are $10, $20 and $25.
Reservations: 924-0077. For unadulterated ballet, though, with a modern slant,
there are performances this weekend by Dennis Wayne's Dancers and the Joffrey II
Dancers, the second company of the Joffrey Ballet.

Mr. Wayne's company will present works by William Soleau, Mr. Wayne, Dale
Brannon, John Butler, Margo Sappington and Efesto, the Italian modern dance
group, in performances tonight and tomorrow at 8 and at a gala Sunday at 4:30
P.M. at the Triplex Theater of the Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199
Chambers Street. Tickets are $8, $10 and $15; $5 for students and the elderly;
additional seats are available for Sunday's closing gala at $30, which includes
an on-stage reception, and $100, which includes a dinner with the company.
Reservations: 618-1980. Charge: 307-7171. And the bright young Joffrey II
company will present Richard Englund's ''Beauty and the Beast'' tomorrow at 8
P.M. at the Lehman Center for the Performing Arts at Lehman College, Bedford
Park Boulevard West and Goulden Avenue, in the Bronx. Tickets are $13, $15 and
$17.50. Reservations: 960-8833.

Performance art will be represented this weekend by Man Act, an English duo
consisting of Phillip McKenzie and Simon Thorne, who will present ''Miracles''
tonight and tomorrow at 8:30 at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street. Tickets are
$8; Theater Development Fund vouchers accepted. Reservations: 255-5793. And
there will be modern dance from Erroll Simpson, a member of Laura Dean Dancers
and Musicians, tomorrow and Sunday at 8 P.M. at the Emanu-El Midtown
Y.M.-Y.W.H.A., 344 East 14th Street. Mr. Simpson will present two new dances,
one a Vietnam memorial and the other a look at spiritual enlightenment through
the traditional music of several cultures. Tickets are $10. Reservations:
673-2207.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Larry White of the Martha Graham Dance Company (Martha
Swope); Feld Ballet members (NYT/Angel Franco); Bill T. Jones (Lois Greenfield)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies

BYLINE: Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1529 words




Oliver Stone's ESP

Let such literary prophets of financial doom as Ravi Batra and Paul Erdman take
their bows; movies have Oliver Stone, who possessed the foresight last spring
and summer to make a movie titled ''Wall Street.''

Although moviegoers will have to wait for December to see the Oscar-winning
director's frame-by-frame dissection of the high rolling in high finance, Mr.
Stone said yesterday that last Monday's debacle in the financial markets came as
no surprise to him.

''We were not surprised at all,'' he said, ''judging from everything we had
heard during the six-month shooting of 'Wall Street.'

''Our film takes place in 1985,'' said Mr. Stone, the son of a Wall Streeter,
''but I think it reflects a situation where not only are the stocks
overinflated, but also the lifestyles of our characters. Our story is about a
paper wealth that is extremely distorted and is, hopefully, being shaken out by
this current drop.''

Friendly Aftermath

Speaking of Mr. Stone made it seem reasonable to look up some of the veterans of
Bravo Company, 25th Infantry.

Bravo Company, of course, was the outfit of fighting men in Mr. Stone's
''Platoon,'' and the roll call accounted for Tom Berenger, who played the
scarred, brutal Sergeant Barnes; Charlie Sheen, who played Chris Taylor, the new
arrival through whose eyes events unfolded, and Willem Dafoe, the gentle, doomed
Sergeant Elias.

Like so many veterans of Vietnam, they are far-flung. Mr. Dafoe is in Morocco,
playing the role of Christ in ''The Passion,'' directed by Martin Scorsese.
Previously titled ''The Last Temptation of Christ'' and based on the novel of
that title by Nikos Kazantzakis, the film is one Mr. Scorsese has wanted to make
for years. Since ''Platoon,'' Mr. Dafoe has been back to the Far East to make
''Saigon,'' a thriller about the hunt for a high-ranking Army officer who has
been murdering prostitutes.

Tom Berenger is widely visible these days as the New York police detective
assigned to guard the body of Mimi Rogers in ''Someone to Watch Over Me.'' He
checked in from South Carolina, where he was taking a break before starting work
next month on ''Sanctuary.'' This time he's guarding the body of a Mexican woman
in her mid-20's, and this time, too, she is a witness to a gangland rubout. But
there's a difference. This time Mr. Berenger plays a priest.

Mr. Berenger is just back from Alberta, Canada, where he portrayed a white
supremacist farmer in ''Sundown'' with Debra Winger, under the direction of
Costa-Gavras. Finished and scheduled for release early next year is ''Mountain
King,'' in which he plays a Rocky Mountain guide who teams up with Sidney
Poitier in the hunt for a murderer.

And Charlie Sheen went from ''Platoon'' into ''Wall Street'' in the role of Bud
Fox, who is seduced into the world of illegal insider trading and other
financial corruption by a character played by Michael Douglas.

And he also went into ''No Man's Land,'' opening today (review on page C10), as
the leader of a highly sophisticated car-theft ring. Ahead is a role as an
F.B.I. agent in the thriller ''Johnny Utah,'' to be directed by Ridley Scott,
who directed Mr. Berenger in ''Someone to Watch Over Me.''

Right now, Mr. Sheen, a onetime Santa Monica High School shortstop
(self-scouting report: ''Lifetime .290 hitter. Not the kind of guy you wanted up
in a clutch situation.'') is in Indiana portraying Oscar Emil (Happy) Felsch,
outfielder, lifetime .293 hitter and member of the infamous Black Sox. The
movie, naturally, is John Sayles's ''Eight Men Out,'' whose cast includes D. B.
Sweeney, Mr. Sheen's co-star in ''No Man's Land.''

Both Mr. Sheen and Mr. Berenger spoke of the positive impact of ''Platoon'' on
their careers and of the camaraderie it bred among its cast. Mr. Berenger said
that although the demands of their work keep them separated, the members of the
platoon had kept in touch. Nine members of the cast came to his wedding in South
Carolina two years ago. He recalled a letter from Mr. Sheen from Oklahoma, and
an hourlong phone call. ''Willem,'' he said, ''I've seen quite a few times.
We've gotten together for beers at the White Horse and reunions before and after
the Academy Awards at Captain Dye's house.'' Dale Dye was the adviser who
whipped the platoon into shape in the Philippine jungles for the movie.

''We formed some real bonds,'' said Mr. Berenger.

''There's a tremendous amount that still exists,'' said Mr. Sheen. ''I don't see
the guys all year round, but when I do, just sharing one look, we know we
experienced something together that no one can ever take away from us.

''It was a great time of growth, of personal awareness, just coming to grips
with what I call the stage where you jettison adolescence for manhood. For some
people that can happen in the course of five years or five hours. It's an
experience where you either fish or cut bait. The camaraderie level was
extremely high, because all you had out there were your platoon mates.''

War Is Fun - Onscreen

Maybe it wouldn't be such a good idea to invite William Tecumseh Sherman and
John Boorman to the same dinner party.

Forget for a minute that Sherman has been dead since 1891 and Mr. Boorman, when
last seen - as the guest of honor at the home of James Mellon, Her Britannic
Majesty's Consul General in New York - was very much hale, hearty and convivial.

Sherman, for those who have not browsed recently through the pages of ''Familiar
Quotations'' by John Bartlett, is the Civil War general (vide ''Gone With the
Wind,'' 1939) who is reputed to have shared with posterity the insight ''War is
hell.''

Mr. Boorman takes the position it was lots of fun. At least for someone who was
a little boy in London when World War II began in 1939 and escalated into the
Blitz.

Mr. Boorman proceeded to embody his memories of those days in ''Hope and
Glory,'' another New York Film Festival attraction that amassed an assortment of
coruscating reviews while touching off a certain amount of puzzlement and hurt
among filmgoers on both sides of the Atlantic who enter theaters bearing not
only popcorn but a bias toward Sherman.

After all, here are grownups made exhilarated and defiant by war, children
frolicking in the rubble of their neighbors' homes and positively reveling in
the bombing of their school; the capture of a downed German pilot (Mr. Boorman's
son Charlie) played for laughs, and an assortment of kiddie voyeurism, teen-age
sex and adult foibles hung out for all to see.

''Everything in it,'' Mr. Boorman said of his comedy, ''all the incidents,
happened to me or my close family. I did cast a thin veil of fictionalization
over it. I changed names. But that subterfuge was quickly stripped away.''

Mr. Boorman said that although he had had the story in mind for a long time, it
reached the screen when it did for two principal reasons. One was his desire to
make something closer to home after the swords and sorcery of his Arthurian epic
''Excalibur'' and after the South American jungles of ''The Emerald Forest.'' (A
retrospective of Mr. Boorman's movies is running through Nov. 5 at the Public
Theater.) And the other was to make ''Hope and Glory'' as ''a kind of gift'' to
his 86-year-old mother, Ivy, who is played in the film by Sarah Miles. ''I felt
I couldn't put it off any longer,'' said Mr. Boorman.

Before Mr. Boorman shared with the world his revelations of wartime life on Rose
Hill Avenue in South London not far from the airfield at Croydon, he shared his
script with his family, including his sister Wendy, whose teen-age affair with a
Canadian soldier it chronicles.

''I gave them all the script to read,'' Mr. Boorman said. ''I wouldn't have made
it had they disapproved. My older sister, who was the model for Dawn, collapsed
and took to her bed for three days. All the things she'd been up to as a
teen-ager that she'd thought she'd got away with had actually been observed by a
small boy. Once she got over it, she was delighted with the whole thing.''

''Hope and Glory,'' playing in New York at the Baronet, opened in Britain last
Sept. 3, the 48th anniversary of the outbreak of the war. ''Curiously,'' said
Mr. Boorman, ''the reaction of people who lived through it was overwhelmingly
favorable. They all said the same thing - they had despaired of ever seeing it
the way it really was, because it was dealt with ad nauseam in movies and
television. It always had the spirit of the Blitz: stiff upper lip and all those
ludicrous things.

''It was quite exhilarating,'' he said, ''not only for children. I think it was
very releasing for women. They took charge and took command and there was this
sense that every day might be your last and therefore you lived it to the full,
which led to all kinds of recklessness and foolishness. This is what people
remember of the time - the silliness, the endlessly kind-of-comic episodes.

''Interestingly enough, a lot of young people were shocked that one could
suggest that war could have enormous levity and fun, because they're brainwashed
to the idea that war is continuous horror.

''But people who were there said: 'That's how it was.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Oliver Stone (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Art: Multiple Viewpoints in African Sculptures

BYLINE: By ROBERTA SMITH

SECTION: Section C; Page 38, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1473 words


THE new exhibition at the Center for African Art provides an excellent
introduction to African sculpture - especially to the stylistic diversity of its
carved figures and masks - but this is only the beginning. What makes
''Perspectives: Angles on African Art'' so unusual is that it also represents
the multiple viewpoints from which African art is studied, interpreted,
appreciated and debated. This has been accomplished by giving the show multiple
curators - 10 to be exact - all with an abiding, experienced interest in African
art. The curators were asked to select about 10 objects from a large pool
available for loan (from a variety of public and private sources) and to explain
each selection in a caption that is displayed beside it.

The show's varying viewpoints fall between two positions, summed up in the
catalogue by Dr. Ivan Karp, one of the curators. He writes of the conflict
between ''universal esthetic criteria'' and ''the idea that we can only truly
appreciate something from the point of view of the people for whom it was
originally made.'' This opposition, exercised loudly and at length in both the
art press and public discussion at the time of the Museum of Modern Art's 1984
exhibition '' 'Primitivism' in 20th-Century Art,'' is treated here in more
measured and ecumenical fashion. Nonetheless, this exhibition, supported by a
grant from Philip Morris, has the spirit of a nicely heated panel discussion in
which the viewer is invited to participate.

The viewpoints range from the total immersion of Lela Kouakou, a sculptor and
diviner who lives and works in a traditional Baule village on the Ivory Coast,
to the demanding connoisseurship of Dr. William Rubin, who is director of the
department of painting and sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art and was one of
the organizers of ''Primitivism.'' Dr. Rubin takes little or no interest in
context and is attracted to certain African objects ''for something they have,
that by definition transcends their origins.''

In between are the viewpoints of the other curators, Nancy Graves, Romare
Bearden and Iba N'Diaye, who are artists; the writer James Baldwin; Dr. Karp, an
anthropologist at the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History; Dr.
Robert Farris Thompson, a professor of African art history at Yale; David
Rockefeller, who collects African art, and Dr. Ekpo Eyo, a professor of African
art history at the University of Maryland and formerly director of antiquities
at the National Museum of Nigeria.

The distinguishing characteristic of this exhibition is the interplay of word
and object. The captions, lacking the single authoritative voice of taped audio
guides to blockbuster exhibitions, encourage viewers to slow down, look more
carefully and think for themselves. Sometimes the words make us see things their
writers miss. Viewers may or may not find, as Mr. Bearden does, that a female
figure made by the Senafu people of the Ivory Coast is ''inward'' while another
is ''on guard.'' But the juxtaposition of these two similar statues stimulates a
series of comparisons regarding stance, dress and scarification that helps one
grasp the constants and variables of the Senafu style.

Elsewhere, one glimpses the wide array of knowledge and information that can be
brought to bear on the understanding of African art. Sometimes this information
is startlingly mundane. When Mr. Kouakou begins one caption with the words ''In
the old days men wore beards like that and had braided hair,'' we appreciate the
realism underlying the stylization of a Baule figure. Sometimes a whole societal
structure is glimpsed, as in Dr. Thompson's caption for a large black figure
whose chest bristles with knives. The figure is a lord of jurisprudence, ''a
spirit so strong he can wear upon his stalwart chest the painful, intricate
issues of his peoples symbolized by inserted blades.''

The extremes outlined by Dr. Karp are not strictly adhered to by any of the
curators. Each gives different emphasis to form, function and meaning, but even
so, form itself gets a lot of play. This is particularly true of the comments
made by Ms. Graves, Mr. Bearden and Dr. Eyo, which often elucidate the repeating
volumes and rhythms of their choices, as well as of Mr. Rockefeller's. It is
clearest of all in the case of Dr. Rubin, whose selections are among the best on
view and whose closely argued explanations, formal as they are, inevitably take
the viewer right to the visual spirit of the work. But even Mr. Baldwin, whose
interpretations tend to be the most narrative, asserts at one point, ''the form
is the content.''

The various ways the curators' words take these objects apart and put them back
together again lay bare the African genius for stylizing and abstracting the
human figure and face while remaining true to some form of reality - mostly an
intensely emotional one. From any angle, these objects represent a breathtaking
achievement, and this exhibition, by encompassing such a full range of response,
pays them special homage.

''Perspectives: Angles on African Art'' is on view at the Center for African
Art, 54 East 68th Street, through Jan. 4.

'Projects': Louise Lawler

Museum of Modern Art
11 West 53d Street
Through Nov. 10

Louise Lawler's latter-day Conceptualism focuses on the uses and abuses of art -
as object, as decoration, as commodity. Her work asks how, if at all, we see art
- not to mention its various contexts and modes of presentation and display. So
it is not surprising that the more art-filled and carefully orchestrated the
context, the more resonant Ms. Lawler's elegant if somewhat attenuated work
becomes.

In the middle of one of modern art's most sacred sites, her color photographs
dwell on art as decor. Here we see a sculpture by Donald Judd over a couch, a
painting by Jasper Johns over a bed and a Jackson Pollock with matching soup
tureen. The bench in the middle of the ''Projects'' gallery also appears in a
trio of photographs on the wall, where a painting by Joan Miro is reflected in
its shiny surface. Both this second bench and the Miro are a mere escalator ride
away. A photograph of Cezanne's garden evokes the Modern's own, just beyond the
glass wall, and the rows of pristine glasses, each printed with disconcerting
messages, conjure those available in the museum's cafeteria and gift shop.
''While you are here,'' intones one set of tumblers; ''Dominance given:
Authority taken,'' warns another, while various groups of fluted champagne
glasses promise ''after the war'' in both English and French. Ms. Lawler's
delicate interweavings of taste and critique aside, the single best object in
the exhibition is the photograph of the shadows cast by a Duchamp at the Modern
Museum in Stockholm. It is a suitable tribute to the original Conceptual
artist's well-known love of both dust and shadows.

Ronald Jones

Metro Pictures
150 Greene Street
Through tomorrow

As other critics have suggested, it may be time for a moratorium on
art-as-furniture. The idea is reinforced by Ronald Jones's current exhibition.

Mr. Jones's ood wall reliefs, which are based on life's inadvertent geometries,
have been promising. He has put to esthetic use such chilling configurations as
the semaphore signals for distress, the floor plan of the North Carolina death
chamber and, above all, the designs proposed for the shape of the conference
table at the Paris peace talks in 1969. North Vietnam and the National
Liberation Front of South Vietnam submitted one plan, for a circular table; the
United States and South Vietnam, on the other hand, proposed no fewer than six
designs, each more elaborate than its predecessor.

Once you know what is being illustrated, the juxtaposition of these forms speaks
volumes about the Vietnamese conflict and the different goals and attitudes of
the two sides. But these points were clearer in Mr. Jones's earlier wall reliefs
than they are here, with the shapes enlarged and fabricated as actual tables in
ebonized wood. Returning these shapes to the realm of furniture diminishes their
power as the conceptual and historical emblems that Mr. Jones seems to intend.
Furthermore, the table tops, with legs removed, can also be displayed as wall
reliefs, making the use of the tables seem gratuitous, more a space-filling
device than anything else.

By painting two walls of the gallery bright yellow and one deep purple, Mr.
Jones translates the conflict into dazzling coloristic terms, setting an
aggressive tone against a more static one. Yellow's signification of both truth
and contagion and purple's of imperial power and penitence are also brought into
play. The large photograph of a World War II G.I. celebrating the end of an
earlier war adds a nice touch, but, in all, Mr. Jones has spread himself much
too thin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of wooden mask

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Spill's Legal Odyssey

BYLINE: By E. R. SHIPP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 947 words


A marathon trial over a spill of dioxin, the highly toxic chemical, has come to
an end after nearly four years. But, even as the two sides are making plans to
appeal the verdict, questions are being raised about the wisdom of using lay
juries in highly technical cases, about abuses by go-for-broke lawyers and about
what, if anything, should be done to streamline the litigation process.

The verdict on Thursday in Belleville, Ill., was a mixed one. No, the jurors
said, the 65 citizens of a small central Missouri town suffered no real
health-related harm when a wood preservative contaminated with dioxin spilled in
a train derailment in 1979, although two plaintiffs suffered property damage.
But yes, the jurors decided, the company that made the chemicals deserved to be
punished.

Legal experts say the trial in the case of Kemner v. Monsanto appears to have
been the longest jury trial in United States history. It was held in the St.
Clair County Circuit Court, just miles away from the Monsanto plant that
manufactured the wood preservative involved in the spill.

No one is quite sure of the costs of the trial to taxpayers, but the judge,
Richard P. Goldenhersh, said he would assess ''extraordinary'' costs against
Monsanto. He estimated these costs, for such things as the construction of a new
area to store the trial records, would be at least $81,000. Legal fees and
litigation expenses are well into the millions.

Concern About 'Fever Pitch'

That Monsanto considered the case to be crucial was clear from a memorandum from
a company official, Dr. James B. Wilson, who wrote, ''For better or for worse,
we're deeper into dioxin than anyone.'' Litigation arising from the spill at
Sturgeon, Mo., from claims brought by Monsanto workers in Nitro, W. Va., and
from Vietnam veterans exposed to the defoliant Agent Orange, which contained
dioxin, had brought matters to a ''fever pitch.''

''There's a lot riding on these cases,'' Dr. Wilson wrote. ''Losses would open
the way to many other plaintiffs. Worst case: we're looking at hundreds of
millions of dollars.''

David Snively, an attorney for Monsanto, would say only that the company had
spent ''millions of dollars'' defending itself; Rex Carr, the lead attorney for
the plaintiffs, estimated that Monsanto had spent $10 million to $20 million in
fighting the Kemner case.

The plaintiffs' out-of-pocket costs, according to Mr. Carr, ran to upward of $2
million.

The plaintiffs had hoped the jurors would decide that there was a clear link
between exposure to dioxin, which is a byproduct in the manufacture of some
chemicals, and certain physical and emotional ailments. $16.2 Million in
Punitive Damages The jurors, after deliberating more than two months, agreed
with Monsanto that the plaintiffs had suffered no physical harm from exposure to
dioxin. But they accepted the plaintiffs' argument that Monsanto had failed to
alter its manufacturing process to eliminate dioxin as a byproduct and that it
had failed to warn the public about dioxin's harmfulness. Most of the plaintiffs
were awarded only $1 each for actual losses, but they were awarded $16.2 million
in punitive damages.

While Mr. Snively, the company attorney, denounced the award as excessive in a
case where there was little or no actual harm to the plaintiffs, other legal
experts disagreed. Gerard V. Bradley, a professor at the University of Illinois
College of Law, said, ''It was basically legal to give a buck as compensation
and to hammer the defendant on the punitive end.''

Richard Lempert, a professor at the University of Michigan Law School, said the
jurors appeared to be warning Monsanto that its conduct was unacceptable. He
added: ''That seems to me to be precisely what you have a jury for. It is
supposed to reflect the sense of the community.''

Issue of Lay Juries

Neither Mr. Snively nor Mr. Carr is totally satisfied with the verdict. But
they, as well as Judge Goldenhersh, expressed confidence in the ability of
ordinary citizens to act as jurors in such a technically complex case.

''I think it is excellent testimony to the wisdom of the jury system as the
founding fathers put it into our Constitution and of the continued vitality of
the jury system in a society that is becoming so complex and so technical,''
Judge Goldenhersh said in an interview.

Professor Lempert said some cases might be too complex for either judges or
juries to handle. But, he added, ''There is no reason to believe the jury did a
worse job than a judge would have done.''

Does the length of the trial indicate that something was wrong with the system?
Some legal experts said it probably meant that the lawyers wasted a lot of time
and that the judge did not manage the case as wisely as he could have. Judge
Goldenhersh, in a ruling 18 months ago, said the trial could have been over in a
year but for ''a persistent pattern of delaying tactics by Monsanto.'' Legal
experts said one alternative used in some cases was to try a few ''bellwether''
claims. Then, based on their outcome, the parties could settle the remaining
claims.

Another alternative might have been for the judge to appoint a special master to
resolve some of the more technical issues before the case was submitted to the
jurors. A third might have been to limit the time that each side had to present
its case.

Appeals in the case could take years. Will Monsanto consider settling out of
court? Mr. Snively said no.

''Monsanto does not settle claims which are utterly without merit,'' he said.

Mr. Carr, the plaintiffs' attorney, calls this ''a war of attrition.''

''I've never been brilliant, but I've always been tenacious,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HIGH COURT FACES ALCOHOLISM ISSUE

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1664 words


Nearly 200 years after a Philadelphia physician first advanced the theory of
alcoholism as a disease rather than merely a character weakness, the issue may
be faced squarely by the Supreme Court.

The Court has agreed to hear a challenge against the Veterans Administration for
excluding alcoholism, which it considers the result of ''willful misconduct,''
from the illnesses and disabilities that allow veterans more time to claim
education benefits.

The case could portend serious consequences for Government agencies, employers,
insurance companies, alcoholism-care providers and the estimated one million
alcoholics expected to seek treatment in the next year.

''Over the last two decades, the disease concept of alcoholism has become the
premise for social policy,'' said Ronald Roizen, a scientist at the Medical
Research Institute of San Francisco. ''But the legal basis has never been
clear.''

The case, to be argued Dec. 7, has enlivened debate about the view that
alcoholism is a disease. Proponents point to research implicating genetic
factors in drinking problems, while critics are becoming increasingly vocal.

''The entire notion of alcoholism as a disease is at stake here,'' said Michael
Ford, executive director of the National Association of Addiction Treatment
Providers. ''It's taken years for the public to come to understand alcoholism as
a disease. And here's the Federal Government saying it's just a temper
tantrum.''

While about 87 percent of Americans now view alcoholism as a disease, according
to a Gallup Poll last April, treatment based on that concept is relatively new.
Through the 1940's, alcoholics were often jailed as criminals, ostracized as
irresponsible or committed to sanitariums as psychological deviants. And it was
not until 1956 that the American Medical Association concurred in the disease
concept.

Treatment today overwhelmingly rests on the notion that alcoholism is a disease
of unknown origin, without a cure, and that the only way to arrest its
development is abstinence.

In recent years, however, a growing minority of alcoholism experts contend that
the pendulum has swung too far.

'Moral Responsibility'

They contend that alcoholism is a behavioral, not a medical, problem. They
reject the idea that genetics play a primary role and contend that the disease
concept ''blurs the issue of moral responsibility.''

''People are using alcoholism as an excuse for wife abuse, vehicular homicide,
embezzlement, every crime you can think of,'' said Stanton Peele, a New Jersey
psychologist whose book, ''The Meaning of Addiction,'' disputes the notion of
alcoholism as a disease.

''The more and more we allow alcoholism to be used as an excuse for misbehavior,
the more misbehavior we get,'' he said. ''Ten years from now, we'll have spent
another $10 billion in treatment and found out we've got more alcoholics than we
had before. In five or ten years, there's going to be a rush back to a
value-oriented consideration of alcoholism. The best way to treat alcoholism is
not to treat it as a disease, but to concentrate on values.''

Treatment of alcoholics, who Mr. Peele contends are ''deficient in certain
values,'' should stress that drinking is a ''moral choice,'' not a disease.
These experts argue that alcoholism treatment would achieve better results as
part of psychological therapy.

Broader Problems Seen

Alcoholism is ''just the tip of the iceberg'' of broader psychological problems,
contends Herbert Fingarette, a professor of philosophy at the University of
California at Santa Barbara and an author of the forthcoming book, ''The Myth of
Alcoholism as a Disease.''

The case before the Supreme Court, which joins two separate lawsuits filed in
1984, was brought by veterans who contend that alcoholism, as a disabling
illness, prevented them from taking advantage of education benefits in the 10
years after their military discharge. In denying them an extension of benefits,
they contend, the Veterans Administration violated the Federal Rehabilitation
Act of 1973, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of handicaps. The law
was amended in 1978 to include alcoholism.

Extensions can be granted to veterans hindered by physical or mental problems
''not the result of their own willful misconduct.'' The V.A. accepts ''secondary
alcoholism,'' in which drinking is a symptom of an underlying psychiatric
problem, as an involuntary illness eligible for extension of benefits, but not
the more common ''primary alcoholism,'' in which drinking itself as the root
disorder.

Plaintiffs in Two Cases

The plaintiffs, Eugene Traynor, a 46-year-old New Yorker who works as a
supervisor in a photography laboratory, and James P. McKelvey, 42, an alcoholism
counselor who lives in Washington, received honorable discharges from the Army
in the late 1960's. Both men said they had abstained from drinking alcohol since
the early 1970's, when they were hospitalized and treated for alcoholism.

Asserting that alcoholism is a dysfunction beyond the control of the individual,
the plaintiffs were joined in friend-of-the-court briefs by the American Medical
Association, the Vietnam Veterans of America and the National Association of
Addiction Treatment Providers. These groups are hoping the Court, for the first
time, will explicitly define alcoholism as a disease.

But it is possible that the Court could decide the case on other matters.
Indeed, in 1985 the Federal courts, in siding with Mr. Traynor and Mr. McKelvey,
held the V.A. policy discriminatory, but did not address the disease issue.

But last year the United States Court of Appeals in New York reversed the
Traynor decision on the ground that benefits policies are exempt from judicial
review. In the McKelvey case, the Court of Appeals in Washington agreed to
review the policy but upheld the V.A. policy on the ground that medical experts
were divided over the question of alcoholism as a disease.

The Washington appellate panel included Antonin Scalia, now a Supreme Court
Justice. Justice Scalia has recused himself from the case.

Disease Issue Raised in 1968

The question of whether alcoholism is a disease initially reached the Supreme
Court in 1968, in a challenge to a Texas law against public drunkenness. In that
case, Powell v. Texas, the Court rejected the argument that public drunkenness
should not be considered criminal on the ground that it is alcoholism sickness.
In its decision, the Court noted that there were differences of opinion among
medical authorities on whether alcoholism is a disease.

In the case now before the Court, the Government has argued that alcoholism,
unlike most orthodox diseases, results from years of behavior chosen freely.

''Even those medical authorities who label alcoholism a 'disease' concede that
it is a disease that can and does involve significant elements of volition,''
the Government brief argues.

Critics of the Government's position dispute that alcoholism is purely a matter
of free will. And they note that other diseases, such as heart problems, can
result from freely chosen behavior, such as diet and smoking.

Proponents of Disease Concept

They also note that scientific findings in recent years make a strong case for
the theory that alcoholism can be inherited. In several studies of twins adopted
at birth, for example, the sons of alcoholic fathers were found to be four times
as likely as others to develop alcoholism themselves, despite being reared in a
home with non-alcoholics.

A New York researcher, Henri Begleiter, has found abnormalities in brain wave
patterns among sons of alcoholics identical to abnormalities found in their
fathers. The sons, some of them as young as 7 years old, had never consumed
alcohol.

''There are all kinds of biological abnormalities in alcoholics and their
offspring which point to the existence of one thing: a bona fide disease,'' said
Mr. Begleiter, a professor of psychiatry at State University of New York's
Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn. ''We're not saying environment doesn't
play some role. And not all alcoholism is the same, just as there are different
kinds of diabetes and hypertensions.''

Providers of alcoholism treatment fear that a victory by the Veterans
Administration would encourage insurers to curtail coverage. In addition, they
worry that employee assistance programs, which in recent years have provided
treatment for hundreds of thousands of alcoholic workers who once might simply
have been dismissed, could similarly face retrenchment.

Outlook on Court Decision

Perhaps most important, they warn, a ruling that alcoholism is not a disease
could thwart society's compassion toward the suffering of alcoholics.

But critics of the disease concept of alcoholism argue that treatment programs,
now a billion-dollar-a-year industry, have been largely unsuccessful. Moreover,
they contend that a ruling against the Veterans Administration would result in
enormous extra cost and complication for the Government. And they believe that
employers have already been unduly stripped of options in dealing with workers
who drink inappropriately.

They contend that dealing with alcoholism as just another disease opens a
Pandora's box of legal difficulties. In a case now pending before an Appeals
Court in Philadelphia, a veteran has filed suit to collect disability payments
because his alcoholism makes it impossible for him to work.

''Where does it all end?'' asked Professor Fingarette.

The continuing dispute over the causes of alcoholism, both sides agree, reflects
the frustrations in grappling with the problems of an estimated 10 million
alcoholics in the United States. And it perhaps illustrates society's ambivalent
attitude toward its drinking problem.

''As a society,'' said Harold A. Swift, president of the Hazelden alcoholism
treatment center in Minnesota, ''we still don't know whether to laugh or to cry
when we see someone who is drunk.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Eugene Traynor (NYT/Jim Wilson) (Page 34)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New York to Open Shelter for Homeless Veterans

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 36, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 903 words


For years, Michael Gold, a Vietnam-era veteran, had watched the growing number
of homeless men in New York City and wondered how many were former comrades in
arms who ''just lost their ability to take hold.''

''You talk to these people,'' he said, ''and you realize the same thing could
have happened to you, given different circumstances. Some of these guys just got
caught in a bad set of circumstances. They lost their job, and lost their
families.''

His sentiment, shared by officials of diverse veterans' groups, from the
American Legion to the Vietnam Veterans of America, led to a four-year campaign
on behalf of homeless veterans - and the establishment of the first city shelter
for homeless veterans.

City officials say the new 275-bed shelter, scheduled to open tomorrow in a
freshly renovated factory building at 21-10 Borden Avenue in Long Island City,
Queens, is probably the only emergency shelter in the country for homeless
veterans.

Mobilizing Volunteers

The shelter, to be run by the Salvation Army under contract to the city, will
provide, for the most part, the same beds, meals, social work help and medical
care available in other city shelters, with additional counseling on veterans'
benefits.

But planners express hope that by bringing homeless veterans together, they will
mobilize a significant volunteer effort from the veterans' community, and at the
same time boost the self-esteem of veterans who have all but lost their identity
in a vast homeless system.

''We are trying to create a concept of family,'' said Lieut. Col. Paul Kelly,
the Salvation Army's divisional commander for greater New York. ''The more we
have a family structure the fewer disciplinary problems. They will begin to look
out for each other. They will automatically have a support group.''

Lieut. Col. Bernard Wray, an official of the Manhattan chapter of the Reserve
Officers Association who had pressed for the shelter said, ''What we really want
to do is bring these people back to the community.''

'Help the Guys'

''Those of us who have served together know that some of us have done very well
and others of us have done badly,'' he added. ''It is the duty of the guys who
have done well to help the guys who have done badly.''

Veterans make up between a quarter and a third of the homeless population,
according to a number of studies of the problem. Between a third and half of
this group is said to have served during the Vietnam War era.

William Grinker, the city's Human Resources Administrator, estimated that of
10,000 homeless men in the city's shelter system, 2,500 to 3,000 are veterans,
with additional numbers living on the streets. He said as many as 1,500 may be
Vietnam-era veterans.

When the city first announced plans to open a shelter with more than 400 beds at
the site, the surrounding community protested at a series of Board of Estimate
hearings and filed a lawsuit that caused a yearlong delay. But once the shelter
was approved, many of these opponents decided to support using the site for
veterans.

Councilman Walter L. McCaffrey, a Queens Democrat who opposed the original
shelter plan but supports the veterans' shelter, said his constituents,
including many veterans of Vietnam, World War II and the Korean War, could
identify with homeless veterans and recognize the need for a special shelter.

Mr. McCaffrey said Woodside, Queens, a few blocks away, had the largest
concentration of Vietnam combat deaths from any single zip code -27. ''This was
something the people of Woodside could understand,'' he said.

Mr. Gold, a board member of the Brooklyn-Staten Island chapter of Vietnam
Veterans of America, recalled that veterans' groups had been lobbying the Mayor,
the Human Resources Administration, and the City Council on behalf of large
numbers of veterans in the system for years, with little success.

Veterans' groups got a benefit when Councilman Abraham G. Gerges, the chairman
of the select committee for the homeless, set up a symposium on homeless
veterans' problems earlier this year and more than 500 people showed up. A
volunteer task force of 50 has been meeting regularly on the problem since.

The support impressed Mr. Grinker, who was setting up special shelters for
employed people, young people and the mentally impaired, and was uncertain that
veterans should be segregated.

''One of the things that makes it very different is that you have support of
veterans' organizations in the community who have said they are going to work
with this population and try to provide them with the kinds of services,
transportation and jobs that really can make a difference.''

Colonel Kelly said the shelter staff is not really sure who will show up at the
shelter, although it expects to see some veterans suffering from post traumatic
stress disorder, caused by military service or combat duty. ''We understand,''
he said, ''there will be some folks that are experiencing flashbacks from war
days.''

The shelter will be open to all homeless veterans, on a first-come, first-served
basis, with the first 50 beds to open Monday. If necessary, Mr. Grinker said the
shelter can be expanded from 275 beds to more than 400.

A spokesman for the Veterans Administration in New York, Everett Chasen, said
his agency supported the city's efforts to help veterans. He said the agency
already sends benefit counselors to existing city shelters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dormitory in new 275-bed emergency shelter for homeless
veterans (NYT/Jim Wilson)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Panel Rejects Female Figure For U.S. Vietnam Memorial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 30, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 423 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 24


The Commission on Fine Arts has rejected a plan to add a statue of a woman to
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in honor of nurses and other women who served in
that war.

The 4-to-1 vote Thursday apparently blocks the drive for the new statue at the
memorial, unless Congress overrules the panel with special legislation, said J.
Carter Brown, chairman of the Federal commission.

Commission approval is required by law before monuments and memorials may be
built on Federal park grounds in Washington, Mr. Brown said.

The Vietnam Women's Memorial Project has been raising money and pushing plans to
add a statue of a woman in military uniform to the memorial, and had gained the
backing of Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel.

Durenberger Urged Statue

Senator Dave Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota, urged the panel to permit the
additional statue, saying, ''The time has come, in the opinion of many of us, to
complete the Vietnam Memorial with a sculpture that represents the women's
experience in the Vietnam War.''

An estimated 10,000 women served in Vietnam during the war, from 1964 to 1975,
said Donna-Marie Boulay, a former Army nurse from Minneapolis, who has directed
the monument project. Most were nurses.

Mr. Brown, who is director of the National Gallery of Art, said the commission
members felt the Vietnam Veterans Memorial is complete as it is. He said
allowing the statue of a woman would open the door to others seeking added
representation for their ethnic group or military specialty. He said permitting
the added statue ''would stand for the perpetual incompleteness of the
memorial.''

Opposition to Proposal

Among those opposing the new statue was Maya Lin, the artist who designed the
stark, black V-shaped wall on which are the names of all Americans who died in
the war, including eight women.

Also opposed to it was Frederick Hart, sculptor of the statue of three male
soldiers that stands in trees across the open lawn from the wall. Mr. Hart is a
member of the commission but abstained from voting.

His statue of three soldiers was added to the design for the memorial in a
political compromise that permitted construction of the memorial to proceed and
ended a bitter fight over the plans for the memorial.

Congress passed legislation last year authorizing establishment of a separate
memorial on Federal land in Washington honoring women who have served in the
armed forces. Mr. Brown said that ''seemed the opportunity to do it right from
scratch and not do it as an afterthought.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, OCTOBER 25, 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 893 words




INTERNATIONAL    3-19

A missile accord could be concluded between the United States and the Soviet
Union, banning medium- and shorter-range missiles, without a summit meeting
between the two countries' leaders, Secretary of State George P. Shultz said.
    Page 1



A daylong series of disappointments last week forged a hard lesson in the
precarious nature of the Soviet-American relationship and the bold
unpredictability of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader.    1

A revised Iran-contra draft report prepared by the joint Congressional committee
that investigated the affair is more critical of President Reagan than earlier
versions, according to Congressional officials.    1

China's Communist Party will meet for the first time in five years to grapple
with an array of problems, including who will lead China, where the country will
go and how.    12

Brazil's evangelical movement is changing the country's religious profile, and
its growth and energy have stunned the powerful Roman Catholic hierarchy.
Opponents attribute the impact to missionaries and financing from the United
States.    16

Another mission for submarines has been added by the United States Navy.
Submarines can now fire cruise missiles with high-explosive, non-nuclear
warheads at military targets ashore, Pentagon officials said.    9

A shadowy militancy is growing in Sri Lanka's once-peaceful south, thriving on a
resurgent ethnic nationalism among the country's Sinhalese majority, while
bitter fighting rages in the country's north.    14

South Korean rally attacked    3
Grenada since U.S. invasion    3
Budapest leaders look for support    11
Furor in Calcutta over dress code    15
Pollution problems confront Eastern bloc leaders    18

NATIONAL    20-34, 42-44

A proposal to freeze spending on domestic and military programs, with the
exception of Social Security, is being given serious consideration by White
House aides as they prepare for budget negotiations with Congressional leaders.
    1

The largest options clearinghouse in the country needed a major infusion of
capital last week to meet its regulatory obligations. The move averted a further
financial strain that could have affected major markets.    24

Brokerages stayed open yesterday for an onslaught of calls and visits from
panicked investors, following the most wrenching week in the stock market's
history. But the anticipated flood never came.    24

The teamsters' union was readmitted to the A.F.L.-C.I.O. on a unanimous vote by
the federation's executive council. Reaffiliation may help the union, expelled
30 years ago in an ethics dispute, in its struggle against a Federal takeover.
    1

Jack F. Kemp addressed the issues on a campaign swing through his home state of
New York. But there was little indication that being the most specific
Republican Presidential candidate in the race was really helping Mr. Kemp.    28


Whether alcoholism is a disease rather than a character defect will be faced by
the Supreme Court, which has agreed to hear a challenge against the Veterans
Administration on the issue.    1

Farmers in central California are locked with business people and civic leaders
in a divisive debate over the future of the lush region that borders a
600-square-mile site proposed for an immense atom smasher.    20

Black and Hispanic students lag behind white students in reading, writing and
mathematics tests, a study of nearly 450 public high schools in metropolitan Los
Angeles has found, and the gap has grown in the last six years.    22

The Pentagon plans civilian layoffs    20

17-week strike ends at NBC    21

Labor sorting out role in 1988 Presidential race    27

Plan for woman's figure at Vietnam Memorial is rejected    30

New steps against AIDS urged    32

REGIONAL    34-39, 46-50



Sweeping welfare changes in New Jersey are planned after the state obtained a
number of Federal waivers that will allow it to implement requirements such as
job training and full-time employment for welfare recipients.    1

A police officer shot and killed a man who reached for a toy gun in a shoulder
holster during an undercover drug raid on a peep show theater near Times Square.
The toy resembled a .45-caliber automatic pistol, a police spokesman said.    35


Revising New York City's charter is the ''single most important political
issue'' for the city's minority groups, participants at a forum said.    36

In an effort to preserve vistas along the Hudson Valley, as well as historic
sites and rural quality of life, the Rockefeller familiy is expanding its
activities, promoting ''quality'' tourism as a ''clean'' industry.    35

A city shelter for homeless veterans, the first of its kind, is scheduled to
open tomorrow in Queens. Planners hope to mobilize a significant volunteer
effort from the veterans' community and lift the self-esteem of homeless
veterans.    36

Fitness class helps fight truancy    34
Koch uses baked goods to make a point    37
Kasparov victim of his style    38
U.S. close to victory in bridge    38

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Killing and School Plan Stir Tensions in Lowell

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 43, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

DATELINE: LOWELL, Mass., Oct. 21


Rancor and hostility toward this city's newest group of immigrants has surfaced
amid an angry debate over a school desegregation plan.

The rising tensions have a familiar ring here in the Boston area, where school
busing accompanied by ethnic clashes have been a fact of life for more than a
decade.

But they have bitterly ironic overtones in Lowell, a city whose most prominent
citizen and economic savior, the computer entrepreneur An Wang, is an immigrant
from Asia. The targets of the recent outbreak of ethnic tension are also Asians.


Businesses and Buddhist Temple

Refugees from Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam now make up about 15 percent of
Lowell's 100,000 residents. Lured by the region's flourishing high-technology
industries, most of the immigrants arrived in the last four years, establishing
businesses and a Buddhist temple, thronging the city's tiny Acre section and
becoming increasingly visible to an increasingly perplexed community.

''You can't go to a self-service gas station without the cashier being an
Asian,'' said Larry Flynn, coordinator of a program, Gateway Cities, that helps
immigrants.

Mr. Flynn and several city officials said that hostility toward the Cambodians,
by far the largest immigrant group, has risen in Lowell, in part because of
their visibility and in part because of customs many natives find strange or
suspicious. Many of the immigrants live communally in houses packed with several
generations of extended family. Few speak English well. And some drive luxurious
cars, prompting rumors of secret Government handouts. In fact, Mr. Flynn said,
the cars are purchased with the combined savings of several families.

Cambodian Boy Killed

''Cambodian families pool their money so they can buy one house and one car to
share,'' Mr. Flynn said, ''The bigots who have taken over are people who work
lousy jobs, rent small apartments, and see Cambodians driving by in nice cars.''

Tensions surfaced most dramatically in September, when a 13-year-old Cambodian
boy drowned after he was pushed into the Pawtucket Canal by a white boy. The
killing sent shock waves through the Cambodian enclave and also focused
attention on the desegregation plan because the fight developed after the boys
had to wait for a tardy school bus.

The Cambodian boy, Vandy Phorng, whose family of 10 fled Southeast Asia four
years ago, went fishing with his brother, Vanthy, and some friends after their
school bus did not arrive. According to accounts by Vanthy and the police, an
11-year-old who was also not picked up for school made comments about Vandy's
ethnic background, hit him in the face, and pushed him in the water, where
strong currents impeded his swimming. Vanthy, who is 8, found a passing student,
who pulled the boy from the water, but Vandy died the next day. The 11-year-old
faces up to 10 years in the custody of the state's juvenile justice system.

Referendum on Busing

The busing plan was ordered by the state last year when officials discovered
that schools in the Acre section were both segregated and overcrowded, with
classes of Cambodian students held in billiard rooms at the Lowell Y.M.C.A. The
plan, which requires that 700 of Lowell's 13,000 schoolchildren be bused to
schools outside their neighborhoods, was adopted by a 4-to-3 vote of the Lowell
School Committee after the state threatened to cut off state aid.

At first, the plan faltered because of a shortage of bus drivers. Fights broke
out among students left standing at bus stops, and local election campaigns were
transformed into a referendum on the busing plan.

In a primary election for the School Committee last month, candidates in whose
vehement opposition to busing some residents see racial undertones placed first
and second. The first-place winner, George Kouloheras, has has publically
criticized city officials for making the city too attractive to Cambodians.

Most Candidates Favor Repeal

''He is becoming a spokesman for bigotry,'' Mr. Flynn said, Mr. Kouloheras
declined to be interviewed.

At a recent debate, 15 of 17 candidates for the City Council called for the
repeal of the plan, even though the state's Education Commissioner, Harold
Raynolds, vowed that, in the event of a repeal, he would have the school
committee sued.

''It's ironic that there is this undercurrent of racial hostility in Lowell,''
said Anita Dunn, an aide to Congressman Chester Atkins, who represents the city.
Referring to Mr. Wang, a Harvard-trained computer scientist who moved his
computer company's executive offices to Lowell in 1978, she added, ''So much of
Lowell's economic revitalization has been due to Asian immigrants.''

The Cambodian community is a silent voice in the desegregation debate. Many have
arrived in Lowell too recently, or speak too little English, to understand the
school issue, and most are simply grateful that their children are enrolled.

'They Welcome Everyone'

But some parents have asserted themselves. According to Teresa Theobald,
director of the Cambodian Mutual Assistance Association of Lowell, a group of
parents representing the Cambodian, Laotian, Vietnamese and Hispanic communities
attended a School Committee meeting last spring, but when they asked permission
to have the proceedings translated, some committee members walked out. Another
group of parents filed a lawsuit, now pending in Federal court, faulting
Lowell's bilingual education program and racially isolated classrooms.

But for the most part, Southeast Asians in Lowell say they do not perceive the
city as a hostile place. Narin Sao, who emigrated from Cambodia in 1984 and now
works as a job counselor at the Office of Employment and Training here, called
Lowell a ''homeland'' for Cambodians. He praised the city's leaders, saying,
''They really care about refugees - they welcome everyone.''

One of Mr. Sao's colleagues, Phomma Sayasane, who came here from Laos, said
prejudice in Lowell was a ''very small problem.'' In fact, among the thousand
jobs in the area that Mr. Sao and Mr. Sayasane are trying to find workers to
fill, some employers have specifically requested Southeast Asian employees
because of their reputation for hard work.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mayor Robert Kennedy of Lowell, Mass., at Pine Street School
(The New York Times/Rick Friedman); map indicating Lowell, Mass. (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM;
A Real Principal Grades the Reel 'Principal'

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN; Samuel G. Freedman is former New York Times
reporter.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1629 words


EARLY LAST MONTH, AS ONE million pupils were returning to New York City's public
schools, a rather eye-catching advertisement turned up on subway platforms and
across full pages in newspapers. It showed two men standing inside a shattered
window, one of them wearing a football jersey and black weight-lifting gloves,
the other brandishing a baseball bat. ''At a high school where students major in
arson, extortion and assault,'' the text beneath the picture read, ''the new
principal and the head of security just might be crazy enough to turn things
around.''

This, then, was the promotional campaign announcing Christopher Cain's movie,
''The Principal,'' a cinematic event for which I harbored an unlikely
anticipation. Just as the film opened, I was starting to spend a year at a
public high school in a poor neighborhood, Seward Park High School on
Manhattan's Lower East Side, for the purpose of writing a book. Since I put a
great deal of stock in popular culture as a measure of the American mind-set, I
was anxious to see a film that apparently reflected the truism that city schools
are zoos in which the animals have overthrown their keepers.

But who wants to eat popcorn alone? So I invited Seward Park's principal, Dr.
Noel Kriftcher, to accompany me to ''The Principal'' and to provide expert
annotation. Seward Park, after all, is a severely overcrowded school whose
student body is about 95 percent nonwhite. It is not a specialty school or a
''magnet'' school, using admission tests to weed out the purported rabble; it is
an old-style neighborhood school, expected to answer the door for whoever
knocks. Before coming to Seward in 1980, Dr. Kriftcher had been a teacher and
administrator at public schools in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and the St. Albans,
South Jamaica and Springfield Gardens sections of Queens, not exactly the most
precious precincts of Gotham. Somehow, he had survived without the benefit of a
Louisville Slugger.

By the time Dr. Kriftcher and I took our little field trip last week, my
curiosity had been further excited. ''The Principal'' was a popular hit, playing
in New York theaters from Harlem to Greenwich Village, and doing so much
business nationally that it rated as one of the top five grossing films for
several weeks running. Whatever ''The Principal'' was selling, people were
buying. And the consumers, presumably, were not solely people in search of a
brass-knuckles-and-tire-chains divertissement.

When I quoted some of the box-office figures to Dr. Kriftcher, he was reminded
of an incident last July when he had been called for jury duty. In the course of
questioning, an assistant district attorney learned of his profession. She then
asked him if his school was safe. ''What do you mean by safe?'' he replied.
''Well,'' she said, ''are there fights?'' ''Suppose you had 4,000 people in this
courtroom,'' he told her, giving the approximate population of Seward Park,
''and every 40 minutes they had to get up and move to another courtroom within
four minutes. And suppose you had to do it five days a week for 10 months a
year. Do you think there'd be an altercation?''

But back to the movie. ''The Principal'' does open with a sense of folly - a B
movie winking at the audience in acknowledgment of its own inanity. Rick Latimer
(Jim Belushi), a teacher at an affluent, white, suburban high school, has just
been divorced by his wife and is tossing back shots in a bar. His ex appears
with her new beau, who happens to have been her lawyer, and Latimer snaps,
grabbing a baseball bat from behind the bar and bashing a few new orifices into
the boyfriend's sports car. Latimer's punishment is not only losing his teaching
job but being assigned as principal of the fictive Brandel High School.

At that very early juncture, the movie ceases winking and assumes a grave
countenance. In documentary-style shots, we see Latimer riding past the tattered
houses and listless black men of the ghetto in Oakland, Calif., where the film
was shot. He arrives at Brandel, a jaundice-colored hulk tattooed with graffiti,
just in time to break up a gang fight. When he tries to expel the brawlers, the
assistant principal informs him, ''Most of the students have already been
expelled from somewhere else. Permanently.''

But Latimer's a gung-ho sort. To rouse his narcoleptic faculty, he heaves an
ashtray against the wall of their lounge. He deputizes some gym teachers as
extra security guards. He faces off against the dread gang leader, a black named
Victor Duncan. He wades into a girls' lavatory that is as thick as a steam room
with marijuana smoke to catch a drug dealer. When Latimer later hears that the
dealer's planning to drop out of school, he goes to her threadbare apartment to
offer her tutoring in his office at 6 A.M. the next day. She arrives, all right
- not for help but to set up Latimer for a brutal beating by Duncan's gang. At
another point, the only idealistic teacher at Brandel (Rae Dawn Chong) is jumped
by a would-be rapist. Although Latimer roars his motorcycle through the
corridors to her rescue, she decides to leave Brandel for a job at New England
boarding school.

The message of such moments is clear: Not only don't students want interest and
caring from educators, they will interpret them as weakness and take advantage.
That premise sets the tone for the rest of ''The Principal,'' separating it from
predecessors such as ''The Blackboard Jungle'' or ''Up the Down Staircase,''
which mixed melodrama with some recognition of redemption, a possibility.
Without ruining the fun for future viewers, I can tell you that ''The
Principal'' climaxes with a confrontation between Duncan, armed with a gun, a
knife and two henchmen, and Latimer, equipped only with his trusty bat. ''It's
an urban 'High Noon,' '' Dr. Kriftcher whispered to me as the men joined in
combat. ''With Rae Dawn Chong as Grace Kelly.''

He pursued the ''High Noon'' metaphor as we shared dinner after the show. ''It's
a cowboy movie without horses,'' he said, chuckling. ''The good guy rides a
motorcycle instead of a horse, and he wears a black helmet instead of a white
hat.'' I agreed but saw less humor in the point. Just as John Ford's classic
westerns represented a certain widely held view of American character and
American community, didn't ''The Principal,'' in its clunkier way, do the same
for the routine, despairing view of American public education?

''If it were a documentary, it would bother me,'' Dr. Kriftcher said, ''but it's
a movie. I don't know that it's any more true to education than 'Miami Vice' is
true to the detective profession.'' As Dr. Kriftcher saw it, there was so much
blatant exaggeration in ''The Principal'' that no intelligent person would take
it seriously. Every teacher but Ms. Chong's character is a clock puncher. Every
student but one semiliterate Hispanic, whom Ms. Chong teaches to read, appears
to be either a member or an admirer of Brandel's warring gangs. At Seward Park,
in contrast, 90 percent of last year's graduates went on to higher education,
carrying off $100,000 worth of scholarships. Where, Dr. Kriftcher wondered, was
any indication of achievement in ''The Principal''? Didn't anybody at Brandel
deserve an award? Even for perfect attendance?

''Is that a real school?'' he went on, asking the question the movie begs. ''Or
is that a stereotyped idea of what a city school is like? It's harder to talk
about the real dimensions of the issue, the real scope of the problem, when you
can have the principal carrying a baseball bat. It's a television commercial
mentality. I would never walk around with a baseball bat. If you continually
look for physical confrontations, you give up a certain edge of respect. And
eventually someone will knock you on your keister.''

Did that mean that Dr. Kriftcher had suffered such showdowns himself? No. Had he
known any colleagues who had been attacked by students? Rarely, if ever. Still,
I thought of the anecdote he told about the jury selection. And the morning
after seeing ''The Principal,'' New York newspapers carried the report of a
Brooklyn teacher being robbed in her own classroom.

Wasn't that exactly the danger of a movie like ''The Principal,'' I asked. By
building on enough bits of reality - schools that are unsafe, teachers who are
disaffected, teen-agers who are criminal - didn't it deftly present the abnormal
as the normal, the exception as the rule? Wasn't it mirroring back to people,
and so confirming, the attitudes they brought to the movie?

Dr. Kriftcher wasn't so sure. He answered by way of recounting the evening a
friend showed him a video cassette of ''Missing in Action,'' the film in which
Chuck Norris returns to Vietnam to rescue American soldiers who were still being
held as prisoners, well into the 1980's. ''That movie didn't change my ideas
about the Vietnam war any more than 'The Principal' will change anyone's ideas
of urban schools,'' he said. ''We've had the television shows - 'Welcome Back,
Kotter,' 'The Bronx Zoo.' We've had movies back to 'The Blackboard Jungle.' It's
tiresome to watch after a while. What would be unfortunate is that people who
grow up in unitary, or suburban, schools look at this movie as the way it is.''

I felt certain they would, because they probably already did. Dr. Kriftcher
remains unconvinced. His skepticism reminded me of something he had said
immediately after the movie - that it was in classical terms a comedy, because
the hero survived. His observation proved two things to me. One, he knew his
Aristotle. And two, he could divine the slenderest thread of optimism amid a
tapestry of pessimism which, I suppose, is the ability one needs above all
others to persevere in the maligned world of public education.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of a scene from ''The Principal'' with James Belushi; Dr. Noel
Kriftcher (NYT/ Neal Boenzi)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THOSE FRACTIOUS REPUBLICANS

BYLINE: By Hedrick Smith; Hedrick Smith is the Washington correspondent of The
New York Times Magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3783 words


CHEERS ECHOED through Iowa State University's Hilton Coliseum to the brassy
theme song from ''Rocky.'' A human wall in white T-shirts (''Robertson for
President'') was chanting ''Go for it Pat.'' The candidate, the Rev. Marion G.
(Pat) Robertson, television evangelist turned politician, smiled warmly at the
emotional pandemonium he had touched off. And then he plunged into the crowd,
hugging his followers.

Their passion evoked underdogs from elections past - fervent youth flocking to
Senator Eugene McCarthy's protest over the Vietnam War in 1968; angry Dixie
Democrats rallying to Gov. George Wallace of Alabama and stalking away from
Hubert Humphrey, the 1968 Democratic nominee; or Barry Goldwater's conservative
army seizing the Republican Party in 1964.

Already in the 1988 race, the Robertson phenomenon has jolted Republican Party
regulars with organizational victories in Michigan, South Carolina and Iowa.
Even if Robertson lacks enough support to win the nomination, his movement is
deepening divisions in Republican ranks - divisions that threaten to splinter
the Reagan coalition, the key to Republican power since 1981.

For Ronald Reagan has held together an amalgam of incongruous factions -
well-heeled Republican businessmen and disaffected redneck southern Democrats,
high-tech suburban yuppies and ethnic blue-collar workers, ideological
free-enterprisers (the market right) and religious fundamentalists (the moral
right), buoyant optimists high on ''morning again in America'' and cynics fed up
with Washington. What brought them together was anger at high inflation and the
humiliation of America by Iran, resentment against big government and high
taxes, and frustration with Jimmy Carter.

Reagan's successes - at cutting taxes, boosting defense spending, presiding over
lower inflation and sustained economic growth - have eased the angers that glued
his coalition together. Moreover, the President's problems with the Iran-Contra
scandal, waste in the Pentagon and soaring deficits have created new frictions
within his coalition. Since 1984, Republican factions have clashed in Congress -
over defense, the deficit, taxes, abortion, Social Security and handling Moscow.
Even the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork was a painful source
of finger-pointing among Republicans.

With his personal appeal and extraordinary skill at juggling conflicting
interests, the President has won unusual loyalty from his public constituencies.
But his personal chemistry cannot be handed on, and the battle to succeed him is
tearing the fabric of his coalition.

''The Reagan coalition is different groups moving in different directions with
tremendous potential for divisiveness,'' observes Norman J. Ornstein, a
political scientist at the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy
Research, a conservative think tank in Washington. ''Reagan could simultaneously
appeal to country-club Republicans by pushing free-market economics and keep the
moral right happy with rhetoric on school prayer, abortion, bus-ing, even though
he did not actually get that much done for them. The next guy coming along has
an awesome problem. He is going to have great trouble turning the Reagan
coalition into a Republican coalition.''

ALL REPUBLICAN candidates label themselves conservatives these days, but the
term hides a world of differences. The basic cleavage in the Republican Party is
between the orthodox, establishment wing and the ideological wing; between the
mainstream and the New Right - mainstream meaning affluent executives and
suburban yuppies plus traditional ''Main Street'' Republicans from Middle
America, and the New Right meaning the ardent tax-cutting economic right, the
religious right, and the neo-conservative, anti-Communist right.

Of the six Presidential contenders, Vice President Bush, Robert Dole, the Senate
minority leader, and former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. come from
the establishment wing. Robertson, Representative Jack F. Kemp of Buffalo and
Pete du Pont, former Governor of Delaware, champion the ideological wing.

The Republican candidates fall into two camps over Reagan's plans to sign an
agreement with Moscow to eliminate medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe. Bush
applauds it, Dole calls it ''a step in the right direction,'' but Robertson,
Kemp, du Pont and Haig attack it as a bad deal that leaves Europe inferior to
Soviet conventional forces. On the deficit, Dole has backed a package that
allows for some tax increases and cuts in defense spending; Kemp and du Pont
adamantly oppose tax increases. But more than issues mark the candidates and
their camps apart. Values, agendas, philosophies of life, social backgrounds,
all divide them.

Rarely have the polar opposites in style and substance been thrown into bolder
relief than in back-to-back speeches by Pat Robertson and George Bush in
mid-September at Iowa State University. Robertson, confident and charismatic,
set off a prairie fire with his ringing, rolling, messianic cadences, calling
for ''a crusade to restore the greatness of America through moral strength.''

In his inspirational tenor, the preacher proclaimed the yearnings of his
grass-roots legions: ''They tell me in their view Communism is tyranny, and they
want for us to establish as the long-range goal of the United States of America
the ultimate downfall of Communist tyranny throughout the world, in every
nation, including the Soviet Union. . . .

''And just as these people are saying we can never allow private choice to
become the rationale for killing the elderly and the infirm, we can no longer
permit pro-choice to be the rationale for the slaughter of 1 1/2 million unborn
babies every year. . . . .''

His coda was a paean of patriotism, appealing to that portion of the Reagan
coalition for whom pride in country is paramount.

''If we're willing to work, if we're willing to sacrifice, if we're willing to
dream,'' Robertson promised, ''then when we leave the legacy to our children and
grand-children, we can say to them, that when the torch of freedom was passed to
us, we kept it burning bright, and we proudly present to you the greatest nation
on the face of the earth, the United States of America, one nation under God.''

Vice President Bush claimed a very different piece of Reagan - the personal link
and the record. His was a temperate establishment message, a corporate chief
telling his sales force that the company had had a good year and needn't fear a
hostile takeover. Bush was positive and sensible, but bland and uninspired,
knowing, one aide said, ''that the audience had 'Gone South' on him.''

No mention of abortion, school prayer, Communist collapse or a ringing moral
crusade. For seven years, he boasted, ''I have stood side by side with one of
the greatest Presidents . . . and I'm very, very proud.'' (''Damn proud,'' his
advance text said, but Bush cautiously toned it down.) To Bush, the ''unfinished
agenda'' spelled more economic growth and progress toward peace, and ''the
revival of traditional ethical standards'' meant fewer government appointees
trying to turn a fast buck.

The Vice President name-dropped about his personal dealings ''with Kohl,
Mitterrand, Thatcher and Nakasone'' and talked constructively about making
ethanol fuel from corn to help Iowa farmers, setting up tax-free college savings
bonds for parents, and promoting ''remediation for the illiterate.''

He clashed with Robertson on dealing with Moscow -and this was before he got in
hot water by saying that if Moscow had good tank mechanics, they should ''send
them to Detroit, because we could use that kind of ability.'' This evening, Bush
was ''especially proud'' of prospects for an arms agreement. ''We have no higher
calling,'' he declared, ''than to work for peace.'' The Bush partisans cheered,
but they were no match for the passion of the Robertson crowd.

These speeches underscored the dramatic difference between what Republican
Congressman Newt Gingrich of Georgia calls ''the managerial wing'' and ''the
visionary wing'' of the party - one selling competence, experience and
electability, the other playing to values and visions of the future.

For the Reagan coalition has its ''revisionists'' and its ''keepers of the
flame'' - the moderate pragmatism of Bush and Dole versus the ideological fervor
of Kemp, Robertson, du Pont, each proclaiming a portion of Reaganite scripture.
In short, the Republican battle of 1988 will decide whether the Reagan
Revolution will get a new surge of fervor or dissolve into more traditional
Republicanism.

''Dole and Bush represent the pre-Reagan party, the side of the party Reagan had
to beat to win,'' Gingrich observes. ''Kemp, Robertson and du Pont represent the
party that Reagan has created.''

''Eventually, you will have a fight between the establishment and the
ideological wings of the party,'' agrees Doug Bailey, co-publisher of the
Presidential Campaign Hot Line, a daily political news summary. ''If it doesn't
happen before the convention, it'll happen at the convention.''

IN SHEER NUMBERS, the mainstream has a larger base among rank-and-file
Republicans than the ideological wing. Obviously, there are no precise
boundaries, but most strategists and polltakers reckon that 60 to 65 percent of
Republicans are mainstream and about 35 to 40 percent fall into the ideological
wing.

In most opinion polls of Republican voters, Bush and Dole, the leading
mainstream candidates, pull a combined total of 60 to 70 percent support, with
Bush ahead. Wide public recognition helps each draw support within the
ideological wing - Bush, aided by ties with Reagan; Dole, by defending causes
important to the moral right, such as the Supreme Court nomination of Judge
Bork.

This year, moreover, polls suggest that the electorate favors managerial
leadership over visionary leadership. ''I don't think there's a desire for a
great new vision or new direction,'' says Robert M. Teeter, Bush's polltaker.
''People are generally satisfied with eight years of Reagan. They want to know,
'How do we build on it, refine it?' It's a very results-oriented electorate.''

But if the establishment wing has the larger slice, it is far from monolithic.
The world of traditional Republicans has regional and class differences, and
important differences in attitudes toward Reagan and the future.

As a Yale graduate and Texas oil entrepreneur, George Bush is a quintessential
establishment Republican. He epitomizes both the old-line business Republicans
from the Northeast and the newer Sunbelt Republican establishment -
upper-middle-class southerners who rode into the party in 1964 with Goldwater
and every four years afterward.

Bob Dole's political base is in the Middle West - farmers, bankers,
small-businessmen, people who have lately had a hard time making ends meet. Dole
is a master of Washington politics, but he has made personal populism his
campaign trademark. At high schools in places like Newton, Iowa, Dole gives
heart-to-heart talks about his small-town roots, his brutal wounds in World War
II, his compassion for the little folk.

''I was born in Russell, Kan.,'' he recalled in Newton. ''My mother sold sewing
machines and taught sewing lessons. My father ran a cream and egg station for 22
years. I'm one of four children, the only one to get a college education because
I had the G.I. Bill of Rights.'' After the war, and 39 months in hospitals, Dole
came home and was elected County Attorney.

''Every month I had to look at all the people on the welfare list - and every
month I found my grandparents there, Robert G. and Margaret Dole,'' he said.
''They were hard-working people, tenant farmers, and they couldn't make it. . .
. I tell you these things because there's a perception out there that we
Republicans don't care about real people. Oh, we like the country-club set, but
we don't have time for someone with real problems. That perception's not
accurate. I am one candidate, and there may be others, who has never forgotten
where I'm from or how I got where I am.''

Dole's pitch strikes home in Iowa farm country. But Dole, like Bush, conveys
more than regional and class identity. Each has a subliminal message that points
to a more basic rift in the Reagan coalition. Bush wraps himself in Reagan's
legacy, Dole takes an independent course. Bush plays to the optimists, content
with the nation's situation; Dole to the pessimists, who worry about deficits,
foreign competition and their own financial future.

Al Haig is another Republican contender given to blunt talk about the nation's
problems. He praises Reagan for restoring the nation's pride, but attacks
''Republican deficits'' and Reagan's economic policies, especially for giving
''cold turkey to the American farmer.'' Haig attracts interest from uneasy
establishment Republicans and moderates, mainly in the Northeast, but he has yet
to challenge the leaders.

In the battle for mainstream support, Bush remains ahead of Dole in organization
and fund raising ($12.5 million to $8 million). As of now, he is better armed to
withstand one or two early losses and to tackle Super Tuesday, the one-day,
20-state primary contest next March 8. But polls show Dole catching up.

If either Bush or Dole becomes the clear mainstream favorite by mid-March, he
will either have cinched the nomination or have gotten a long leg up. If they
battle evenly through next spring, however, it could create an opening for a
long-shot ideological candidate. So far, neither Bush nor Dole stirs grass-roots
excitement and passionate commitment, giving dark horses a chance to spurt. <k>

THE VISIONARY wing is where Republican fire and brimstone burn brightly, where
issues arouse passions, and the passions of true believers can sometimes
overwhelm more complacent mainstream Republicans. Militant minorities can
magnify their power (Continued on Page 42) in the primary and caucus process,
where Republican turnout in key states like Iowa and New Hampshire runs only
100,000 to 150,000.

''The establishment wing has an advantage of, say, 60 percent to 40 percent,''
says the publisher Doug Bailey, ''but those aren't the numbers that participate
in primaries. If the ideological conservatives energize their voters, the split
could be 50-50 or, in the South, even 40-60 the other way.''

Like the mainstream wing, however, the Republican right is no one's monopoly. It
has serious rifts, mainly between the market right of anti-government
free-enterprisers, and the moral right of Protestant evangelicals and Catholic
right-to-lifers. The market right is often turned off by the moral right's
attacks on feminism, abortion and school textbooks. Many in the moral right care
little about economic policy and favor some Government programs.

For a decade, the market right has been the main terrain of Jack Kemp, the
exuberant apostle of boundless economic growth through massive tax cuts.
Crusading for an American renaissance, Kemp competes with Bush for Republican
optimists.

''What a great moment this is to be living!'' Kemp trumpeted recently in
Orlando, Fla. He lashes Democrats for claiming it is ''midnight in America.''
And he projects his own bountiful vistas of ''full employment without inflation,
jobs and free-enterprise zones from sea to shining sea!'' He envisions even
smokestack states revitalized by ''global prosperity'' born of free trade.

Kemp claims he can hold two new elements of the Reagan coalition: under-30
Republicans and ethnic blue-collar Democrats.

But his candidacy illustrates the problems of keeping the Reagan coalition
intact. Hard-core conservatives dislike Kemp's support for sanctions against
South Africa and for right-to-work laws, and his opposition to a constitutional
amendment to balance the budget. They wince at his talk of a ''progressive,
conservative, radical, revolutionary, Lincoln emancipation'' party with appeal
in union halls and urban ghettos. In trying to broaden his appeal, Kemp has
offended part of the Reagan base.

To compensate, Kemp has fallen back on a staple of the ideological wing - fierce
anti-Communism. This fall, Kemp has swung to the right of Reagan, warning
against a peace sellout in Central America and a weak arms deal with Moscow,
delighting neo-conservatives. (Haig, too, has played to the anti-Communist
right, calling himself the best equipped to stand toe to toe with Soviet leader
Mikhail S. Gorbachev.) Within the free-market right, Kemp has been outflanked by
Pete du Pont, who is an even more ardent economic libertarian. Du Pont wants the
$26 billion farm subsidy program phased out, welfare recipients made to work and
high-school students drug-tested to qualify for drivers' licenses. He attacks
Dole for defending farm subsidies and Kemp for backing Social Security and aid
to education.

Du Pont's hottest support is on college campuses, where he hooks interest with
one key question: ''If you think Social Security is going to be there when you
retire, raise your hand.'' Few hands go up. Du Pont's pitch is a subsidized
private-sector savings option to Social Security.

BUT THE MOST STUN-ning new figure in the ideological wing is Robertson, because
he entered the race with a huge political base from his $200-million-a-year
Christian Broadcasting Network and the 14 million regular viewers of his 700
Club program. Robertson told me he reckoned some 20 million Republican voters
are evangelicals - born-again Christians. ''I would need only a third of that
nationwide to win the nomination,'' he said. (The last Republican nomination
race, in 1980, attracted 12.7 million primary voters.) Pollsters and strategists
for other candidates contend that Robertson exaggerates the size of the
evangelical movement, and his ability to unite it. But all agree that
evangelicals, the core of the moral right, have been the most potent bloc of
voters to shift into the Republican column in the Reagan era, and they expect
Robertson to bring in still more.

Robertson has shown striking ability to generate enthusiasm and active support,
using fundamentalist churches to organize. He claims 3.3 million people signed
petitions urging him to run. And by his account, he has raised close to $11
million (spending more than $6 million on fund-raising itself) to finance a paid
staff of 104, working in 20 states.

Son of the late Senator A. Willis Robertson of Virginia, Robertson has a feel
for politics, a flair for the dramatic. He won the Michigan precinct caucuses in
August 1986 and, in alliance with Kemp, took over the state party committee; he
showed precinct-level strength in South Carolina; and then won the Iowa
Republican straw poll in September.

Robertson has been quietly laying groundwork for his Presidential run for six
years. In 1981, he set up the Freedom Council, a now-defunct nonprofit
organization that spent $4 million to $5 million a year to recruit and involve
Christian fundamentalists in the political process.

Already, Robertson speaks of Kemp as ''the junior partner'' in their alliance
against Bush and the mainstream. Robertson argues that if he proves himself a
viable candidate, he will pull support from Kemp and others - from right-to-work
and right-to-life groups, gun-control advocates, the Conservative Caucus, a mass
organization of right-wing activists, and the staunchly anti-Communist Council
for National Policy.

Robertson's big hurdle is the high negative reaction he stirs among many voters.
He concedes resistance, even among Christian fundamentalists, to a clergyman
running for President. Establishment Republicans complain about his
''sermonizing'' about family values and women's place in the home. Black and gay
hecklers, chanting ''Bigot! Bigot!'' and carrying placards, ''Robertson and
Khomeini in '88,'' disrupted his campaign announcement in New York's
Bedford-Stuyvesant on Oct. 1. He was quickly engulfed in controversy over
alleged embellishments in his political resume and over his hiding the fact that
he was married just 10 weeks before the birth of his first child.

Robertson admitted ''sowing wild oats'' when young -before his born-again
experience - but denied other charges. And he has taken steps to gain political
legitimacy. He has stopped hosting television broadcasts and resigned as head of
his broadcasting network. In market tests, he has softened negative reactions
with advertisements playing up his role as educator, businessman, Korean War
veteran and ''international statesman'' working on famine relief.

Probably the most severe backlash will come if Robertson actually wins the
caucuses in states like Michigan and Iowa next January and February and begins
to emerge as the champion of the ideological wing.

''I don't think he'll get the nomination, but he'll be so strong that he'll
scare the establishment Republicans to coalesce around one candidate, Bush or
Dole,'' says Doug Bailey. ''They will fear the splinter in their own ranks could
lead to a Robertson nomination, and that is a horrifying thing to them.''

Win or lose, Robertson and his moral right movement represent a potentially
divisive force for the Reagan coalition. Given Robertson's funding, organization
and political base, other Republican campaigns expect him to win 20 percent or
more of the Republican delegates. That would give him bargaining power
comparable to what the Rev. Jesse Jackson is likely to have at the Democratic
convention - power to pull the party nominee and platform to the right, as
Jackson may push the Democrats to the left.

If Robertson were to impose tough demands on the nominee and platform, some
mainstream Republican strategists fear this could drive away moderate Democrats
and independent voters in the general election. As Dole and Kemp keep reminding
Republican audiences, a Republican nominee cannot win the Presidency without
support from independent voters and Democrats.

To try to perpetuate the Reagan coalition, the Republicans can work basic themes
of peace and prosperity if the 60-month economic recovery holds up and popular
arms agreements are signed with Moscow. But the hard right may fight the arms
agreements, and Robertson's push points to other internal tensions.

Ultimately, says Kevin Phillips, a veteran Republican analyst, the ineptitude of
Democrats may drive feuding Republican factions together. ''There's no
Republican who can hold the Reagan coalition together,'' he remarks. ''But the
Democrats are doing silly things that take people's minds off jobs, the economy
and foreign competition. With their lack of talent and their fratricide, the
Democrats are holding the Republicans together.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article in The Times Magazine last Sunday about dissension among Republicans
misidentified one group that Pat Robertson hopes will support his Presidential
bid. The group should have been identified as opponents, not advocates, of gun
control.

GRAPHIC: photo of Pat Robertson campaigning for president (Ann Klose/The Daily
Tribune, Ames, Iowa)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 54, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 956 words



THE PIANOPLAYERS, by Anthony Burgess. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $4.95.)
Anthony Burgess's 29th novel is about a man, much like the author's own father,
whose piano playing provides the real-time soundtrack for silent pictures; his
career falls apart with the advent of a new technology called talkies. While
Ph.D. candidates might not find the book as fulfilling as Mr. Burgess's more
erudite works, Gene Lyons said here last year, its ''modest charms [include] its
vivid re-creation of the humble joys of working-class Manchester and Blackpool
during the 1920's.''

INTERVENTION: How America Became Involved in Vietnam, by George McT. Kahin.
(Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) For many historians, the manner in which the United
States became involved in the Vietnam War is a case study in how the machinery
of decision-making can become loosed from its moorings and run like a mad
automaton, bereft of the governing influence of reality testing. Drawing on his
own interviews and previously classified documents, George McT. Kahin, who
teaches international studies at Cornell University, ''has produced an
illuminating work about a darkening series of decisions'' that led to America's
intervention in Southeast Asia, The Times's Walter Goodman said last year.
''Opponents of the Reagan Administration's truculence toward Nicaragua cannot
fail to find . . . a cautionary experience.''

THE ORANGING OF AMERICA: And Other Stories, by Max Apple. (Penguin, $5.95.) Max
Apple's first book contains 10 good-natured satirical stories that unearth some
of the unexamined oddities of American life. ''Apple's principal asset is his
startling imagination,'' one reviewer said in 1976. ''He translates the most
battered of our cultural cliches into glistening artifacts.''

THINKING BACK: The Perils of Writing History, by C. Vann Woodward. (Louisiana
State University, $6.95.) In this retrospective, C. Vann Woodward, who has made
a career of challenging accepted interpretations of the history of the American
South, trains his revisionist instincts inward and takes a critical second look
at his own career. The book is a ''fascinating meditation on the role of
revisionism by a practitioner,'' Linda Orr said here in 1986. ''The original
energy that comes from overturning long-accepted ways of seeing the past is
still there.''

JANE, by Dee Wells. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $7.95.) Jane, an American film
critic living in London, tries to juggle three love affairs. In 1974, our
reviewer, Margaret Drabble, said she felt a bit guilty about liking this
''slick, trendy'' first novel, but ''its sheer readability wins out.'' The
author, she said, makes ''some serious comments on modern life, but, more
important, her story and her jokes are good.''

COUNSELS OF WAR, by Gregg Herken. (Oxford University, $10.95.) Along with the
development of atomic weapons has come an odd new breed of armchair warriors:
the civilian scientists and strategists whose harrowing but dispassionate
analyses attempt to provide a rational underpinning to nuclear war. This book
''provides a valuable survey of the main debates'' within the strategic
community and ''a sense of the personalities of those who have taken part,''
Michael Mandelbaum said here in 1985.

THE COLD STOVE LEAGUE, by Thomas Boyle. (Academy Chicago, $4.95.) An
unsuspecting American comes to Portugal to help run a bar; instead, he finds
himself caught up in an international web of murder and financial misdeeds spun
by none other than the gnomes of Zurich, the secretive Swiss bankers who some
paranoid investors accuse of manipulating the world economy. ''Most of the book
manages to be believable,'' Newgate Callendar said here in 1984, ''and the
writing is lively and fast-moving. Just the thing for a pleasant hour or two
under a tree.''

UNDER SIEGE: P.L.O. Decisionmaking During the 1982 War, by Rashid Khalidi.
(Columbia University, $12.50.) As a Palestinian and an Oxford-trained historian
who knows Yasir Arafat, Rashid Khalidi was in a unique position to evaluate the
Palestine Liberation Organization's strategy during the Israeli-Lebanese war.
Through interviews and an examination of P.L.O. archives, the Columbia
University historian has produced a ''generally objective, lucid and incisive
account [that] fills a critical void in the literature about the Israeli
invasion,'' The Times's Thomas L. Friedman said here in 1985. ''One cannot help
but be struck by what a graveyard of illusions the 1982 war turned out to be.''

ONE WAY OR ANOTHER, by Peter Cameron. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $5.95.) In a
story called ''Homework,'' a boy who is depressed about the death of his dog is
pondering the ultimate algebraical conundrum: ''Find the value for n such that n
plus everything else in your life makes you feel all right.'' But the problem,
like others posed in Peter Cameron's collection of short stories, is unsolvable;
the best his people can do to extricate themselves from life's entanglements is
to lie to themselves and others. ''Characters can't ease their pain in Mr.
Cameron's environment,'' Victor Kantor Burg said here last year, ''but they do
engage in interesting deceptions.''

ON ACTING, by Laurence Olivier. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $8.95.) When
Laurence Olivier sat down to record his reflections on the nature of his craft,
he was determined to avoid ''boring theatrical gossip.'' The result, Fritz
Weaver said here last year, ''is the work everyone hoped we would have from him.
. . . In Lord Olivier, perhaps more than any other actor of this century,
significance lurks, mystical lights flash; one has a sense of the large past, a
kinship with kings and ministers, heroes and monsters.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of George McT. Kahin

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT Q&A: CHRISTOPHER COLLIER;
'YOU LIVE HISTORY EVERY DAY'

BYLINE: By CHARLOTTE LIBOV

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 3, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1591 words


CHRISTOPHER COLLIER, a history professor at the University of Connecticut, has
been the Connecticut State Historian for three years. He is the author of
several books, among them ''Roger Sherman's Connecticut,'' and ''Decision in
Philadelphia,'' his most recent, about the Constitutional Convention, which he
wrote with his brother, James Lincoln Collier. They have also collaborated on
six historical novels for teen-agers, which are used in classrooms around the
country.

On a recent afternoon at his home in Orange, Dr. Collier talked about the post
of State Historian and about his views on the value of history in everyday life.
Following are some excerpts from the conversation:

Q. What is the history of the State Historian?

A: The State Historian post goes back many years. It grew out of the
tercentennial celebration for Connectiut in the 1930's. Eventually, the post
became more formalized. It used to be an office under the State Library Board,
and was held by my predecessor, Albert Van Dusen, for 33 years. In 1985, there
was a public act transferring it to the University of Connecticut, and I was
appointed by the trustees. I've tried to make it into a working office that is
providing public service, and, judging from the amount of time that is demanded
of me, it's clear there is a huge public need for such an office.

Q. What are your duties?

A. There is one formal duty, to sit on the Connecticut Historical Commission,
which oversees the preservation of old buildings. There is no historian on that
commission, so it was decided, by law, that the State Historian would serve on
it. That's the only official duty. In addition, there is a legislative record
that exists for the years 1806 to 1851, but it is only in manuscript form, so we
are trying to publish it. I get to hire an editor and an assistant, but I have
to oversee all of the administrative duties. This past year, we published the
volume of 1804-05, after a hiatus of 20 years, and, to complete the series, I
estimate it will take about 25 years.

Q. What have you chosen to do on your own?

A. One thing I do is answer queries from journalists, and I am delighted to do
it. I am thrilled that journalists care enough to get their facts right. I also
lobby legislators for history-related bills, and right now, I am very concerned
about teacher certification.

Also, the General Assembly is gearing up for its 350th birthday celebration.
There will be money for teaching materials, money for public television videos
and money for a permanent exhibit. All of those need historical data, so I will
work on that as a consultant and researcher. I also do a lot of teacher training
in Connecticut history, and I travel throughout the state, giving lectures at
libraries and to groups.

Q. You are also a scholar on the Constitution. Since this year is the
bicentennial of the Constitution, you must be very busy.

A. I am exceptionally busy. In addition to all that I do in Connecticut, I also
go out of state. I've also done a ''Constitutional Minute'' for CBS, I did a
half-hour special for Channel 3, I did a program for Law Day, and I've spoken on
lots and lots of radio shows. I also attended the national celebration in
Philadelphia as part of the state delegation and, served as a commentator for
C-Span television, which broadcast the ceremonies.

Q. How successful have the events celebrating the bicentennial of the
Constitution been, from a scholarly point of view?

A. I am delighted with the celebration of the Constitution. As you might recall,
I was critical of the celebration of Connecticut's 350th birthday. I felt a
marvelous opportunity for education had been squandered, but I was told the
public was only interested in things like parades, balloons, and cow-chip
throwing contests. I did not believe that. Then Warren Burger came along and set
the tone for the celebration of the Constitution. He said it was to be a
''cerebration,'' rather than a ''celebration,'' more cerebral than just drums
and flags. Again, I was told the public wouldn't get involved. Well, the public
has gotten involved. And they are discussing heavy, heavy issues. In Ledyard the
other day, 250 people came for a talk I gave about the Constitution. There has
been a tremendous amount of involvement.

Q. What is the level of understanding among the public as to the importance of
the Constitution?

A. Well, when I do talks, I've found that the public is confused. They do not
know the difference between the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution
and the Bill of Rights. There is that level of ignorance. So, if you can teach
them to distinquish between those three, you have accomplished something.

The American public is ignorant of the mechanics of American Government. We
cannot count on the maintenance of American Government with the level of
ignorance we have. If people do not understanding their freedoms, they may give
them away. Take the Fifth Amendment, for example. Many people believe the Fifth
Amendment protects only criminals. If they understood the history of that
provision, that people were once tortured until they confessed, they would
understand why that amendment must be there. So an undertanding of the
historical condition is essential to the public safety.

Q. What about children. What kind of education in history and the Constitution
are students learning in school?

A. It's been very bad. The 1970's were a disaster for public education.
Undisciplined, sloppy teachers; permissiveness; grade inflation; the refusal to
impose any intellectual discipline. But it's turning around. It's getting
better. But the problem is that kids don't have a body of knowledge to draw
from. There have been a number of reports measuring the degree of ignorance in
American history. I've done tests and I've found that one-third of high school
students cannot tell you which came first, the Korean War or the Vietnam War. I
always find in my college classes that 10 to 20 percent of the kids can't tell
you how long a senator's term is. Yesterday, there was one who couldn't tell me
how long the President's term was. He was a college sophmore. The level of
ignorance is mind-blowing.

Q. How can the teaching of history be improved?

A. First of all, in adult education, the media could play a vital role, and they
have been. There has been marvelous television coverage of the Bork hearings and
''Irangate.'' The Iran hearings turned people's interest to the Constitution. It
was all about the separation of powers. The Bork hearings were all about
judicial review. There is a tremendous amount of education going on. A lot of
scholars will tell me that the public is only getting a superficial idea, but
they are getting at least a hazy idea of something they did not know before.
These themes get reinforced in newspaper articles and again on the evening news.

As for the kids, the weakest link is teacher training. Connecticut is rewriting
its teacher certification requirements. In Connecticut, teachers can teach
American history to fifth graders without having studied what they are teaching.
Prospective teachers are required to take one course, but that may be in
20th-century history, when what they are teaching about is the American
Revolution. My campaign now is to get certification changed so that every
prospective teacher must take a two-year survey course of American history.

Q. How do you get your students and people who come to hear your talks excited
about learning about the Constitution?

A. I try to show that the Constitution is living. What I tell people is, ''You
live history every day.'' If you get into the car and drive to see me in Orange,
you knew how to get here, because you had been here before. That's history. Or,
if you used a map, you've used a historical record. If you had only your own
memory to go on, there is a great deal that you couldn't do. If you study
history, you have the benefit of the memory of society.

You also need history to understand your rights. Suppose you are going 30 miles
in a 25-mile-per-hour zone, and a cop stops you and smells the odor of alcohol.
Does he have the authority to search your car? You know whether he does by
studying history. When I go to schools, I ask students about the high school
newspaper and whether the principal has ever censored it. I tell them that if it
ever was censored, they could take it all the way up to the Supreme Court, that
there is a case pending right now about censorship of a high school newspaper.
Or, I ask them, ''Has your teacher ever looked in your locker? Do you think it's
legal?'' And we talk about probable cause.

Q. Most of your work, research and writing centers on early American history.
Why did you choose that period?

A. The years 1763 to 1803 were the seeding of the American Republic. Our whole
governmental system, our principles and mechanics were established in that era
and they are still functional. We live relatively freely in America, and we owe
that relative freedom to what happened during that era. Teaching is more to me
than just relating facts. It is a calling. To me, it is a desperate calling. I
remember moments during the McCarthy era of the 50's when I felt that freedom
would be taken away from us. People who get into a position of authority are
people who want to control, and those are exactly the wrong type of people to
have running the Government, so we have to be on our guard all the time. The
Founding Fathers knew this, and we must remember it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Christopher Collier (NYT/Stephen Castagneto)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Paperback Best Sellers: October 25, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 54, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 850 words

                                                                          Weeks
                                                                             On
     Fiction                                                               List
 1   THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain.  (Dell, $4.95.)                          3
     Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New
     York family begun in "Evergreen."

 2   A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James.  (Warner,                             4
     $4.95.) Comdr. Adam Dalgliesh investigates a
     brutal double murder.

 3   FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov.                                   3
     (Del Rey/Ballantine, $4.95.) The hero of the
     "Foundation" series searches for Earth.

 4   IT, by Stephen King.  (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)                              10
     Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman
     who grew up in a small Maine town.

 5   FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen                                       2
     Coonts.  (Pocket, $4.95.) Navy aviators in the
     Vietnam War.

 6   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy.  (Berkley,                             15
     $4.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians.

 7   VALE OF THE VOLE, by Piers Anthony.  (Avon,                              4
     $3.95.) Esk, the son of an ogre and a nymph,
     defends the inhabitants of a paradise.

 8   DREAMS ARE NOT ENOUGH, by Jacqueline                                     4
     Briskin.  (Berkley, $4.50.) A California family
     dynasty out to conquer the world.

 9   REGRETS ONLY, by Sally Quinn.  (Ballantine,                              8
     $4.95.) Two men, two women, passion and power-
     brokering in Washington.

10   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom                                        76
     Clancy.  (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
     brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

11   STAR TREK: HOW Much for Just the Planet? by                              1
     John M. Ford.  (Pocket, $3.95.) Captain Kirk's
     crew competes for rights to mine valuable
     deposits on a faraway planet.

12   THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen.                                 9
     (Avon, $4.95.) Romance, power and greed mark
     an 18th-century woman's coming-of-age.

13   PAPER MONEY, by Ken Follett.  (Signet/NAL,                               1
     $3.95.) Crime, high finance and journalism form
     the threads of this newly reissued 1977 thriller.

14   STAR TREK -- THE NEXT GENERATION:                                        1
     Encounter at Farpoint, by David Gerrold.
     (Pocket, $3.95.) A new command takes over the
     U.S.S. Enterprise.

15 * I AM THE ONLY RUNNING FOOTMAN, by                                        3
     Martha Grimes.  (Dell, $3.95.) Scotland Yard's
     Superintendent Jury on the trail of a strangler.
                                                                          Weeks
                                                                             On
     Nonfiction                                                            List
 1   ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph                                        3
     Wambaugh.  (Bantam, $4.95.) A case involving the
     1979 murder of a high school teacher and the
     disappearance of her two children.

 2   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.                              209
     (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
     spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 3   FATHERHOOD, by Bill. Cosby.  (Berkley, $6.95.)                          26
     Anecdotes and ruminations by the television star
     and father of five.

 4   WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.                                  51
     (North Point, $12.50.) A woman's adventures
     flying in Africa and across the Atlantic in the 30's.

 5   NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.                                     35
     (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
     author says, and we must confront them to grow.

 6   KAFFIR BOY, by Mark Mathabane.  (Plume/                                  8
     NAL, $8.95.) A young back man tells of his
     coming-of-age in apartheid South Africa.

 7   HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley.  (Bantam, $4.95.) An                           9
     unauthorized biography of Frank Sinatra.

 8   ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John                                        1
     Madden with Dave Anderson.  (Jove, $3.95.)
     Observations on football by the television
     commentator and former Oakland Raiders coach.

 9 * ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett.  (Avon,                                 2
     $4.50.) The comedian's autobiography, beginning
     with her impoverished childhood in Hollywood and
     taking her up to age 26.

10   THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam.  (Avon,                              5
     $5.50.) The confrontation between America's Ford
     Motor Company and Japan's Nissan.
                                                                          Weeks
     Advice, How-to and                                                      On
     Miscellaneous                                                         List
 1   BILLY AND THE BOINGERS BOOTLEG, by                                       9
     Berke Breathed.  (Little, Brown, $7.95.) More
     "Bloom County" cartoon strips.

 2   WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin                                       73
     Norwood.  (Pocket, $4.95.) How to avoid or end
     addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.

 3   THE BOOK OF QUESTIONS, by Gregory Stock.                                20
     (Workman, $3.95.) Provocative and challenging
     questions to ask yourself in order to learn more
     about yourself.

 4   ADULT CHILDREN OF ALCOHOLICS, by Janet                                  49
     Geringer Woititz.  (Health Communications,
     $6.95.) Advice about a family problem.

 5   DIANETICS, by L. Ron Hubbard.  (Bridge                                  33
     Publications, $4.95.) Lates edition of a handbook
     by the founder of Scientology.




* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, OCTOBER 26, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-11
 China must restructure its economy at a more intense pace if the country is to
escape its poverty, the acting head of the Chinese Communist Party, Zhao Ziyang,
told the opening session of the 13th Party Congress in Beijing.    Page A1


 A new look at Soviet history is being explored in Moscow. The historical
inquiry has divided scholars, prompted bitter public debate and produced signs
of friction between political leaders.    A1


 A bloody coup d'etat in Burkina Faso that included the first presidential
assassination since the country won its independence from France in 1960 has
left the populace in a state of shock and upset nearby nations.    A8


 A clash ended a South Korean rally in Seoul that featured the first joint
campaign appearance of the two main opposition rivals for the country's
presidency. Violence erupted after police officers blocked a student march.
A11


 Top contra officials met secretly in New York on Saturday with Miguel Cardinal
Obando y Bravo, the Roman Catholic Primate of Nicaragua, ac-cording to rebel and
American officials. The cardinal may be able to help arrange a cease-fire.    A3


 India's villages reflect the changes wrought by the pull of the modern world
against traditions. Challenges abound in adjusting Indian traditions to modern
realities.    A10


 An army-run radio station in Israel has earned a reputation for being as
comfortable on the cutting edges of journalism and music as it is on the
battlefield and has become popular recently with Israelis.    A4


Sandinistas pressed on 2 key points

    A3


 U.S. may not want summit meeting

    A6


 National    A12-17, B6, B9-10


 The search for a deficit compromisebegan as Congressional leaders started to
lay out the options and focus on trying to reach agreement with the Reagan
Administration. The leaders are scheduled to meet with President Reagan on the
issue today.     A1


 The stock market's record plunge last Monday was preceeded by pessimism among
financial executives and bad news from abroad. Monday morning, minute by minute,
the news
 Curbs on computerized stock trading and futures trading appear all but
inevitable following the week of tumult on Wall Street. Even those who
strenuously oppose restrictions agree that they are on the way.    D1


 The President's drug crusade, declared one year ago, has been stymied by poor
coordination and the failure of the Reagan Administration to follow through,
critics say.    A1


 Louisiana's Governor withdrew from his campaign for re-election after placing
second in a primary. The decision by Governor Edwin Edwards automatically makes
the primary leader, Representative Buddy Roemer, Governor-elect.    A12


 Jeane J. Kirkpatrick will not run for the Republican Presidential nomination,
the former chief United States delegate to the United Nations said. The decision
was viewed as aiding the campaign of Representative Jack F. Kemp.    A16


 Television commercials are beaming Pete du Pont's political message into New
Hampshire homes, telling voters the Republican Presidential candidate is willing
to tamper with what conventional political thinking regards as untouchable.
A17


 The American labor movement is embarking on new ventures in organizing and
political action as it confronts a rapidly changing work force and an economy
that has abandoned rules that prevailed when labor was a dominant force.    A15


 The B-1 will cost 20 percent more to bring into service than originally
forecast by the Reagan Administration, the chairman of the House Armed Services
Committee said. An Air Force spokesman called the statement about the bomber
''misleading.''    B6


 News analysis: Fiscal footwork by the Martha Graham Dance Company, which
bypassed the National Endowment for the Arts and requested a $7 million
appropriation directly from Congress, has not drawn bravos from the endowment.
    C15


 Novi journal: Shops repaint rural landscape

    A12


 Little agreement on tree deaths

    A12


 PACs devise protective bylaws

    A16


 1969 death may be AIDS-related

    B9


 Press notes: U.P.I. hits contract impasse

    B10


 Washington Talk    A14


 Epilogue on Bork: Len Garment's crusade
 South Vietnam's last ambassador hopes to be heard
 Regional    B1-4, B12-13


 An outward Bound course in the citytested New Yorkers' survival skills in a
forest of high-rise steel and glass and was part of a movement to re-establish
the organization's commitment to helping the troubled and disadvantaged.    A1


 A year-round schedule for 10 schools in poor neighborhoods in New York State is
planned as part of an experimental program to make the schools into hubs of
community activity, state education officials say.    B1


 More than $150 million in aid to strengthen undergraduate education will be
requested by the State University of New York over the next five years from the
Legislature as part of the university's 1988-89 budget.    B2


 Andrew J. Maloney has declined an offer from Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato to
nominate him to succeed Rudolph W. Giuliani if Mr. Giuliani, the Federal
prosecutor in Manhattan, resigns soon, as expected. Mr. Maloney is now the
United States Attorney in Brooklyn.    B2


 A doctor who committed suicide at a Princeton, N.J., hospital last week was
facing terminal cancer of the spine and may have been trying to spare his family
the ordeal of his illness, family members said.    B1


 A football rivalry in Connecticut between teams from the neighboring towns of
Ansonia and Derby is an autumn tradition that is viewed by many residents as an
extension of their hometowns' hard-knuckled identities.    B1


 A landmarks battle over angels

    B2


 2 are shot in Chinatown holdup

    B3


 Tweed, earplugs and shooting clay targets

    B13


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Washington Talk: Bui Diem;
A VOICE FROM VIETNAM HOPING TO BE HEARD

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 25


In the 12 years since the fall of Saigon, Bui Diem, South Vietnam's last
Ambassador to Washington, has been a bit of a jack-of-all-trades: professor,
writer, lecturer and, for one two-year period, a dispenser of pastrami and corn
beef at Goldberg's Deli in northwest Washington.

''I had to find some way to earn my living,'' Mr. Diem recalled. ''We had a
young 8-year-old son to whom I had to give an education, and I had to try to
forget Vietnam because if you continued to think of it, it would become too
depressing.''

His son, Han, is now studying business and computers at the University of
Maryland. And Mr. Diem, currently a visiting professor at the Indo-China
Institute at George Mason University in Virginia, has written a memoir of the
Vietnamese struggle, ''In the Jaws of History,'' published last month by
Houghton Mifflin. Written with David Chanoff as co-author, it is one of a
handful of books by Vietnamese authors published here.

Two Days Before the Fall

It is a story told by a man who was at center stage. Mr. Diem was a member of
the delegation to the 1954 Geneva conference, chief of staff to Prime Minister
Phan Huy Quat in 1965, Ambassador to Washington from 1967 to 1972 and
Ambassador-at-Large until the end in April 1975.

He had been sent back to Washington by President Nguyen Van Thieu in an
unsuccessful, last-ditch lobbying effort on behalf of $700 million in emergency
aid that was bottled up in Congress. While here, he had relocated his wife,
Kim-Ngoc, his son and two grown daughters, Ngoc-Luu and Ngoc-Giao. On April 17
he returned to a doomed Saigon, flying out again with his 90-year-old mother and
sister two days before the city fell to North Vietnam's Coummunist forces on
April 30.

The memory is still vivid, said Mr. Diem, 65 years old, as he settled down for
an interview at Jean Pierre, a fashionable French restaurant on K Street.

''I thank you for asking me to come to this place,'' said Mr. Diem as he looked
about at the flowers and linen-draped tables. ''I used to come here
frequently.''

From Jeers to Questions

As South Vietnam's envoy in Washington he used to do business in such settings
with journalists and with such Government figures as William P. Bundy, Philip C.
Habib, Robert S. McNamara, Maxwell Taylor and Henry A. Kissinger. Today he
lectures to eager young students who, he said, want to understand the Vietnam
War.

In the mid-1960's Ambassador Diem was jeered and booed on unversity campuses.
Today, students ask him questions.

''Students are very much interested in understanding why it happened,'' he said.
''They tell me, 'People keep comparing Vietnam with Central America and Korea
and the Philippines, but we have no idea about what went on - we have to
understand Vietnam before we can compare it with what is going on today.' ''

Like many Vietnamese who came to this country, Mr. Diem lost everything. He fled
Saigon, he said, with two suitcases and ''a few thousand dollars.''

''I went through a very difficult time,'' he said without elaboration. In those
first years he supported his family by working on a Vietnam study at the Rand
Corporation. In 1979, with Vietnamese friends and borrowed money, Mr. Diem
bought into the Goldberg delicatessen on K Street. That proved a bad business
venture, he said, and he returned to his writing, lecturing and consulting at
the American Enterprise Institute and at the Woodrow Wilson International
Center, where he first began work on his memoir.

Mr. Diem, who is now an American citizen and lives in Rockville, Md. in a house
''with a big American mortgage,'' voices little bitterness about the brutal
manner in which the United States left Vietnam.

No Passing Chapter

''Perhaps I still feel the anger deep down, but I restrain from expressing it,''
he said. ''I suppose it is a matter of temperament.''

''For many Americans it is a passing chapter,'' he added, ''but for us, we have
to live with this tragedy. Every Vietnamese family practically without exception
has been touched by this war, families divided, lost or destroyed.''

He no longer dreams of a democratic and free Vietnam as he did as a young boy
growing up in a mandarin family of scholars near Hanoi. His history teacher was
Vo Nguyen Giap, who as General Giap would go on to lead the North Vietnamese
Army against both France and the United States.

''I was educated in the French way, and we learned about the Napoleonic wars and
the revolution of 1789,'' Mr. Diem recalled. ''We went through a lot of books
about fighting for the freedom of the people, and all of us got enthused by a
kind of self-given mission to liberate the people.''

An estimated 800,000 Vietnamese now make their home in this country, with 20,000
or more living in the Washington area, said Mr. Diem, who is president of the
executive board of Vietnamese in America, an umbrella group of Vietnamese
organizations from all over the country working to encourage participation in
the political process.

The group will hold its third annual convention in August on the West Coast. Mr.
Diem is helping make plans for that while also spending a good bit of his time
traveling and speaking to Vietnamese community groups.

Eye on the Mainstream

''When the Vietnamese first came they were not very well organized,'' he said.
''But they are beginning, especially the younger people, to become part of the
mainstream in this country. Every ethnic community has its lobby group, and as
more and more Vietnamese gain their citizenship we expect to be a political
force.''

Upon occasion Mr. Diem visits the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, the walled monument
on the Mall inscribed with the names of Americans killed or missing in the war.

''It is a very strange feeling,'' he said, ''I don't know how to describe it.
But often in looking at those Amerian names I think of the thousands and
thousands of Vietnamese - soldiers and civilians - whose names are not listed
anywhere.''

He paused then added: ''Perhaps it is feelings like that, that pushed me to
write the book. It is a voice from Vietnam, and I hope it will be heard.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bui Diem (NYT/Ken Henien)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Washington Talk: Briefing;
Flying With the Contras

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 159 words


When Nicaraguan rebel leaders met with Republican senators this month, they
asked whether some legislators would accompany them in their attempt to return
to Managua to negotiate a cease-fire with the Sandinista Government.

No problem, said Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader. He volunteered Senator
John McCain of Arizona.

The Central American peace plan obliges President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of
Nicaragua to negotiate a cease-fire, but he has said he will do so only with
contra field commanders. If the leaders come to Managua, he said, they will be
arrested.

Senator McCain said recently that he doubted the rebels would go without
permission of the Sandinista leadership. He also told friends that he was not
interested in a mission to land in Managua without permission. ''I've been shot
down once already,'' he muttered. As a Navy flier, he was shot down 20 years ago
today over Hanoi and kept prisoner for more than five years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Gore Defends Brochure With a Vietnam Photo

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 231 words

DATELINE: CASPER, Wyo., Oct. 25


Senator Albert Gore Jr. says he does not believe a campaign brochure showing him
carrying an M-16 rifle in Vietnam is misleading although he served in a
noncombat role.

''You can read it any way you want to,'' Mr. Gore, a Tennessee Democrat who is
seeking his party's Presidential nomination, said at a news conference Saturday.

''I carried that rifle all over Vietnam and walked like that in every part of
the country,'' Mr. Gore said. As a reporter in the Army's 20th Engineer Brigade,
he explained, he also carried a pencil.

A four-page campaign brochure distributed here by Gore workers lists his service
in Vietnam as ''one of the reasons people give why Al Gore should be our next
President.''

Reporters at the news conference, preceding the Wyoming Democratic Party's
annual Jefferson-Jackson dinner, asked the Senator to describe his military
experience.

''I was not involved in fire fights,'' he said. ''I was not in the infantry. I
was in areas where combat took place. I did not see combat myself. I was fired
upon. The engineers frequently took fire, but we usually had a critical mass of
bulldozers and equipment and personnel that made it mostly harassment fire.''

Asked if he thinks his campaign literature could lead someone to conclude he was
an infantryman, Mr. Gore said, ''I don't think it says infantry there.''

He said the brochure ''speaks for itself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Chief and 100 Artists Trade Blunt Complaints

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 26


A hundred leaders of Vietnam's literary and artistic establishment have
apparently told the country's new Communist Party leader in blunt terms what
they think is wrong with state-supported cultural endeavors.

In reply, the party leader, Nguyen Van Linh, expressed frank astonishment at
some of their complaints and made some startling revelations of his own,
according to a partial transcript of the lively give-and-take broadcast by
Hanoi's official radio.

Mr. Linh, who took office last December after what appears to have been a power
struggle with the last of Ho Chi Minh's generation of leaders, said that he,
too, had to remain on guard against party hard-liners who demand rigid orthodoxy
in all fields.

Mr. Linh, saying he had been ''itching unbearably to write,'' acknowledged that
he was the author of a new newspaper column, ''Things That Must Be Done
Immediately,'' which has been the talk of Vietnam.

He then added: ''Many people have welcomed and responded favorably to it, but
there are also people who wondered why I was blackening the regime, and thought
that this might be the way to start a cultural revolution.'' The reference was
to the period of radicalism that gripped China from 1966 to 1976.

Meeting Lasted Two Days

The two-day meeting, which Hanoi's domestic radio network said took place on
Oct. 6 and 7, brought together writers, actors, film makers, musicians,
sculptors, architects and other cultural leaders, according to a translation
from Vietnamese made by the British Boradcasting Corporation's monitoring
service.

The party's General Secretary told those attending not to be afraid to be
muckrakers. At one point he was reported to have blurted out during an artist's
speech, ''God helps them who help themselves!''

Mr. Linh - who was dropped from the Politburo from 1982 to 1985, apparently for
advocating a more open economy - also said he understood the artists' fears of
''prohibitions and persecution.''

''What you dread most,'' he said, ''is something hovering somewhere in the air
that you fear more than censorship.''

Reporters visiting Vietnam in August were told by artists that they were seeking
a meeting with Mr. Linh. Publishers, writers and dramatists said that the arts
were reviving, but that many creative people were unsure how far they could go
in pushing out political or oganizational bounds.

Artists Fault 'Despotic' Control

At the seminar, according to the official summary broadcast on Oct. 13, the
cultural leaders criticized ''undemocratic, despotic and overbearing'' party
control.

They attacked the system in which only official, state-subsidized artists are
recognized. According to the radio, Mr. Linh expressed surprise that subsidies
continued in this field when they had been abandoned in others.

''You have demanded,'' Mr. Linh recalled in closing remarks, ''that in your
domain work should not be imposed as a train is placed on the tracks.''

His remarks follow reports from international human rights organizations that
seven writers arrested under the previous leadership may be about to go on
trial. The cases have not been discussed in the official press, and there is no
indication the subject was raised at the two-day meeting.

'Renovation' Is His Aim

As in other public speeches, Mr. Linh reminded his audience that ''renovation''
of the Communist system, not political change, was the aim of his campaign to
open society. He referred several times to ''socialist realism,'' usually
interpreted as the correct artistic style for a Communist society.

But Mr. Linh, who was Hanoi's link to the South during and after the Vietnam
War, also said his own experiences in dealing with the ''old regime'' had taught
him some lessons.

''In the old days,'' he said, ''we used to espouse the simplistic concept that
if one talked about socialist society, one had only good things to say.''

''I have come to realize it is quite difficult to be so sure about things,'' he
concluded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

Exiles Warn West on Moves by Communists

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1426 words


With commentators in the Western countries heralding political changes in the
Soviet Union and China, a group of writers and scholars from many of the world's
Communist-ruled countries gathered in New York over the weekend, and a different
and generally less optimistic view prevailed among them.

The group, made up in large part of exiled dissidents from Vietnam, China, the
Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, Rumania, Hungary, Cuba and other countries, argued
through many sessions over the nature of the changes.

The conference at the Omni Park Central Hotel, titled ''The Future of
Communism,'' was sponsored by the Foreign Policy Research Institute, a
conservative foreign-affairs study group based in Philadelphia.

No clear picture of the future of Communism emerged from the speeches and
discussions. But there were scholarly analyses, mingling with jokes, parables
and parodies that, taken together, provided a composite view of the changes
taking place in Communist-ruled countries today.

No Fundamental Change

In the end, it became possible to distinguish a warning to Westerners: Even with
the Soviet Union under Mikhail S. Gorbachev striving to free itself from rigid
orthodoxy and to allow a greater measure of expression, Communist countries are
unlikely to change fundamentally, or to become less menacing, by their own
volition.

Such change will take place, if at all, only because the West remains strong as
the weaknesses of the Communist system take their toll over time, many of the
participants contended.

''An economically flourishing and democratic Communist society is as possible as
a flying crocodile,'' said Alexander Zinoviev, an exiled Soviet writer who lives
in Munich, West Germany. Mr. Zinoviev has argued that Mr. Gorbachev's program of
glasnost, or openness, is a cynical and hypocritical maneuver, designed in part
to encourage complacency in the West.

Another Soviet exile, Eduard Kuznetsov, news director for Radio Liberty in
Munich, said that if is assumed that Moscow will liberalize and thus become less
threatening, ''then we are not obliged to do anything.''

'An Improved Lie'

Ivan Svitak, a Czech exile who teaches philosophy at California State University
at Chico, said: ''Glasnost is not a new policy. It is an improved lie, a new
temporary facade. Glasnost is an ideology of reforms without actual reforms.''

One view of change in the Soviet bloc was contained in a paper by a Hungarian,
Miklos Haraszti, who is editor of Beszelo, an officially tolerated dissident
journal. It was read to the conference when Mr. Haraszti, who lives in Hungary,
was unable to come to New York, apparently for personal reasons.

Mr. Haraszti wrote that in Budapest in the years after World War II, the
Communist authorities tore down a church damaged by bombing in order to create
''an imitation Red Square,'' where the country's leaders would greet the
''working masses'' during the parades that marked national holidays.

The square was dominated by ''a giant Stalin,'' a statue that towered behind the
review stand. But after the de-Stalinization efforts in the Soviet Union in
1956, the authorities tore down the statue and only Stalin's boots were left,
Mr. Haraszti wrote.

Some months later, even the boots were removed, though many people continued to
refer to it as Boot Square. They were replaced by a simple marble platform, a
symbol of reform and change. But crowds continued to come to the square every
year, paying obeisance to the Communist rulers who stood on the platform.

The leaders decided to encourage the atmosphere of reform even more by building
a National Theater in the square equipped with a special balcony where they
would stand, as before, on holidays.

''These changes are simply variations in form of the same impertinent,
self-congratulatory monolithic power,'' Mr. Haraszti said.  ''Maybe it doesn't
matter anymore on what kind of platform our leaders will wave and smile. The
boot is inside us.'' By RICHARD BERNSTEIN With commentators in the Western
countries heralding political changes in the Soviet Union and China, a group of
writers and scholars from many of the world's Communist-ruled countries gathered
in New York over the weekend, and a different and generally less optimistic view
prevailed among them.

The group, made up in large part of exiled dissidents from Vietnam, China, the
Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, Rumania, Hungary, Cuba, and other countries,
argued through many sessions over the nature of the changes.

The conference at the Omni Park Central Hotel, titled ''The Future of
Communism,'' was sponsored by the Foreign Policy Research Institute, a
conservative foreign-affairs study group based in Philadelphia.

No clear picture of the future of Communism emerged from the speeches and
discussions. But there were scholarly analyses, mingling with jokes, parables
and parodies that, taken together, provided a composite view of the changes
taking place in Communist countries today.

No Fundamental Change

In the end, it became possible to distinguish a warning to Westerners: Even with
the Soviet Union under Mikhail S. Gorbachev striving to free itself from rigid
orthodoxy and to allow a greater measure of expression, Communist countries are
unlikely to change fundamentally, or to become less menacing, by their own
volition.

Such change will take place, if it takes place at all, only because the West
remains strong as the weaknesses of the Communist system take their toll over
time, many of the participants contended.

''An economically flourishing and democratic Communist society is as possible as
a flying crocodile,'' said Alexander Zinoviev, an exiled Soviet writer who lives
in Munich, West Germany. Mr. Zinoviev has argued, contrary to a view gaining
ascendency among many specialists on the Soviet Union, that Mr. Gorbachev's
program of glasnost, or openness, is a cynical and hypocritical maneuver,
designed in part to encourage complacency in the West.

Another Soviet exile, Eduard Kuznetsov, who is news director for Radio Liberty
in Munich, asked why people in the West are eager and ready to find hope in the
actions of the current Soviet leaders. If it is assumed that the Russians will
liberalize and thus become less threatening, he went on, ''then we are not
obliged to do anything.''

'An Improved Lie'

Ivan Svitak, a Czech exile who teaches philosophy at California State University
at Chico, said: ''Glasnost is not a new policy. It is an improved lie, a new
temporary facade. Glasnost is an ideology of reforms without actual reforms.''

The thinking behind this statement was elaborated on by several participants who
argued, among other things, that people living under Communism have become so
inured to the system that they resist changes that Westerners might find
beneficial.

This view was summed up in a paper by a Hungarian, Miklos Haraszti, who is
editor of Beszelo, a dissident journal. It was read to the conference when Mr.
Haraszti, who lives in Hungary, was unable to come to New York, apparently for
personal reasons.

Mr. Haraszti wrote that there is a large square in Budapest where the Communist
authorities, in the years after World War II, tore down a church damaged by
bombing in order to create ''an imitation Red Square,'' a place where the
country's leaders would greet the ''working masses'' during the parades that
marked national holidays.

Huge Statue of Stalin

Early on, the square was dominated by ''a giant Stalin,'' a statue that towered
behind the review stand. But after the de-Stalinization efforts in the Soviet
Union in 1956, the authorities tore down the statue and only Stalin's boots were
left, along with a feeling that Hungary had ''done away with Stalinism itself,''
Mr. Haraszti wrote.  Some months later, even the boots were removed, though many
people continued to refer to it as Boot Square. They were replaced by a simple
marble platform, a symbol of reform and change. But crowds continued to come to
the square every year, paying obeisance to the Communist rulers who stood on the
platform.

The leaders decided to encourage the atmosphere of reform even more by building
a great National Theater in the square - equipped with a special balcony where
they would stand, as before, on holidays.

''These changes are simply variations in form of the same impertinent,
self-congratulatory monolithic power,'' Mr. Haraszti said.  ''Maybe it doesn't
matter anymore on what kind of platform our leaders will wave and smile. The
boot is inside us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, an article on Oct. 27 about the views of writers
and scholars from Communist countries on recent changes in the Soviet Union and
China incorrectly described the circumstances under which a Budapest statue of
Stalin was removed in 1956. It was torn down by demonstrators, not by the
authorities.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ON MY MIND;
The Bradley Doctrine

BYLINE: By A.M. Rosenthal

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 747 words


This is the time, with the summit meeting so strangely suspended by the Kremlin,
for Americans to ask themselves a question a boy of 10 put at a town hall
meeting between American and Soviet citizens in New York State.

The boy asked his elders just what they wanted relations between the United
States and the Soviet Union to be in the year 2000. Much the same question often
is brought up in solemn meetings of foreign-affairs think tanks.

Good question, people nod, but the answers are usually vague, as they were at
the Chautauqua meeting in August. The conversation drifts on to something else.
But it is a question to be faced now, and Moscow's summit erraticism makes it
more important.

The superpowers no longer determine the future of the entire world; see Vietnam,
Palestine, Iran, Afghanistan, South Africa. But at least we can be clear in our
minds about the principles and conditions on which we want to base the
Soviet-American slice of that future.

On the platform the day the boy stood up was Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey.
The Senator gave an off-the-cuff reply; it does not stick in the mind. But
earlier this month, in Minnesota, he did give thoughtful answers that are worth
thinking about. That speech showed why so many Democrats keep pushing the
reluctant Senator to get into the Presidential race.

Mr. Bradley collected his thoughts on one of the most important subjects facing
the country and presented them strongly and calmly. They were sophisticated, but
not cynical, and rich in detailed reasoning.

They came from a man grounded in foreign affairs and eager to learn more. Adding
to a sound foundation of knowledge is different from the catch-up ball so many
politicians start playing after they see the White House in their dreams.

Wasting no time, Mr. Bradley provided a one-paragraph doctrine that explains
Americans' fears and suspicions of the Soviet Union:

''A society governed by a centralized, one-party state that insists on
dictatorial control is inherently unstable. History teaches that instability and
great military power are a dangerous combination. That is why Soviet power has
been such a problem for the rest of the world, especially for Eastern Europe.''

Without that understanding, the past has no meaning, the future no clarity.
Glasnost may open Soviet society somewhat and produce more bread for Soviet
workers; that is good. But as long as it rests on top of a one-party,
centralized dictatorship with vast military might, unease and suspicion of the
Soviet Union will remain - and be historically valid.

The cold war was real. It was started by Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe.
Its bequest is the opposing armies still on the Continent.

The past does not demand we automatically refuse whatever opportunities Mikhail
Gorbachev and glasnost present to marry the best interests of the Soviet Union,
which is what occupies him, and the best interests of the United States, which
is - or should be - our point of concentration.

The very prospect of widening of U.S.-Soviet negotiations on arms control makes
a far more open Soviet society not only a U.S. humanitarian goal but a U.S.
security interest.

Open enough so that freedom of expression is a right, not a hedged permission,
as it is under glasnost. Open enough to internal differences and political
competition so that a military dictatorship could not suddenly use its armies or
put the country into reverse.

There are other conditions for a safe future. Mr. Bradley named some: much
greater freedom for Eastern Europe, more Soviet restraint in the developing
world. And, as important as any, a reduction in Soviet offensive conventional
power, which now could overwhelm Europe.

That is a matter of safety for both sides. Only such a reduction could guarantee
that if Soviet tanks and armies moved they would not be answered with nuclear
weapons.

Mr. Bradley feels that any economic support for Mr. Gorbachev should be limited
and tied to real progress in reform of the Soviet system itself. ''I question
the wisdom - and the morality - of helping the Soviets avoid the choice between
civilian investment and military buildups.''

Taken together, a good answer to the boy at Chautauqua and to all Americans who
ask themselves what we want for ourselves and the Soviet people.

If Bill Bradley keeps refusing to run for President, somebody else is going to
try to make the man Secretary of State. That threat might make the Senator think
again.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV Reviews;
Billy Joel in Soviet on HBO

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 579 words


IN tune with all the current talk of glasnost, pay cable's Home Box Office has
brought ''Billy Joel From Leningrad, U.S.S.R.'' to its schedule. The hourlong
program, which can be seen tonight at 11:30, is the latest presentation in a
series called ''HBO World Stage,'' featuring music stars in performances around
the globe. On a worldwide tour with his musicians, Mr. Joel appeared in August
at the V. I. Lenin Sports and Concert Complex in Leningrad. The shows were
heralded as the first time an American pop-music star had brought a fully staged
rock show to the Soviet Union.

Shortly before that time, in Moscow, Mr. Joel made the headlines by throwing an
onstage tantrum because, apparently, of his unhappiness with the video crew
preparing for this television special. Needless to say, there are no artistic
tensions evident in the final cut. Neither are there political tensions. Here is
another of those distinctive transcultural occasions where the message is that,
beneath the shells of ideology, we are all brothers and sisters, eager to boogie
to the same musical beat. As Mr. Joel has put it: ''We have a lot in common with
the people of the Soviet Union. They love music and so do we.'' All right, so
don't play ''Melancholy Baby.'' Give us ''The Volga Boat Song.''

Produced by Robert Dalrymple with Rick London, ''Billy Joel From Leningrad'' is
a nonstop celebration - of togetherness, of rock music and, of course, of Billy
Joel. He is at the center of things, sitting at his piano by the edge of the
stage while the rest of his group seems to be a least a half block away. The
camera lingers lovingly on Mr. Joel, capturing him in detailed close-up, while
the other musicians are invariably limited to almost subliminal, nervously
edited blips. This is clearly Mr. Joel's party and no one else is going to blow
out the candles.

The rest is pure Joel, not much different from the kind of entertainment he has
been doing for the the past five years, or longer. He is a showman, not
especially partial to moments of true spontaneity. In the middle of what seems
like an impassioned rendition of a song, he can wink casually at some nearby
fan. He likes special effects. His Vietnam song ''Good Night, Saigon'' provides
the darkened arena with spotlight searches and the sounds of helicopters. It is
the rock show equivalent of Cinemascope.

But, for all that, the show is good. The subjects in a couple of the songs might
upset certain American flag-wavers: steelworker unemployment in ''Allentown,''
homeless winos in ''Big Man on Mulberry Street.'' But, supplied with skimpy
translations, the enthusiastic crowd at the Lenin complex couldn't care less.
They are listening to the beat and are clearly having a great time. An
especially enthusiastic crowd of young people is conveniently gathered close to
the stage, monopolizing the first several rows of the arena, and one can't help
wondering who these privileged few are. In any event, things seem a bit more
subdued back in the distant bleachers.

No matter. The concert ends with Mr. Joel sprawled atop his piano and many of
his fans dancing in the aisles. Several people keep waving a banner consisting
of an American bicentennial flag stitched to a Soviet flag. Flowers are flung at
Mr. Joel. He throws them back at the audience. Closing the show, he says
something to the effect of not to take any garbage from anyone. I could not
detect that particular line being translated for the crowd.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Billy Joel

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV Reviews;
'Top Flight,' Chronicle of Aeronautics

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 577 words


''TOP FLIGHT'' is an homage to the Air Force; sometimes it looks and feels like
a recruiting poster. Uncle Sam wants you, so to speak, to zoom across the sky.
Recruiting poster or not, however, the one-hour CBS documentary, on Channel 2 at
8 o'clock tonight, is done with great style. There is a sense of humor, too.

Consider the opening: drum beats and the long, lean figure of Sam Shepard in a
flight suit. Then Mr. Shepard flies off in a jet; Barbara Hershey is deep in
reverie on the ground.

''I guess I like the kind of man who can push the outside of the envelope.'' Ms.
Hershey says throatily. ''Fly boy,'' she finally adds, almost as if overcome.
The scene is from ''The Right Stuff,'' and it is meant to be amusing; at the
same time, it creates a mood. ''Top Flight'' may be a documentary, but it is
also a kind of romance.

The romance is with the idea of flight, and the brave men and women who have
captured our imagination. ''Top Flight'' - written, produced and directed by
Carol L. Fleisher -uses interviews, old newsreel film and Hollywood movies. Van
Johnson fights World War II, and James Stewart brings in a crippled bomber.
''Top Flight'' wants us to stand up and cheer.

Nonetheless, there is more here than heroics. The film, with a genial William
Shatner in a leather flying jacket as host, is also a history of the Air Force,
which is observing its 40th anniversary as a separate branch of the armed
services this year. In 1916, the film tells us, the Army sent its entire
squadron of eight planes to fight Pancho Villa. Apparently, the planes all
crashed. On the eve of World War I, the Army had only 57 pilots. In an
interview, we hear Arthur Brooks, an engaging man, now 92 years old, who flew in
1917.

Aviation technology, Mr. Brooks says, wasn't much in World War I. Compasses
didn't work, engines failed, ''a good plane lasted an hour or two.'' He says:
''I expected to die. It was as simple as that.'' Pilots didn't even have
parachutes.

''Top Flight'' shows news film from both World Wars, Korea and Vietnam. It gives
us a feeling for the courage and commitment that combat flying has demanded. The
paradox is that the most moving interview we hear is conducted with an airman
who didn't fly a plane or helicopter; he is Master Sgt. Duane Hackney, who
rescued downed pilots in Vietnam.

''There's no romance or anything involved in war,'' Sergeant Hackney says. His
specialty in Vietnam was to be lowered by cable from helicopters, often in the
face of enemy fire, to where the downed and wounded pilots lay. Recalling the
men who died, Sergeant Hackney is close to tears.

We are moved, which is what Ms. Fleisher and Arnold Shapiro, the executive
producer, want us to be. Mr. Shapiro is no war lover, but in previous
documentaries - a fine work called ''The Unknown Soldier'' among them - he gave
us a sense of the bravery and decency that Americans have shown in battle. ''Top
Flight'' does this, too.

Meanwhile, ''Top Flight'' has something like a subtext. Call it the
democratization of flying. There is a segment on black pilots in World War II -
the famous Tuskegee airmen -and a segment on women. More than 1,000 American
women flew during World World II. ''Top Flight'' interviews an Air Force flight
instructor, who just happens to be a woman. It also visits the Air Force
Academy, where the top academic graduate this year was a Vietnamese refugee. You
don't have to cheer, but you may decorously applaud.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Federal Court Continues 'Platoon' Videotape Ban

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 134 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Oct. 26


A Federal appeals court Monday continued an injunction against Home Box Office
selling or renting video cassettes of ''Platoon,'' the Vietnam War film that won
the 1986 Academy Award as best motion picture, and returned the case to a
Federal District Court.

In a 2-1 vote, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit upheld
for one more week an injunction it issued Oct. 9 against HBO, in connection with
a suit filed by Vestron Inc. challenging ownership of video distribution rights.

The appeals court ordered both sides to appear before Federal District Judge
David Kenyon in Los Angeles and said further extensions of the injunction after
Nov. 2 would be up to Judge Kenyon. Federal District Court in Los Angeles had
earlier dismissed Vestron's claim of copyright infringement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 28, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Missing the Point On War Powers

BYLINE: By Stephen J. Solarz; Stephen J. Solarz, a Brooklyn Democrat who is a
member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, recently returned from a trip to
the Persian Gulf.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1392 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


As the United States edges closer to sustained hostilities in the Persian Gulf,
the War Powers Resolution should be invoked to help establish a consensus on the
American presence in the region. Our policy is essentially on track, especially
now that our Arab friends and European allies are beginning to provide
meaningful support. It should not be derailed by an avoidable debate over the
resolution.

Many members of Congress, arguing that United States forces are in real danger
of further attack, have demanded that the President invoke this landmark
legislation. Yet the Administration, citing both constitutional and substantive
objections, has refused to take this step.

Besides maintaining that the law is unconstitutional, the White House apparently
fears that the act's 90-day deadline - beyond which our forces could not remain
in the region without explicit Congressional authorization - would encourage the
Iranians to unleash an all-out war against American shipping in the gulf in the
hope of inducing Congress not to grant this authorization.

Under the pressure of events in the gulf, the Senate has felt compelled to act.
Unfortunately, it has adopted an approach which, however well intentioned, fails
either to assert the relevance of the War Powers Resolution for the current
situation in the gulf or to send a clear message of American resolve to both our
friends and foes in the region.

Instead, the Byrd-Warner Resolution (which the Senate passed last week) simply
provides that 60 days from now the Senate will hold another vote on an as yet
undefined resolution. That resolution could do virtually anything, from
declaring war to terminating the entire American presence in the gulf.

The Byrd-Warner approach constitutes a kind of tacit Congressional complicity in
the President's refusal to invoke the War Powers Resolution. Moreover, it would
actually create the very same period of uncertainty about American intentions
that critics of the War Powers Resolution have lamented. In short, it has given
us the worst of both worlds.

There can be little doubt but that the War Powers Resolution applies to the
current situation in the gulf. Under the provisions of this 1973 statute, the
President must report to the Congress within 48 hours when United States forces
are deployed into hostilities or into situations ''where imminent involvement in
hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances.'' These forces must then
be withdrawn within 90 days unless Congress adopts a resolution authorizing our
presence there.

In the past two months we have seen a succession of war-like incidents in the
gulf. American-flagged ships have been hit by Iranian mines and missiles, and
United States forces have fired in retaliation against Iranian offshore
platforms and mine-laying vessels.

Furthermore, the Pentagon's decision to award dangerous duty pay to military
personnel serving in the gulf - because they are ''more subject to hostile fire
or imminent danger'' -clearly undermines the Administration's contention that
our troops are not in a situation covered by the War Powers Resolution. One
cannot help marveling at the logic of a position that awards dangerous duty pay
yet denies that the situation prompting this pay has any connection with the War
Powers Resolution.

Mr. Reagan should trigger the resolution, because it is the law of the land.
While the President may believe the act is unconstitutional, as have all his
predecessors since 1973, he is nonetheless obligated to carry out its provisions
until the courts rule on the issue.

Invoking the resolution is not only legally imperative, but also politically
desirable. Then both houses of Congress would undoubtedly adopt, by substantial
majorities, a resolution approving our military presence in the gulf, since even
many legislators who opposed the original policy of reflagging the Kuwaiti
tankers would be reluctant at this point to order our fleet home.

Such a resolution would legalize and legitimize our policy of escorting
American-flagged ships in the gulf. At the same time, it would demonstrate to
our friends in the region that this is a commitment we intend to honor, while
simultaneously sending a clear signal to Iran that it cannot drive a wedge
between Congress and the Administration by unprovoked attacks against United
States shipping in the gulf.

If the Administration remains adamant in its refusal to invoke the War Powers
Resolution, other means can be found to establish the relevance of the
resolution, while also obtaining an expression of legislative support for our
Persian Gulf policy. For example, the White House and Congressional leaders
could agree that Congress would adopt a joint resolution triggering the War
Powers Resolution, while simultaneously authorizing the presence of American
forces in the gulf. Mr. Reagan could then sign the resolution while issuing a
statement that his signature did not represent an admission of the law's
constitution-ality.

Under this proposal, Congress would establish the relevance of the War Powers
Resolution for the current situation in the gulf, while the Administration would
get its show of Congressional support without giving ground on the
constitutional principle. In addition, the uncertainty associated with the
90-day waiting period would be avoided, depriving the Iranians of an incentive
to attack American ships in the hope of inducing Congress to refrain from
enacting a resolution approving the American presence in the Gulf.

There are, to be sure, some members of Congress who would like to invoke the War
Powers Resolution, not in order to endorse our naval presence in the gulf but to
terminate it. Whatever the merits of the original reflagging decision, however,
it would be a serious mistake to change course now.

After the fall of the Shah, the withdrawal of the marines from Lebanon and
Irangate - all of which cast doubt on the value of American promises and support
- the decision to respond affirmatively to Kuwait's reflagging request has gone
a long way toward shoring up the confidence of the gulf countries and enhancing
America's reliability and resolve.

In a less important area of the world, our reputation as a steadfast supporter
might not much matter. But in the Persian Gulf, home to 60 percent of the
world's proven oil reserves, maintaining America's credibility must be regarded
as a policy objective of the first order.

Opposition in the United States to the initial decision to reflag Kuwait's
tankers arose in part from a perception that we were acting on behalf of friends
and allies who would be the principal beneficiaries of our actions but who were
unwilling to accept any of the burdens associated with United States policy. Yet
now, after a somewhat sluggish start, we are receiving considerably more
cooperation from our friends in the region than is generally realized. Most of
the gulf states are not only supporting us diplomatically, but are also
providing significant logistical assistance, including mine sweeping, radar
coverage, port facilities and medical contingency arrangements.

Our European allies have also committed themselves to a much more visible
presence in the region. Currently about three dozen ships are stationed in the
gulf, with the British, French, Dutch, Belgians and Italians all providing
vessels. Indeed, the French have a higher percentage of their fleet in the gulf
than we do.

In short, in its basic outlines, American policy for the Persian Gulf is
essentially on track. Now, having committed ourselves to a policy of reflagging
and providing naval escorts, we must stay the course.

A decision to deflag the reflagged Kuwaiti tankers would have the most serious
consequences for our credibility in the region and around the world. Were we to
allow the fulminations of the fundamentalists in Teheran to force us out of the
Persian Gulf, countries that depend upon us for their security would inevitably
be led to reconsider the wisdom of relying on a United States defense
commitment.

One of the lessons of the Vietnam War is the necessity of maintaining support at
home if we are going to sustain our commitments abroad. Invoking the War Powers
Resolution would significantly help to facilitate the emergence of a much-needed
national consensus on our policy in the gulf.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 28, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

At West Point, Symbol of Change for Army

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y., Oct. 26


The parade ground of the United States Military Academy was a confusing scene
today. As the new commandant of cadets, Brig. Gen. Fred A. Gorden, looked on,
small units, representing phantom companies, marched past an empty reviewing box
while White House helicopters practiced landings nearby.

West Point officials, who leave nothing to chance, were rehearsing for a visit
Wednesday by President Reagan that will include a major speech on arms control,
as well as a parade and lunch with cadets in the mess hall.

Amid all the activity, General Gorden was calculating the turns the cadets will
make as they march in reverse order around the field - a change required by a
decision to move the reviewing stand to the opposite side of the field.

He became West Point's 61st commandant of cadets only two months ago, and now he
was seeking to insure that the parade met the military academy's standards.

The Only Black in His Class

''This visit is something quite special,'' he said. ''In the years since I was a
cadet, I don't recall a President ever coming at times other than for
graduation.''

The Army's selection of General Gorden as commandant, the officer in charge of
the training, discipline and physical condition of the Corps of Cadets, was also
something special. He is the first black officer to become commandant of cadets,
the most prominent job at the academy except for that of the superintendent, in
West Point's 185-year history.

The 47-year-old artillery officer, who served in Vietnam and at the Pentagon,
has returned to a West Point that is different in many ways from his days as a
cadet, not least of all in terms of minority enrollment.

''When I entered in 1958,'' he said, ''there was only one other black plebe, and
he left at the end of the first semester.''

Cadet Gorden remained the only black in his class, and was one of 11 in the
entire corps of 2,500 cadets, representing less than one half of one percent.
Today there are 304 blacks in a corps of 4,334 cadets, or 7 percent. That
compares with a 27 percent black enrollment in the Army at large and an Army
officer corps that is 10.5 percent black.

West Point's black enrollment is a result of intense recruiting, according to
officers familiar with admissions. The military academy must compete with other
institutions for black recruits, and then watch private industry try to lure
them away after their five-year service commitment expires.

West Point's minority enrollment also includes 192 Hispanic cadets, 152
Asian-Americans and 19 native Americans. First admitted in 1976, women now
number 454 cadets, just over 10 percent of the corps, with their ranks including
38 blacks and 33 other minority group members.

General Gorden said the Army ''was ostensibly integrated by Presidential order
in 1948, ''but the practical aspect of integration began in Korea in 1952.'' He
said that by the time he returned to West Point as an instructor in 1962, ''the
Army was indeed integrated.''

Scholar and Athlete

Born in Anniston, Ala., he was a baby when his family moved to Atlanta. He was
the fourth of five children, ''and while still an infant was raised by an aunt
who was childless.'' The rest of the family ''lived right around the corner, and
I saw them every day.''

When his aunt moved to Battle Creek, Mich., to marry, he said, ''I went along
with her.'' There he attended local schools, achieving distinction as a scholar
and athlete, qualities sought by West Point.

''I was in the National Honor Society and played basketball on an all-city
team,'' he said. Toward the end of his first year in a local junior college he
received a call from ''one of our hometown lawyers, a black lawyer - I think he
was the only one - who said he had been contacted by our local Congressman about
filling his appointment to West Point.''

He got the appointment, he said, ''but I recall on the very first day having
second thoughts about whether this is really what I wanted to do.'' Cadet basic
training, known then as ''beast barracks,'' was an intimidating process intended
to help transform civilians into soldiers.

Explaining the Whys

West Point's basic training, which covers the same eight weeks devoted by the
regular Army to the entry process, has since been toned down, a change that
preceded General Gorden's arrival as commandant, but one he favors.

''There was a time when you would tell a young soldier what to do and he would
be expected to respond with absolute obedience,'' he said, ''but youngsters in
our society today also want to know why we're doing things.''

Ninety percent of Army personnel today are high school graduates, he said, and
they are interested in technology. ''We're attuned to the more intellectual
approach of doing things,'' he said. ''I want the people who work for me to be
coaches, mentors and trainers.''

He added, ''My philosophy, when it comes to motivating and inspiring the corps,
is to lead them and not to command them to do things.''

Other changes he has seen at West Point range from more varied summer
assignments for the cadets to a greater variety of branches open to them as
commissioned officers, from five basic combat arms into 16 branches of service.

Meanwhile, some traditions remain. On Wednesday, he said, President Reagan will
be speaking in the mess hall, ''the very place where MacArthur gave his famous
'duty, honor, country' talk in 1962'' after receiving an award from the Military
Academy's Association of Graduates.

''I think of the fact that we are preparing leaders today for the year 2000 and
the 21st century,'' General Gorden said, ''and that regardless of the dimensions
of arms control the President may offer, the cadets he will be addressing will
be responsible for implementing whatever he might have to say.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Brig. Gen. Fred A. Gorden (NYT/Alan Zale) (Pp. 1 and 2)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 28, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MARKET TURMOIL;
Economists Scale Back Predictions of Growth

BYLINE: By THOMAS C. HAYES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1234 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Oct. 27


The stock market collapse could push the United States economy into low gear
next year, and it has increased the chances of a recession before 1989, several
economists say.

''The longer the market turmoil goes on, the more consumers will sit on the
sidelines,'' said Ronald L. Promboin, senior economist with the Amoco
Corporation in Chicago. ''The more the consumer retrenches, the more you're
going to start seeing business plans affected.''

Mr. Promboin, like many economists, has pared his forecast of growth in the
nation's gross national product because of the market's plunge. He now foresees
annual growth of about 1.7 percent, down from 2.7 percent.

Most economists asserted that a recession is not likely, despite the
psychological damage caused by the 508-point plunge in the Dow Jones industrial
average on Oct. 19. But at least one respected economist, John Rutledge,
chairman of the Claremont Economics Institute in Claremont, Calif., said he is
convinced a recession began that day.

A recession is usually defined as two or more consecutive quarters of decline in
the nation's output of goods and services. Since World War II, an average
recession has lasted nearly 11 months.

Most economists agree that about $1 trillion in buying power, which had been
presumed to be available to owners of common stocks, has been erased from the
stock market since the Dow Jones industrial average reached a peak of 2,722.42
on Aug. 25.

''The market's plunge need not have any significant or lasting effect on the
nation's standard of living,'' Martha R. Seger, a Federal Reserve Governor, said
today in New York. But she added that consumer confidence had been ''thoroughly
shaken'' by the decline in stock prices.

''I wonder whether the consumer will be as willing as before to make major
spending commitments,'' Reuters quoted Ms. Seger as saying at an investment
conference.

The consumer confidence index of the Conference Board, a business research
group, is scheduled to be releases today. It will show only a slight decline
after the stock market drop, said Fabian Linden, the board's director of
research into consumer economics. ''Before the market plunge, our index was
116.9, but over this past weekend it dropped to 110.4, which is a difference of
6.5 and insignificant,'' he said.

In comparison, after the December 1973 oil crisis, the board's confidence index
plummeted by one-third, Mr. Linden said.

Lawrence Chimerine, chairman of the WEFA Group, formerly Wharton Econometrics,
in Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., said consumer spending would be a key factor in whether
economic growth ends in the coming months. After the market collapse, Mr.
Chimerine pared his 1988 forecast of G.N.P. growth by one percentage point, to
1.5 percent.

''When you consider the high debt levels of American consumers, you can't rule
out a steep recession,'' he added. ''We're dealing with trying to measure fear.
The speed of the market's decline is scaring people.''

Historic Pattern: Downturns

In the past, a collapse in stock prices has generally led either to a marked
slowdown in economic growth or a recession, according to Geoffrey H. Moore,
director of the Center for International Business Cycle Research at the Columbia
University Business School.

The reasons are several, he said. When stock prices fall, it costs businesses
more to raise capital to finance their growth; stockholders' wealth is slashed,
and consumers and businesses are more reluctant to take on debt. The result is a
prevailing caution that restrains demand for goods and services.

''There is a 50-50 chance that real growth in 1988 could be close to zero,''
said Norman Robertson, chief economist of the Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh, who had
anticipated a growth rate of 2 percent next year. ''I see little or no increase
in consumer spending in 1988, but continued improvement in capital spending as
well as in foreign trade.

''If actions by the United States, Germany and Japan are prompt and decisive,
it's entirely possible that the fallout from this entire affair will be minimal.
If there is delay and hesitation, the uncertainty will mount and there is a good
chance we can have a recession.''

Many economists had expected a slowdown in consumer spending in the United
States before the market collapse. Strong spending by consumers had led the
economy on an unusually long upward path. That advance, which will mark its
fifth anniversary next month, represents what Mr. Moore called the longest
peacetime expansion of the American economy since 1796. An expansion from
February 1961 to December 1969 -which was extended by factors related to the
Vietnam War - was the longest since World War II.

Economists said one explanation for the sustained spending by consumers in the
current expansion was the parallel rise in stock prices, which began in August
1982. This, they said, gave consumers a sense that they were better off, a
condition economists call the ''wealth effect.'' Meanwhile, personal savings
fell to what is now the lowest level since the 1930's.

For many executives, the tumult on Wall Street was jarring, but spending
projects are apparently going ahead as planned.

Ennius E. Bergsma, who heads a corporate finance consulting practice with
McKinsey & Company in New York, said most executives he had spoken with in the
last 10 days indicated they planned to stay with 1988 budget plans already in
the works. ''They don't think the collapse portrays the beginnings of a
recession,'' he said, adding that he agreed with that assessment.

Jerry J. Jasinowski, chief economist of the National Association of
Manufacturers, in Washington, said the Commerce Department's report of a 3.8
percent increase in the annual G.N.P. growth rate during the third quarter
confirmed his view that the economy remained in good shape.

Still, he said, he pared his 1988 G.N.P. growth forecast by a percentage point,
to about 2 percent, because of the stock market's plunge. His new forecast
assumes that the dollar will be stable, the Dow Jones average will settle near
2,000 and interest rates will hold steady or fall slightly.

David A. Wyss, chief financial economist for Data Resources Inc., in Lexington,
Mass., said a recession could be avoided next year if central banks in West
Germany and Japan lower interest rates and stimulate their domestic economies.
For now, he is forecasting a growth rate of 1.5 percent next year, down
three-quarters of a point because of the stock market.

Mr. Wyss said the earliest, best measure of whether consumer confidence was
shaken by the market selloff will be the next report on 10-day auto sales, due
Nov. 4. Mid-October sales, reported last Friday, were at an annual rate of 6
million cars, unchanged from a year ago.

Mr. Rutledge, of Claremont Economics, said last week's plunge in stock prices
immediately touched off a recession that could last for perhaps three quarters,
the duration of a normal recession.

But the downturn could be extended if Congress enacts protectionist laws in an
effort to trim the nation's trade deficit, he said. ''Protectionism is the one
event which could turn this recession story into story of a worldwide recession,
collapse and depression,'' he said.

Michael K. Evans, president of Evans Economics Inc., in Washington, predicted a
mild recession lasting two quarters, beginning in the first or second quarter
next year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 28, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MARKET TURMOIL: PRESIDENT IN A CRISIS;
His Optimistic Style Has Not Helped To Ease Concerns Over the Economy

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 13, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 27


As the stock market continues its wild gyrations and many Americans worry that
the nation may be looking over the edge of an economic precipice, President
Reagan's aides say he is perplexed by the calls for greater leadership from the
White House.

Congressmen, corporate leaders and financial traders, among others, have been
urging President Reagan to step forward and take decisive control of the crisis.

All of that comes as a surprise, perhaps because for most of his time in office,
Mr. Reagan has, if nothing else, managed to project the image of a strong
leader. ''And the simple fact is,'' a senior White House official said today,
''he's not doing anything now that's any different than he has always done.''
That, some aides said, may be the problem.

The problem, some officials acknowledge, is that the optimistic style that has
served Mr. Reagan so well may now seem inappropriate. Coming after a string of
notable problems and failures - the Iran-contra scandal, the unsuccessful
nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court - the President's
ebullient optimism and cheer seem unusual, even discomforting to some.

When the nation believes it is caught in a crisis, the public is accustomed to
images of the President closeted with his senior aides, brows furrowed, faces
grim as they work late into the night. So it was with President Kennedy in the
Cuban missle crisis, President Johnson in the worst moments of the Vietnam War
and President Carter at key points in the Iranian hostage negotiations.

'Never Been a Workaholic'

Mr. Reagan has not been shown in scenes like that. To be sure, he has worked
extensively with his aides, sometimes even at night or over the weekend. ''But
he has never been a workaholic, and he still isn't,'' a White House official
said.

Since the stock market crises began eight days ago, the public has seen Mr.
Reagan most often waving and smiling, bouyant as he heads off to Camp David for
the weekend or shouting answers to reporters on the fly, his waiting helicopter
roaring in the background. At least one senior White House aide quarrels with
the thesis that Mr. Reagan's public persona has any bearing on how the public
judges his ability to lead.

''I don't think the American people care if they see a President smiling or
frowning,'' he said today. ''I think they want to see good policies being put
into place.''

But even in the policy area, the President's performance has been uncertain. On
the day the Dow-Jones Industrial Average fell 508 points, Mr. Reagan said the
historic fall was simply investors taking profits. The next day he implied it
was the fault of Democrats in Congress. On Wednesday, he said the crisis
''appears to be over.'' Last week he did change his mind and agree to meet with
Congressional leaders for negotiations to reduce the budget deficit. Those talks
continued today.

But his aides say he agreed to those steps, which he fundamentally abhors, only
after they twisted his arm.

That was accomplished with sharp disagreements between what has come to be known
as the White House pragmatists, notably Howard H. Baker Jr., the chief of staff,
and the conservative ideologues, who agree with Mr. Reagan that he should fight
all tax increases no matter what.

A senior aide who agrees with the President said: ''He genuinely believes tax
increases will be a terrible thing. He genuinely believes Congress is
responsible for the deficit. He genuinely believes that if he makes a deal with
Congress, they'll back down on their end. That's why he didn't jump on these
things the first day.''

Paradigm for His Style

Now Mr. Reagan is being forced to negotiate on all those points.

Throughout his term the President has managed to fend off most calls for tax
increases or other initatives he opposes by appealing directly to the public.
His televised speech in 1982 asking the public to support tax legislation was so
successful it became a paradigm for his strategy in later years.

Mr. Reagan's mastery of television, his aides agree, may have contributed as
much as anything to Mr. Reagan's broad personal appeal.

Even after a national calamity like the Challenger explosion last year, Mr.
Reagan's televised speech lamenting the disaster touched millions of people;
''It was one of the most effective things he has ever done,'' an official
recalled.

Mr. Reagan even turned that disaster into an optimistic promise, telling
relatives of the victims: ''Your loved ones were daring and brave and they had
that special grace, that special spirit that says 'Give me a challenge, and I
will meet it with joy.' ''

But in the last year almost all of his television speeches have been reactive,
defensive. He spoke of his ''great regret'' in the Iran-contra affair. Another
time, he said, ''I paid a price for my silence in terms of your trust and
confidence.''

His most recent televised speech, urging support for Judge Bork even after his
nomination was clearly doomed, was not carried by any of the three major
television networks.

That, aides agree, has added to the image of a leader in decline. And out of all
of it, a senior aide acknowlegded, ''The days when this President can absolutely
control events are slipping away.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

24 Names Added to Vietnam Memorial

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 70 words


Kirk Bookman, left, and Jim Lee engraving the name of one of 24 veterans being
added to the black-marble wall. Some of the additional names were overlooked
when the original list was compiled, but at least five have died within the last
three years of injuries suffered in the war. Officials are trying to locate
relatives of the men to invite them to a dedication ceremony scheduled for Nov.
11, Veterans Day. (AP)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Little Evidence of 1968 Tet Massacre in Hue

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 300 words


To the Editor:

Reed Irvine suggests it is ''well established'' that 2,810 bodies found in mass
graves and 1,946 people missing from Hue after the 1968 Tet Offensive were
victims of Communist ''massacre'' (letter, Sept. 22).

There is evidence of several hundred political executions carried out by the
Communists toward the end of the occupation in Hue. Many of these were
apparently revenge killings by Buddhist activists and the former Hue police
chief, who fled from the military suppression of the Buddhist struggle movement
in 1966 and returned with Communist forces at Tet.

But that the more than 2,800 bodies found in and around Hue after Tet were
victims of Communist executions is supported only by official assertions. In the
bloody fighting to recapture Hue, in which half the homes were destroyed,
thousands -civilians and Vietcong troops - were killed and buried in mass
graves. The original South Vietnamese Government figure for civilians killed in
the fighting was 3,776, but the Saigon Army's 10th Psychological Warfare
Battalion substituted the figure 944 and blamed the Communists for the rest.

The site of one set of mass graves was also the site of a major battle in which
some 250 Communist troops were reported killed in heavy United States air
strikes. Saigon's minister of health, after visiting burial sites, said the
bodies could have been Communist soldiers killed in battle.

As for Douglas Pike's claim that there were Communist blacklists of students and
intellectuals to be killed as ''natural leaders,'' interviews and captured
Communist documents both indicate there was no such Communist plan in Hue.

GARETH PORTER
Washington, Oct. 11, 1987
  The writer teaches Southeast Asian politics at American University's School of
International Service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

John Oliver Killens, 71, Author And Founder of Writers' Group

BYLINE: By C. GERALD FRASER

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 802 words


John Oliver Killens, a writer, teacher and a founder of the Harlem Writers
Guild, died of cancer Tuesday at the Metropolitan Jewish Geriatric Center in
Brooklyn. He was 71 years old and lived in the Crown Heights section of
Brooklyn.

Mr. Killens's novels, belying his low-key and soft-spoken manner, mirrored his
hard-edged activist philosophy. He once wrote, ''My fight is not to be a white
man in a black skin, but to inject some black blood, some black intelligence
into the pallid mainstream of American life, culturally, socially,
psychologically, philosophically.''

As a teacher in creative-writing programs at colleges, including Fisk, Howard
and Columbia Universities and Medgar Evers College, and a founder in 1952 of the
Harlem Writers Guild, Mr. Killens was notable for nurturing young people. ''He
was very giving,'' said Malaika Adero, an editor at Simon & Schuster and a
Killens workshop participant. ''He cared about writing beyond the development of
technical skills.''

''There is no such thing as art for art's sake,'' Mr. Killens once said. ''All
art is propaganda, although there is much propaganda that is not art. We must
join a crusade to decolonize the minds of black people. No one else will do this
work, so we must.''

Tutored Developing Writers

Younger writers he tutored include Nikki Giovanni, Richard Perry, Arthur
Flowers, Wesley Brown and Barbara Sommers. And the list of early guild members
includes John Henry Clark, Lonne Elder 3d, Douglas Turner Ward, Ossie Davis,
Paule Marshall, Audre Lorde, Maya Angelou and Sarah Wright. In the first 12
years of its existence, guild members produced several novels, three plays and a
movie. Mr. Killens himself read and honed his first novel, ''Youngblood,'' at
guild meetings in members' homes.

Mr. Killens's writings, which were translated into 14 languages, include a
drama, two screenplays and several novels. In ''And Then We Heard the Thunder,''
his second novel, published in 1963, Mr. Killens's black hero is a law-school
student who, in World War II, becomes a commissioned officer with an all-black
amphibious regiment. After being disabused of the notion that he is on an equal
footing with the white commissioned officers, he makes common cause with his
black fellow soldiers. Like his hero, Mr. Killens himself left law school for
the Army.

The writer and critic Noel Perrin wrote in 1985 that World War II and Vietnam
produced large quantities of good fiction, and among the 1,000-plus World War II
books of fiction, ''And Then We Heard the Thunder'' was one of five major
novels. A year after publication it was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize.

The first Killens novel, ''Youngblood,'' was published in 1954 as the Supreme
Court outlawed school segregation and the civil-rights movement was gestating in
the South. Mr. Killens, who was born in Macon, Ga., set his novel in a small
Georgia town and portrayed a community of ordinary black people ready to die to
obtain rights.

Essays, Stage and Film

Mr. Killens was especially admired for his first two novels. Some viewed his
later fiction as less powerful, more didactic. His final work is ''The Great
Black Russian: The Life and Times of Alexander Pushkin.'' It will be published
in May by Wayne State Press. He also wrote ''Black Man's Burden'' (1966), essays
on the black man's evolution in America; ''Sippi'' (1967), the story of a black
family in Mississippi; ''Cotillion: Or One Good Bull Is Half the Herd,'' (1971);
''Great Gittin' Up Morning: A Biography of Denmark Vesey'' (1972), and a
children's book, ''A Man Ain't Nothin' but a Man: The Adventures of John Henry''
(1975).

In 1964 he collaborated with the playwright Loften Mitchell on ''Ballad of the
Winter Soldiers,'' a pageant about freedom fighters presented at Lincoln Center.
In another collaboration he and Fred Halstead wrote material for ''Harlem
Stirs,'' a collection of photographs by Don Hogan Charles and Anthony Aviles.

Of his two major screenplays, the more commercially successful was the 1959
feature ''Odds Against Tomorrow,'' which starred Harry Belafonte, Robert Ryan
and Ed Begley as a trio of bank robbers. His other script was for ''Slaves''
(1969).

Mr. Killens's experiences in the Army inspired his turn to writing. After the
war he abandoned law school, returned to New York and took writing classes at
Columbia University.

Mr. Killens earlier attended Edward Waters College and Morris Brown College and
graduated from Howard University. In addition to being the first chairman of the
Harlem Writers Guild, he was a vice president of the Black Academy of Arts and
Letters.

He is survived by his mother, Willie, of Washington; his wife, Grace; a son,
John Charles; a daughter, Barbara Killens Rivera, and two brothers, Charles and
Richard, of Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John Oliver Killens (NYT)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 31, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CBS ENTERTAINMENT CHIEF IS LEAVING THE NETWORK

BYLINE: By PETER J. BOYER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 54, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 643 words


B. Donald Grant, president of CBS Entertainment since 1980, will leave the
network to form his own production company, he said yesterday.

Mr. Grant, reached by telephone in California, said that his departure was
voluntary and that independent television programming ''is something that I want
to do.'' His contract with the network provided that CBS would establish a
production company for him upon his departure.

The new company, to be called Bud Grant Productions, will have a nonexclusive
programming arrangement with CBS - meaning that CBS will pay for the company and
will have first refusal of Mr. Grant's program proposals.

No successor to Mr. Grant has been named, and some network officials speculated
that none would be named soon. Kim LeMasters, vice president in charge of
programming under Mr. Grant, will take over his duties and report to the CBS
Broadcast Group.

CBS is third in the ratings competition this season. Mr. Grant was responsible
for scheduling several of CBS's established hit shows, like ''Murder She Wrote''
and ''Newhart,'' which helped keep CBS in first place through the mid-1980's.
But the network has failed to develop any major new hits in the last few
seasons.

Contrast at NBC

That failure parallels the rapid rise in the ratings of NBC's prime-time
programs, which has established that network as the audience favorite, as well
as giving NBC an edge in advertising revenues.

CBS's highest-rated programs are all shows that have been on the schedule for
several years: ''Dallas'' has been on the air since 1978, ''60 Minutes'' (a
program from the news division) has been on the air since 1968, ''Murder She
Wrote'' is in its fourth season and ''Newhart'' is in its sixth season. By
contrast, NBC last year added a new hit, ''L.A. Law,'' to its schedule, and ABC
has added several hits, like ''Moonlighting'' and ''Growing Pains,'' to its
schedule.

This week, CBS announced that five of the nine programs introduced this season
would be allowed to remain on the air for the rest of the year, but the new
shows have had only moderate success.

Still, Mr. Grant pointed out, ABC, which is in second place in the overall
ratings this season, has been helped by its sports schedule, which includes
''Monday Night Football'' and, this year, the World Series. ''When you compare
CBS entertainment to ABC entertainment, CBS is ahead,'' Mr. Grant said.

The Deputy's Projects

Laurence A. Tisch, president and chief executive officer of CBS, said in a
statement yesterday that Mr. LeMasters would remain as vice president in charge
of programming and report to Gene F. Jankowski, the president of the CBS
Broadcast Group.

Mr. LeMasters has been in his job for 18 months and has been responsible for
bringing new programs into development under the supervision of Mr. Grant. It
was Mr. LeMasters, for example, who gave the CBS schedule a somewhat more daring
aspect this season with such shows as ''Tour of Duty,'' a weekly drama about the
Vietnam War, and ''Beauty and the Beast,'' a modern takeoff on the classic
fantasy about an attractive heroine and her hairy protector.

Several CBS executives said yesterday that Mr. LeMasters was considered the
front runner as Mr. Grant's replacement if there is to be one. It is also
possible that the CBS program department will continue to report directly to Mr.
Jankowski.

Asked why he was leaving the network now, Mr. Grant said: ''I have thought about
this for a long time, that some day I'd like to get closer to the progamming,
closer to the product. The time has come. I feel this is a good time to do it.''

Some CBS executives said the move was made now to give Mr. Grant's replacement
time to plan for the new development season. The networks will begin to decide
after the first of the year which projects to make into pilot films for next
season.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TENSE MANILA DEBATES HOW BEST TO FIGHT THE REBELS

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHETHER the gunmen who killed three American servicemen and a Filipino
businessman near Clark Air Base in the Philippines last week were Communists is
not certain. An anonymous caller claimed responsibility for the Communists' Alex
Boncayo Brigade. American and Philippine authorities said the ambush followed
the pattern of assassinations by Communists, but it was still possible that a
right-wing group had killed the Americans, hoping the Communists would be
blamed.

The assassinations can be expected to fuel tensions in the Philippine Government
and its disgruntled army over how to fight the guerrillas. The Communists are
entrenched in the countryside, where they are believed to control 20 percent of
the villages. They have also infiltrated unions, schools and other urban
institutions, but experts say the countryside remains their principal target.
According to Maoist doctrine, when the revolution dominates in rural areas, the
cities eventually fall.

The Communists' New Peoples Army is a tightly controlled force of about 12,000,
supported by 12,000 militiamen who provide intelligence, refuge, food and
couriers. They face 30,000 of the Government's 115,000 regular and paramilitary
forces, but these units are spread out and relatively inactive. Military
officers complain that President Corazon C. Aquino views the insurgency as ''an
army problem.'' Col. Homer Capulong, who heads the principal army training
center, said: ''It is not a military problem. It is a societal problem, and
depending upon the army to solve it will only make matters worse.'' Frustrated
officers and many foreign observers say that unless the Government develops a
coherent national plan, combining political, economic and military measures,
Communist strength will continue to grow. The army has been accused of making
convenient excuses for military inactivity. However, most officers have studied
revolutionary warfare at home and in the United States. Gen. Fidel Ramos, the
Chief of Staff, is a 1950 graduate of West Point, where several Filipinos are
cadets each year. About 200 officers attend graduate classes in the United
States.

Many officers see similarities now to the beginnings of the Vietcong insurgency
in South Vietnam. ''The Saigon Government failed to realize that fundamental
changes in rural life were essential to success against the Communists,'' said a
retired Philippine general and Aquino Government adviser. ''The Government
placed its trust in weapons and failed, while the Vietcong placed theirs in the
people and won. We must not make the same mistake.'' Many Philippine officers
agree with the Communists that the allegiance of the ''barangays,'' or villages,
is the real prize. Guerrilla activity is troublesome and the army should fight
it more aggressively, they say, but the guerrillas are not central now. The
Communists, they say, are careful to use persuasion and social pressure, rather
than intimidation and terror in the villages. This must be countered by economic
and political changes to persuade villagers that the Government, not the
Communists, will help them. ''It is foolish to send the army to protect people
who don't feel threatened,'' an army major said. He added that only when the
peasants believe in the Government and reject the Communists will the army be
needed to protect them ''by hunting down'' the rebels.

While theoretical knowledge of insurgencies seems widespread, there is little
evidence that it is being put to use. A reluctance to vigorously track down the
guerrillas was evident on a recent visit to rural villages in Luzon and
Mindanao. Villagers in these widely separated islands said army patrol schedules
were known well in advance, allowing guerrillas time to hide. ''The soldiers are
afraid to meet the N.P.A.,'' a farmer said, using the guerrilla force's
initials.

Accumulated grievances and coup rumors have virtually paralyzed
counterinsurgency operations.

The army is crippled by lack of training and severe shortages, from boots to
spare parts. Morale is low except in elite marine and ranger units. Officers
accuse the Government of ignoring army needs, contending that Mrs. Aquino's
amnesty program and her attempt to obtain a cease-fire show she is ''soft'' on
the Communists.

Widespread bitterness is reflected in sympathy for Col. Gregorio Honasan, who
led a coup attempt in August and is still at large.

Richard G. Stillwell, a former

Deputy Undersecretary of Defense, is pessimistic. ''Unless and until trends can
be changed,'' he added, using the Communist Party's initials, ''it is
predictable that the C.P.P. will readily increase its control of the rural areas
while concurrently infiltrating and destabilizing the urban areas, with Manila
as the ultimate target.'' To reverse that, he said, Mrs. Aquino must make defeat
of the insurgency the ''No. 1 national priority,'' and the United States must
develop a ''responsive'' assistance program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 1, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 908 words




$

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     4    THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $4.95.)
            Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New
            York family begun in ''Evergreen.''

 2     5    A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Warner,
            $4.95.) Comdr. Adam Dalgliesh investigates a
            brutal double murder.

 3     3    FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen
            Coonts. (Pocket, $4.95.) Navy aviators in the
            Vietnam War.

 4 *   11   IT, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)
            Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman
            who grew up in a small Maine town.

 5     4    FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov.
            (Del Rey/Ballantine, $4.95.) The hero of the
            ''Foundation'' series searches for the lost planet
            Earth.

 6     16   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley,
            $4.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
            World War III.

 7     1    WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Avon, $5.95.)
            Iran during the month following the Shah's
            departure.

 8     1    KENTUCKY! by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam,
            $4.50.) The latest in the ''Wagons West'' series tells
            of a plot to assassinate President Grant.

 9     5    VALE OF THE VOLE, by Piers Anthony. (Avon,
            $3.95.) Esk, the son of an ogre and a nymph,
            defends the inhabitants of a paradise.

10     5    DREAMS ARE NOT ENOUGH, by Jacqueline
            Briskin. (Berkley, $4.50.) A California family
            dynasty out to conquer the world.

11     2    PAPER MONEY, by Ken Follett. (Signet/NAL,
            $3.95.) Crime, high finance and journalism form
            the threads of this newly reissued 1977 thriller.

12 *   77   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom
            Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
            brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

13     9    REGRETS ONLY, by Sally Quinn. (Ballantine,
            $4.95.) Two men, two women, passion and power-
            brokering in Washington.

14     10   THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen.
            (Avon, $4.95.) Romance, power and greed mark
            an 18th-century woman's coming-of-age.

 15    4    I AM THE ONLY RUNNING FOOTMAN, by
            Martha Grimes. (Dell, $3.95.) Scotland Yard's
            Superintendent Jury on the trail of a strangler.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction

 1     4    ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
            Wambaugh. (Bantam, $4.95.) A case involving the
            1979 murder of a high school teacher.

 2    210   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
            (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
            spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 3     52   WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.
            (North Point, $12.50.) A woman's adventures
            flying in Africa and across the Atlantic in the 30's.

 4     27   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Berkley, $6.95.)
            Anecdotes and ruminations by the television star.

 5     36   NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.
            (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
            author says, and we must confront them to grow.

 6     9    KAFFIR BOY, by Mark Mathabane. (Plume/
            NAL, $8.95.) A young black man tells of his
            coming-of-age in apartheid South Africa.

 7     3    ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Avon,
            $4.50.) The comedian's autobiography, taking her
            up to age 26.

 8     10   HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $4.95.) An
            unauthorized biography of Frank Sinatra.

 9     18   MAYFLOWER MADAM, by Sydney Biddle
            Barrows with William Novak. (Ivy/Ballantine,
            $4.95.) Tales of the world's oldest profession.

10 *   2    ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John
            Madden with Dave Anderson. (Jove, $3.95.)
            Observations on football.

11 *   6    THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Avon,
            $5.50.) The confrontation between America's Ford
            Motor Company and Japan's Nissan.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1     1    THE FAR SIDE OBSERVER, by Gary Larson.
            (Andrews & McMeel, $5.95.) Cartoons.

 2     10   BILLY AND THE BOINGERS BOOTLEG, by
            Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $7.95.) More
            ''Bloom County'' cartoon strips.

 3     21   THE BOOK OF QUESTIONS, by Gregory Stock.
            (Workman, $3.95.) Provocative questions to ask
            yourself in order to learn more about yourself.

 4     74   WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin
            Norwood. (Pocket, $4.95.) How to avoid or end
            addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.

 5     27   CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson.
            (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $6.95.) Cartoons.

 6 *   34   DIANETICS, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge
            Publications, $4.95.) Latest edition of a handbook
            by the founder of Scientology.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Woman Who Beat The Klan

BYLINE: By Jesse Kornbluth; Jesse Kornbluth is a contributing editor of Vanity
Fair and a screenwriter.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3887 words


IN HER DREAM, THERE was a steel-gray casket in her living room. Who was the dead
man laid out in a gray suit? She couldn't tell. And every time she moved closer
to the coffin, someone she didn't know said, ''You don't need to see this.'' But
Beulah Mae Donald knew that she did, and so she woke from her dream at two in
the morning in Mobile, Ala., on March 21, 1981. The first thing she did, she
later said, was to look in the other bedroom, where her youngest child slept.
Michael, 19, wasn't there. She telephoned one of her six other children. Though
Michael had watched television with his cousins earlier in the evening, he had
left before midnight.

Mrs. Donald drank two cups of coffee and moved to her couch, where she waited
for the new day. At dawn, Michael still wasn't home. To keep busy, she went
outside to rake her small yard. As she worked, a woman delivering insurance
policies came by. ''They found a body,'' she said, and walked on. Shortly before
7 A.M., Mrs. Donald's phone rang. A woman had found Michael's wallet in a trash
bin. Mrs. Donald brightened - Michael was alive, she thought. ''No, baby, they
had a party here, and they killed your son,'' the caller reported. ''You'd
better send somebody over.'' A few blocks away, in a racially mixed neighborhood
about a mile from the Mobile police station, Michael Donald's body was still
hanging from a tree. Around his neck was a perfectly tied noose with 13 loops.
On a front porch across the street, watching police gather evidence, were
members of the United Klans of America, once the largest and, according to civil
rights lawyers, the most violent of the Ku Klux Klans. Less than two hours after
finding Michael Donald's body, Mobile police would interview these Klansmen.
Lawmen learned only much later, however, what Bennie Jack Hays, the 64-year-old
Titan of the United Klans, was saying as he stood on the porch that morning. ''A
pretty sight,'' commented Hays, according to a fellow Klansman. ''That's gonna
look good on the news. Gonna look good for the Klan.''

FOR BENNIE HAYS, THE 25 PO-licemen gathering around Michael Donald's body
represented the happy conclusion to an extremely unhappy development. That week,
a jury had been struggling to reach a verdict in the case of a black man accused
of murdering a white policeman. The killing had occurred in Birmingham, but the
trial had been moved to Mobile. To Hays - the second-highest Klan official in
Alabama - and his fellow members of Unit 900 of the United Klans, the presence
of blacks on the jury meant that a guilty man would go free. According to
Klansmen who attended the unit's weekly meeting, Hays had said that Wednesday,
''If a black man can get away with killing a white man, we ought to be able to
get away with killing a black man.''

On Friday night, after the jurors announced they couldn't reach a verdict, the
Klansmen got together in a house Bennie Hays owned on Herndon Avenue. According
to later testimony from James (Tiger) Knowles, then 17 years old, Tiger produced
a borrowed pistol. Henry Francis Hays, Bennie's 26-year-old son, took out a
rope. Then the two got in Henry's car and went hunting for a black man.

Michael Donald was alone, walking home, when Knowles and Hays spotted him. They
pulled over, asked him for directions to a night club, then pointed the gun at
him and ordered him to get in. They drove to the next county. When they stopped,
Michael begged them not to kill him, then tried to escape. Henry Hays and
Knowles chased him, caught him, hit him with a tree limb more than a hundred
times, and, when he was no longer moving, wrapped the rope around his neck.
Henry Hays shoved his boot in Michael's face and pulled on the rope. For good
measure, they cut his throat.

Around the time Mrs. Donald was having her prescient nightmare, Henry Hays and
Knowles returned to the party at Bennie Hays's house, where they showed off
their handiwork, and, looping the rope over a camphor tree, raised Michael's
body just high enough so it would swing.

THE MOBILE POLICE CHIEF WAS certain from the very beginning that the Klansmen
were involved. Despite that, the police soon arrested three young men they
described as ''junkie types.'' When it became clear these men had no involvement
in the killing, they were released - and, at the District Attorney's invitation,
the Federal Bureau of Investigation entered the case. That investigation
produced no useful evidence, however, and it seemed that the killers would go
unpunished. It took two years, a second F.B.I. investigation and a skillfully
elicited confession to convict Tiger Knowles of violating Michael Donald's civil
rights and Henry Hays of murder. Hays, who received the death sentence, is that
rarest of Southern killers: a white man slated to die for the murder of a black.

At that point, a grieving mother might have been expected to issue a brief
statement of gratitude and regret, and then return to her mourning. Beulah Mae
Donald would not settle for that. From the moment she insisted on an open casket
for her battered son - ''so the world could know'' - she challenged the silence
of the Klan and the recalcitrance of the criminal justice system. Two
convictions weren't enough for her. She didn't want revenge. She didn't want
money. All she ever wanted, she says, was to prove that ''Michael did no
wrong.''

Mrs. Donald's determination inspired a handful of lawyers and civil rights
advocates, black and white. Early in 1984, Morris Dees, co-founder of the
Southern Poverty Law Center, suggested that Mrs. Donald file a civil suit
against the members of Unit 900 and the United Klans of America. The killers
were, he believed, carrying out an organizational policy set by the group's
Imperial Wizard, Robert Shelton. If Dees could prove in court that this ''theory
of agency'' applied, Shelton's Klan would be as liable for the murder as a
corporation is for the actions its employees take in the service of business.

Mrs. Donald and her attorney, State Senator Michael A. Figures, agreed to
participate in the civil suit. Last February, an all-white jury in Mobile needed
to deliberate only four hours before awarding her $7 million. In May, the Klan
turned over the deed to its only significant asset, the $225,000 national
headquarters building in Tuscaloosa. Meanwhile, Mrs. Donald's attorney moved to
seize the property and garnish the wages of individual defendants. ''The Klan,
at this point, is washed up,'' says Henry Hays, from his cell on death row.

On the strength of evidence presented at the civil trial, the Mobile District
Attorney was able to indict Bennie Hays and his son-in-law, Frank Cox, for
murder; their trial, scheduled to begin in February, will complete Beulah Mae
Donald's long and painful campaign to insure that her son's lynching will be the
last Alabama will ever see.

WHEN SIX VETERANS OF THE Confederate Army founded the Ku Klux Klan in 1865,
their intent was to relieve the boredom of life in a small Tennessee town. After
giving themselves titles intended to sound preposterous, the members of this
secret society decided to add costumes -and their hooded robes encouraged them
to commit acts of violence they would never have dared to undertake without
disguise. By 1867, they were beginning to terrorize blacks; Jews and Catholics
were to follow.

In the 1920's, at the height of its popularity, the Klan had about 5 million
members, more in the North than in the South; in that decade alone, Klansmen
lynched as many as 900 blacks. The modern Klan has, by contrast, only about
5,000 to 7,000 members - and they are split into four groups, with no national
leader. Michael Donald's murder, the first Klan killing in Alabama in years, was
more an expression of impotent rage than it was testimony to a resurgence of the
white-sheeted Klan.

In the 1970's, if the Mobile Klansmen were known for anything, it was for the
business cards they printed up and handed out to the elderly ladies they helped
across downtown streets. But there were still reasons they might believe they
could kill a black in Mobile and go free.

Although about one-third of Mobile's population is black, not a single one was
elected to Mobile's top governing body from 1911 to 1985. In the mid-1970's,
when a police squad was formed to prevent robberies, minority leaders charged
that its real purpose was to harass blacks. In 1977, their belief gained
credibility when members of this squad took an innocent black man into custody
and encouraged him to confess to a burglary by putting a rope around his neck,
tossing it over a tree and pulling him onto his tiptoes. The squad was
disbanded, but race relations didn't improve significantly.

BEULAH MAE Donald, who was born in 1919, grew up isolated from most of this. She
left school in the 10th grade to have a child; by 1962, when Michael was born,
she says she was so exhausted that she had to spend a year in the hospital.
She'd always worked - ''I had a sorry husband,'' she says - and when her
marriage ended soon after Michael's birth, she moved her brood into a Mobile
housing project and began to raise them alone. ''I wasn't able to get everything
for them,'' she recalls, ''but I let them know the value of things.'' Her method
was love and religion. On Sunday, she would take her family to church in the
morning and remain there all day. ''I'm a strong believer,'' she explains. ''I
don't know about man, but I know what God can do.''

As Mrs. Donald recounted her story on a sweltering summer afternoon, one
grandchild rested on her couch. Another came in from the dusty yard to ask for a
cold drink. ''You have water, now, you hear,'' Mrs. Donald told him. ''You can't
go on drinking all my juice like you do.'' She loved this boy, she explained to
her visitor, but she was having trouble teaching him that the family's resources
are limited - she has not yet received any money from the Klan, and supports
herself on $400 a month from Social Security and what little she makes working
with retarded children. ''He complained that he's going back to school without
any new clothes,'' she said. ''I told him, 'Well, you may not get any.' ''

Michael never looked to his mother to provide for him, Mrs. Donald said. From
early childhood, ''If he came home and I was lying down, he'd know something was
wrong, and he'd do little things to help - that's the kind of boy he was.''
Michael worked hard at trade school, gave his mother most of the money he made
and played basketball on a community team. Smoking, she said, was his only vice.
''I told him not to smoke,'' she recalled. ''He'd say, 'I'm going to college.
Can't I have a cigarette?' ''

Considering the kind of boy he was, Mrs. Donald knew that Michael had done
nothing to provoke his murder; from the beginning, she suspected that the Klan
was involved. So did Winston J. Orr, the veteran Mobile policeman who was, from
1981 to 1984, Chief of Police. But Orr was working against a number of factors
that made a thorough investigation unlikely. In the early 1980's, Mobile had one
of the highest per capita murder rates in America - and no homicide squad. To
make matters worse, Orr's detectives ignored the fact that on the night of the
murder, Klansmen had burned a cross on the Mobile County Courthouse lawn.
Instead, they speculated that Michael Donald might have been having an affair
with a white co-worker at The Mobile Press Register, where he'd had a part-time
job. Or, they thought, he might have been involved in a drug deal that went
sour.

Mrs. Donald was so eager to help the police that she allowed them to search
Michael's room for drugs. They tore the room apart - and found none. In June
1981, when their investigation fizzled and the three initial suspects were
released, one of Beulah Mae Donald's daughters and some friends picketed the
courthouse. In August, Michael Figures, her attorney, organized a protest march.
The Rev. Jesse Jackson came to Mobile to lead it. ''Don't let them break your
spirit,'' he told the 8,000 marchers. But that summer, as Mrs. Donald prayed for
the Lord to take her away, she had only one consolation. At least, she told
herself, Michael hadn't suffered the fate of so many murdered black men - his
body hadn't been thrown in the river.

WHAT MRS. DON-ald needed was an advocate within the system. Fortunately, Thomas
H. Figures - her attorney's brother - had in 1978 become the Assistant United
States Attorney in Mobile, and he is, by any measure, a formidable advocate.
After earning an M.B.A. at Indiana University and a law degree at the University
of Illinois, he had moved to New York in 1971 to become a corporate counsel at
Exxon. In 1975, ''before the money got so good I couldn't leave,'' he resigned,
returned to Mobile, and joined the District Attorney's office. As Assistant
United States Attorney, he had watched the first F.B.I. investigation of the
Michael Donald murder with growing dismay. His highest priority became getting
the Justice Department to authorize a second F.B.I. investigation.

Figures's request arrived in Washington just as the Justice Department was
thinking of closing the case. ''As an act of appeasement to me -or to convince
me that a second investigation would come to the same conclusion - I was allowed
to work with a second F.B.I. agent, James Bodman,'' Figures recalls. ''I'll
never forget the first thing Bodman said. He asked me, 'Why the hell do you want
to reopen this can of worms?' But then he got interested in it, and we worked on
it every day. We had lunch together, we talked at night - people started calling
us 'the odd couple.' '' In a sense, they were; both are from the deep South, but
Figures is black, and Bodman is white.

After hearing a lot of lies and following many unproductive leads, Figures and
Bodman uncovered one key fact: On the night of the murder, Tiger Knowles had
returned to Bennie Hays's house with blood on his shirt. With this new evidence,
the Justice Department convened an investigative grand jury in Mobile.
Incredibly, the Klansmen called to testify did not bring lawyers with them. In
short order, one witness told the grand jury that young Henry Hays had admitted
everything to him. This got back to Tiger Knowles, who began to worry that Henry
Hays would confess - and, by trading testimony against Knowles for a reduced
sentence, leave him bearing the greater burden of guilt.

In June of 1983, Knowles confessed to F.B.I. agent Bodman. After pleading guilty
to violating Michael Donald's civil rights, he was placed in the Federal witness
protection program - a fairly standard accommodation for Klan informers -and
sentenced to life in prison. In December, when Henry Hays was tried for capital
murder, Knowles appeared as a prosecution witness. Largely on the strength of
his testimony, a jury of 11 whites and one black found Hays guilty and sentenced
him, too, to life in prison.

That didn't seem sufficient punishment to Judge Braxton Kittrell Jr., who
rejected the sentence in February 1984 and directed that Henry Hays be
electrocuted. In 1986, the Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals set aside the death
sentence. Later that year, however, the Alabama Supreme Court upheld Judge
Kittrell's decision. ''We cannot imagine,'' the justices wrote, ''a case in
which the death penalty is more justified.''

Henry Hays has a surprising ally in his struggle not to die in the electric
chair. ''You can't give life, so why take it?'' asks Beulah Mae Donald. ''You
kill an innocent person, that person stays with you day and night.''

MORRIS DEES, WHO engineered the civil suit for Mrs. Donald, understands her
reliance on the Lord. Born in Alabama in 1936, he was raised in the Baptist
heartland. Like his schoolmates, he wanted to be a farmer; unlike them, he was
also a born salesman, who used his blond hair, blue eyes and effervescent
personality to make a fortune.

Dees's business career began at the University of Alabama when his mother sent
him a birthday cake. That inspired Dees to send postcards to his schoolmates'
parents, asking if they'd like his 'Bama Cake Service to deliver birthday cakes
to their sons and daughters. ''We got 25 percent response,'' Dees says. ''You
couldn't do that in the real world.'' After graduating from the University of
Alabama law school, Dees formed a direct-mail publishing company that eventually
shipped 5 million cookbooks a year. He sold his company in 1970, then turned his
attention to politics.

''I got interested in George McGovern strictly because of his views on Vietnam,
'' Dees says. He and a colleague wrote a seven-page letter for the candidate.
''Everybody laughed at it, said it was too long. McGovern said he couldn't send
it out. I said O.K., but I mailed 350,000 copies anyway. In direct mail, a good
response is a 1 to 2 percent return; our letter pulled 17 percent, with an
average contribution of $25.''

In the 1972 Presidential campaign, Dees's letters garnered an unheard-of $24
million. Dees asked only for permission to use McGovern's mailing list to
approach potential contributors to his Southern Poverty Law Center. The center
became active in death row cases and defended the rights of poor workers, white
and black, who were felt to be victims of discrimination.

In 1979, Dees and Bill Stanton, the center's research director, took on their
first case involving the Klan. They became interested in the possibility of
finishing off the Klan through civil litigation, and, to help law enforcement
officials, they founded Klanwatch, an investigative unit that tracks Klan
activities and publishes a newsletter. Klansmen noticed; the S.P.L.C. became the
Klan's favorite opponent.

In 1983, Klansmen torched S.P.L.C. headquarters in Montgomery; in 1984, when
Denver talk-show host Alan Berg was murdered by a far-right fanatic, Dees was
No. 2 on the killer's hit list. In that same year, Louis Beam, a leader of a
paramilitary Klan, challenged Dees by registered mail to a duel. ''Your
mother,'' he wrote, in part, ''why I can just see her now, her heart just
bursting with pride as you, for the first time in your life, exhibit the
qualities of a man.'' Then Beam ''visited'' the S.P.L.C. in an apparent effort
to intimidate Dees.

From its new headquarters, dubbed the Southern Affluence Law Center because of
its stylish glass-and-steel architecture, the S.P.L.C. undertook its most
massive anti-Klan project in 1984 -using Mrs. Donald's civil suit to dismantle
Robert Shelton's branch of the Klan.

Shelton's men had been involved in the beating of Freedom Riders at the
Birmingham bus station in 1961, in the 16th Street Baptist Church bombing in
Birmingham in 1963 and in the shooting of Viola Liuzzo near Selma in 1965. The
challenge for Dees, Stanton and S.P.L.C. investigator Joe Roy was to locate
former Klansmen who would testify that they were acting under orders when they
participated in those beatings and killings - and, if possible, convince
Klansmen involved in more recent racial incidents to come forward.

In the 18 months it took to prepare the case, Beulah Mae Donald says, Morris
Dees didn't neglect her. ''We didn't meet until the trial, but Morris and I
would talk on the phone. He'd say, 'You still ready to go through with this?'
And he did everything possible - he sent $35, $50 every few weeks. He helped
when we needed it.''

Although Mrs. Donald hadn't attended the 1983 trial, she decided to push herself
and go to the civil trial. ''If they could stand to kill Michael,'' she
reasoned, ''I can stand to see their faces.'' But she couldn't look at Tiger
Knowles, the first witness, as he gave the jurors an unemotional account of the
events leading up to the murder. And she cried silently when Knowles stepped off
the witness stand to demonstrate how he helped kill her son.

Mrs. Donald was more composed when former Klansmen testified that they had been
directed by Klan leaders to harass, intimidate and kill blacks. She had no
difficulty enduring defense witnesses - the six Mobile Klansmen and the lawyer
for the United Klans of America cross examined Dees's witnesses, but called none
of their own. Just four days after the trial had started, it was time for the
closing arguments.

At the lunch break on that day, Tiger Knowles called Morris Dees to his cell. He
wanted, he said, to speak in court. ''Whatever you do, don't play lawyer,'' Dees
advised him. ''Just get up and say what you feel.''

When court resumed, the judge nodded to Knowles. ''I've got just a few things to
say,'' Knowles began, as he stood in front of the jury box. ''I know that
people's tried to discredit my testimony. . . . I've lost my family. I've got
people after me now. Everything I said is true. . . . I was acting as a Klansman
when I done this. And I hope that people learn from my mistake. . . . I do hope
you decide a judgment against me and everyone else involved.''

Then Knowles turned to Beulah Mae Donald, and, as they locked eyes for the first
time, begged for her forgiveness. ''I can't bring your son back,'' he said,
sobbing and shaking. ''God knows if I could trade places with him, I would. I
can't. Whatever it takes - I have nothing. But I will have to do it. And if it
takes me the rest of my life to pay it, any comfort it may bring, I hope it
will.'' By this time, jurors were openly weeping. The judge wiped away a tear.

''I do forgive you,'' Mrs. Donald said. ''From the day I found out who you all
was, I asked God to take care of y'all, and He has.''

Four hours later, the jury announced its $7 million award.

A FEW MONTHS after the verdict, Mrs. Donald was still recovering from the
courtroom drama. She had been inundated by so many congratulatory letters -
''The mail lady was mad'' - that she'd had Morris Dees take them away. When
visitors she didn't know came to see her, she told them they were at the wrong
house. The medication she was taking for her tired legs wasn't helping - until
she absolutely had to be up and about, she was determined to rest.

Soon, she said, the Klan building will be sold. The Klan's money will make her
too prosperous to remain in this housing project. Then she will have to leave
her $94-a-month apartment, with its cinderblock walls, steep steps and sad
memories. Even now, she says, her daughters are looking for a new apartment,
convenient to her church and most of her 32 grandchildren.

In her new home, her family hopes, she'll find some peace. Mrs. Donald, now 68,
doesn't have much expectation of that. ''When the trial was over, the jurors
came down and told me, as people do, that they felt for me,'' she says. ''But
the verdict didn't make me feel better. What happened to Michael - I live it day
and night. I was just surprised that a white jury could do this.''

For all her sorrow, Beulah Mae Donald emphasizes that she won't succumb to
bitterness. ''What is a dream to me is that money comes out of this,'' she says,
contemplating the irony of human loss and monetary gain. ''I don't need it. I
live day to day, like always. But there's some sad people in the world who don't
have food to eat or a decent place to stay. I've been there. I know what it
means to have nothing. If the Klan don't give me a penny, that's O.K. But if
they do, I'm going to help a lot of people who don't have none.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Herndon Ave., Mobile, Ala.; Beulah Mae Donald; Bennie and
Henry Hays (AP); the body of Michael Donald (Klanwatch Archive); Joe Roy (Gilles
Peress/Magnum)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Kean Helps Dedicate Memorial Honoring Veterans

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 49 words


Governor Kean at a dedication ceremony yesterday in Howell Township, N.J., for a
memorial honoring those who served in the Korean and Vietnam Wars. Among the
dignitaries attending the ceremony were Representative Christopher H. Smith and
State Senator S. Thomas Gagliano. (Harvey L. Bilker)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The Stage: 'Conversations in Exile'

BYLINE: By D. J. R. BRUCKNER

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 555 words


''I AM sick of all the virtues,''

Bertolt Brecht's businessman, Ziffel, declares in ''Conversations in Exile.''
But he has faith in ''the heroism of survival,'' and that faith engenders a
frail hope that the world might be made safe for the ordinary and the weak.
However, Ziffel is a true Brechtian, and anyone who thinks he is even a little
bit noble has not been paying attention.

''Conversations'' is a prose dialogue written in 1940 when Brecht was in exile
in Finland, modeled loosely on a similar work by Goethe. A British playwright,
Howard Brenton, has constructed a dramatic piece out of it, which the New
Theater of Brooklyn is presenting in a slyly entertaining production under the
direction of Clinton Turner Davis.

Mr. Davis's choice of black actors - Helmar Augustus Cooper as Ziffel, an exile
from Hitler's Germany, and Ruben Santiago-Hudson as Kalle, a young Socialist who
has also fled the Nazis - does not really confer on this little play the wider
scope the director wanted. But that hardly matters; Mr. Cooper makes a cunningly
amusing businessman who becomes a convert to disorder and even cowardice, and
Mr. Santiago-Hudson's Kalle is a fine Brechtian pessimist, a Socialist who
despises benevolence and ends up going into the roach-exterminating business.

The delight these actors take in Brecht's jabbing lines is infectious as the
dialectic progresses from a consideration of whether mankind is useful for
anything but serving machines in a world which, ideally, ought to be completely
evacuated to make room for war, to a final ironic toast to idealism by apostates
from conflicting faiths. As they talk, they play a game of pool in a Finnish
bar, and the game is an obvious but unobtrusive reflection of their intellectual
sparring. They let you feel as well some of Brecht's pain, for ''Conversations''
was written at a time when this dedicated Marxist watched the Nazis conquer
Europe, free of any Russian threat after Stalin signed a nonaggression pact with
Hitler.

David Dollenmayer's translation of the text often fails to convey the subtleties
of Brecht's German, and naturally it is unable to suggest the echoes of Goethe
that give the Brecht text a rich resonance. And Mr. Davis's use of projected
pictures on the backstage wall, not only from World War II, but also from
Vietnam and other conflicts, along with occasional intrusions of recorded voices
(such as a Watergate-era Richard M. Nixon protesting he is innocent while Ziffel
and Kalle talk about Hitler) are distracting. But these are not overwhelming
problems; nothing short of an earthquake would divert one's attention for long
from the sizzle and crackle of Brecht's seductively subversive ideas.
''Conversations'' is a delight to watch, to listen to and to think about.

SPARRING PARTNERS - CONVERSATIONS IN EXILE, by Bertolt Brecht; directed by
Clinton Turner Davis; adapted by Howard Brenton; translated by David
Dollenmayer; set by Daniel Conway; lighting by John Gisondi; costumes by C. Jane
Epperson; sound by Tom Gould; production stage manager, Debora E. Kingston.
Presented by the New Theater of Brooklyn, Deborah J. Pope and Steve Stettler,
artistic directors; Lillie Bellin, managing director. At 465 Dean Street, off
Flatbush Avenue.

Ziffel...Helmar Augustus Cooper
Kalle...Ruben Santiago-Hudson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Through Missouri Eyes

BYLINE: By FLORA LEWIS; A.M. Rosenthal is convalescing from surgery. His column
will resume shortly.,

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 761 words

DATELINE: COLUMBIA, Mo.


Naturally, there was a lot of talk about the role of the press and its
responsibilities during the annual Journalism Week at the University of
Missouri's School of Journalism. It is the oldest school of its kind, founded in
1908, and proud of its contribution to professionalism.

To judge by the questions they asked an assortment of visitors, the students
belied the image of a new generation's single-minded march to yuppiedom. They
were sensitive, informed and showed concern about being good citizens as well as
getting good jobs.

In fact, several complained privately that they were not being taught enough
about the past and the world outside that confronts America. For them, the
Vietnam War is already history, but they said it is skipped over with a bare
mention in their courses. They wanted deeper probing into how and why it
happened, what went wrong, what to watch out for as the nation moves ahead.

They criticized what they considered excessive American inwardness,
self-congratulation, ignorance of other countries. One said a teacher told the
class that only a democracy can have a free press and that only America meets
the standard. The implication was that no other country is fully democratic
because no other country has precisely the same constitutional system as the
U.S.

She was angered by such nonsense. She knew better. But when the talk turned to
defining democracy, it was clear that that subject had been skipped over, too.
The students hadn't been practiced in articulating the notion, and they minded
that it had been left so vague for them.

A few years ago, a 12-year-old in Florida told me he had learned in school that
it was wrong to call the U.S. democratic because it is a republic. He had no
inkling of the difference between the principle of a government and the
selection of its titular head. The Missouri college students were appalled to
hear about it, but not really surprised. They were disdainful at what they
considered most Americans' lack of knowledge about such basics.

They wanted to be journalists because they were seriously interested in public
affairs and in providing the information a country needs to run itself and to
make its society function satisfactorily. They wanted to travel and to learn and
to know people different from themselves, not just to shine in television
lights.

They didn't imagine they were going to change the world, fix all its flaws and
save it from perdition. They didn't even bother with the questions I often get
from earnest do-gooders, such as ''What should the press do to prevent war? What
should the press do to assure peace? To save the environment? To eradicate
poverty?'' As if the press makes the world's decisions.

But they said they felt they could contribute by digging out and telling truth
as best it can be found. ''I think I can make a difference,'' said one who
clearly wanted to.

They were worried about politics -no mention of the stock market - and
particularly about choosing a President. They were sophisticated about the way
television can conceal and distort as well as reveal the essence of a candidate
as he goes about manufacturing image. They wondered how they could find out the
telling details of a man's relations with his staff, the kind of people he
listens to, the way he conceives of a politician's duty, which give much more
insight into how he is likely to wield power and bear responsibility than do his
campaign presentations.

That indeed, they thought, is an obligation of the press, all the more in the
age of high-tech public relations hype. They don't like being fooled and they
don't want to take part in the fooling. They want to be told, and they want to
tell, straightforwardly.

These were only a few students, on one campus in the Midwest, but they did seem
to represent their classmates and their peers. They were optimistic, but not at
all dreamy, eager to get on and turn their hands to work they can consider
useful and interesting. There has been much talking about ''the closing of
American minds,'' but there was no sign of it here. If anything they were asking
for more, not less substance in their education, and the opportunities they
talked about were for responsibility and exertion, not self-indulgence.

This is a good sign when the mood seems gloomy and fearful, uncertain about the
economy, fretting that a canny Russian leader is about to pull a fast one on a
naive, trustful America, irritated that the world fails to see the U.S. through
American eyes. The new crop looks fine, able and realistic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Japanese Chip Dumping Has Ended, U.S. Finds

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1074 words


The Commerce Department said yesterday that Japan had ceased dumping computer
chips, a finding that Administration officials predicted would allow President
Reagan to lift by the end of the week many of the sanctions that he imposed on
Japanese electronic goods in April.

Administration officials said they hoped an end to the sanctions would ease
trade tensions between the United States and Japan. The sanctions may be lifted
just as Noboru Takeshita, the newly elected president of the ruling Liberal
Democratic Party, takes over as Japan's Prime Minister.

Few in the semiconductor industry were surprised by the Commerce Department's
conclusion, which comes at a time when strong demand for a new generation of
personal computers and other electronic equipment has propped up the battered
chip industry. The sanctions placed 100 percent tariffs on Japanese-made laptop
computers, power tools and television sets, among other goods.

The $300 million in sanctions that President Reagan imposed seven months ago was
the first major retaliation against Japan for trade violations - in this case
involving a 1986 semiconductor accord against dumping - since the end of World
War II. Dumping is the practice of selling a product for less than the cost of
production; it is a means of building market share and clearing inventory
backlogs.

At the time, Mr. Reagan said he was acting ''to enforce the principles of free
and fair trade'' and to stop actions by Japan's electronics giants that had
driven most American manufacturers out of the business of producing the most
common type of memory chip, known as D-RAM's. But the move was harshly
criticized in Japan, and it threw stock, bond and currency markets into turmoil
amid fears of a trade war.

''Our monthly monitoring of semiconductors now shows clear, firm and continuing
evidence that third-country dumping has stopped,'' S. Bruce Smart Jr., the Under
Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, said yesterday. In third-country
dumping, the chips are sold through distributors in places such as Hong Kong and
Singapore.

But Mr. Smart cautioned that Japan had made little progress in opening its home
market to United States chip makers, meaning that some of the sanctions might
stay in effect.

In Tokyo, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry welcomed the Commerce
Department finding and said it ''assumes that the United States Government will
promptly lift the measures relative to the third country pricing.'' The ministry
said it would continue to monitor costs and export prices of semiconductors.

Strategy Called a Success

Administration officials yesterday declared their strategy a success. ''Until we
threatened sanctions, and then acted on the threat, there was relatively little
change,'' Mr. Smart said. ''Since then, prices have been moving up on a pretty
steady basis.''

Many analysts had expected the move to be coordinated with Mr. Takeshita's
arrival, but Commerce Department officials said the timing was coincidental.

How much of that price move can be attributed to the sanctions, however, and how
much to an unexpectedly sudden rise in demand is still a matter of debate in the
computer and semiconductor industry.

At the time the penalties began, Commerce Department officials argued that many
memory chips were being sold at only 60 percent of their fair market value,
based on the estimated production costs of the individual Japanese companies in
the market. By June that figure had risen to about 84 percent. President Reagan,
at the economic summit conference in Venice, lifted the 100 percent tariffs on
20-inch color television sets as an incentive to the Japanese.

Meanwhile, a new generation of personal computers, both from Apple Computer Inc.
and the International Business Machines Corporation, had jolted the low end of
the computer business out of a two-year slump. Demand also surged for mid-range
computers and computer networks, all heavy users of memory-chip technology.

Prices Have Risen Steadily

Japanese and American companies watched backlogs dwindle and raced to keep up
with demand. Prices have risen steadily since.

But if the Administration came to the rescue of the domestic chip industry,
executives assert, it was only after a portion of that industry had been wiped
out. Only a handful of companies, including I.B.M. and Texas Instruments Inc.,
still manufacture D-RAM's, the chip that has long been considered a ''technology
driver'' in the industry because it requires manufacturers to grapple with
ever-smaller circuits.

''It's a little like Vietnam,'' the chief executive of one major chip producer
said yesterday. ''You've just seen the declaration of victory so the whole thing
can go away.''

Other companies hailed the move. ''We have definitely seen the dumping erased in
recent months,'' said Linda Baker, a spokeswoman for the National Semiconductor
Corporation, one of the nation's largest chip makers. The Semiconductor Industry
Association, an industry trade group, said, ''We are delighted with the finding,
but we are cautious about the Japanese market issue.''

Mr. Smart also warned that American officials would be watching closely to see
that Japanese chip makers did not unduly favor Japanese companies in search of
now-scarce memory chips, such as one-megabit D-RAM's. Those chips store more
than one million bits of data.

If Same Formula Is Followed

''We have no evidence of favoritism at this time,'' Mr. Smart said. ''But we
want to be very careful.''

If President Reagan follows the formula he adopted in April, when the sanctions
were imposed, about $135 million of the original $300 million will now be
eliminated. Those tariffs specifically covered American losses that had been
attributed to dumping. While they have been the source of Japanese complaints,
the tariffs were barely noticed by American consumers, who usually had a choice
of alternative products.

The remaining $165 million, however, was a penalty for American exclusion from
the Japanese marketplace, an exclusion that Japan says does not exist. At the
time the semiconductor accord was signed in 1986, American companies held less
than 8 percent of the Japanese chip market; today the figure is only slightly
over 9 percent.

''We've gained no ground at all,'' said an official of the United States Special
Trade Representative's Office. ''That penalty shouldn't be changing at all.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Careers;
Wanted: College Presidents

BYLINE: By Elizabeth M. Fowler

SECTION: Section D; Page 25, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 866 words


THE turnover in presidencies and other executive positions at the nation's
colleges and universities has grown rapidly in recent years.

Heidrick & Struggles, a management recruiting firm that began finding presidents
for colleges 10 years ago, says the business now constitutes about 10 percent of
its gross revenues.

Looking back at its first effort, when it found a president for Brown
University, William J. Bowen, a vice chairman of Heidrick & Struggles, recalled,
''We were reluctant to do the search because we had no experience finding
college presidents.''

Now the firm is so deeply involved in finding presidents, deans, private school
principals and other academic officials that it has published its first academic
survey. Released last week and titled ''The University and College President,''
it offers a profile of the position.

The typical president is a white Protestant male, 53 years old, with a doctoral
degree; is married and has not been divorced; has an academic background, but
not necessarily as a tenured professor, and has held the post about six years.
That merely reflects what is, of course. Many universities would be happy to
fill openings with qualified candidates from more diverse backgrounds.


Mr. Bowen cannot recall when there were so many openings for college presidents.
''The tenure of many in office - 40 percent - now is about three years,'' he
said. At many schools, however - the Ivy League, the Southwestern conference,
and women's colleges including Bryn Mawr, Mount Holyoke, Smith and Wellesley,
presidents tend to stay on the job longer than average.

Some of the most recent comings and goings: Colin Campbell, president of
Wesleyan University, announced last week that he was leaving; James O. Freedman
left the University of Iowa to head Dartmouth, replacing a lawyer, David T.
McLaughlin.

In addition, George D. Langdon stepped down at Colgate University, and Oakes
Ames at Connecticut College. Daniel Berg has left the Rensselaer Polytechnic
presidency to return to a tenured professorship. There is also the former
president of Princeton University, whom Mr. Bowen of Heidrick & Struggles calls
''the other Bill Bowen.'' Princeton's William G. Bowen resigned to head the
Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, and has been replaced by Harold T. Shapiro, former
president of the University of Michigan. Dr. Howard Swearer is leaving Brown
University.

''I am not sure why so many presidents have stepped aside, but I think it might
be a burnout factor, but not the same problems like the sit-ins and riots of the
Vietnam period,'' Mr. Bowen said. He explained that independent colleges and
universities and a growing number of state-supported schools ask their
presidents to be fund-raisers.

''They don't like to do it year after year,'' he said. ''They become drained.''

Facing six dinners this week, Dr. Edward Lewis, president of St. Mary's College,
a state-supported liberal arts college in Maryland, agrees about the burnout
factor. ''Furthermore, social interaction can be painful for some academics,''
he said. ''Also, we are robbed of time to think.''

He said he thought that the opportunities for women presidents were growing but
added that there ''has been a belief that fund raising involves working the
old-boy network, which cannot be done as well by women as by the typical
53-year-old male president.''

He pointed to Dr. Hannah Gray, president of the University of Chicago, as a
woman who made the jump to a presidency recently. ''Also there is Dr. Patricia
Plante, a former dean at another college, who now is president of one of the
University of Maine's units,'' he said.

Fund raising aside, the life of a college president can be quite pleasant. They
usually occupy a mansion on or near campus rent-free. A staff is also provided,
which means instant help when entertaining.

The pay is good, too. The survey indicates that college presidents average
$89,450 a year, with some large Eastern universities paying more than $100,000.


College presidents who responded to the survey said they worked 67 or more hours
a week. While faculty members often can take the summer off to travel, or just
think, college presidents average less than three weeks of vacation.

More than 87 percent of the presidents have doctorates, an indication that most
institutions are still headed by academics despite reports that some successful
businessmen would like to assume the presidencies of some schools.

Presidents have to serve several constituencies, including contentious faculty
and difficult trustees, which makes them often feel as if they are skating on
thin ice.

According to the survey, 87 percent of the presidents named as their first
objective ''recruitment, promotion and retention'' of high-level personnel. In
other words, care and feeding of faculty egos takes precedence over the
trustees, who win the next highest consideration, and the students, for whom the
education is intended.

For the survey Heidrick & Struggles reached 971 presidents of four-year
degree-giving institutions with 1,000 or more students. They received a response
of more than 33 percent, which is considered a good return.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 5, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Army Accepts Copters Despite Some Problems

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 226 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 4


The Army has accepted delivery of 285 new Apache helicopter gunships even though
it is still working with the manufacturer to correct a number of problems on the
aircraft that were identified two years ago, officials say.

The problems have included small cracks in the bulkhead, poor cannon accuracy
and leakage in the rain.

''There are always some problems that crop up with a brand new aircraft, and the
Apache is no exception,'' said Maj. Phil Soucy, an Army spokesman. ''We expect
things like this and we've moved to fix them.''

The trade publication Defense Week reported Monday that the Defense Department's
inspector general was still monitoring efforts by the Army and by the McDonnell
Douglas Helicopter Company, the builder of the helicopter, to correct problems
identified in June 1985.

Some of those problems, such as the cracks in the bulkhead, have been corrected,
the publication reported. Some other problems, including the accuracy of the
helicopter's 30-millimeter cannon, are still being worked on, the publication
said.

The Apache is a twin-engine two-seat attack helicopter designed to replace the
Cobra craft of the Vietnam era as the Army's front-line tank destroyer. The Army
plans to buy 593 of the $11.5 million gunships.

McDonnell Douglas is absorbing the cost in connection with the repairs, Defense
Week reported.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 5, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS PEOPLE;
Marathon Completed

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 6; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 36 words


Bob Wieland of Arcadia, Calif., who lost his legs in Vietnam, completed the New
York City Marathon yesterday and lowered his 1986 time for the event from 98
hours 48 minutes 17 seconds to just over 81 hours.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Central American Peace Accord Goes Into Effect

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 633 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Nov. 5


Central American governments announced a series of measures today to be carried
out over the next two months to comply with a new regional peace treaty.

The accord was signed by Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa
Rica in August. It calls for specific steps to bring greater political freedom,
amnesty, cease-fires in guerrilla wars, and a cutoff of outside aid and use of
territory to assist rebel groups.

The measures announced tonight by Nicaragua, including a willingness to enter
into indirect negotiations with rebel leaders, had been the most eagerly
awaited.

In El Salvador, President Jose Napoleon Duarte announced, as expected, a
unilateral cease-fire under which, he said, the armed forces will mount no
offensive operations, but will defend themselves if attacked. The rebels broke
off peace talks with the Government this past week to protest the slaying of a
human rights official sympathetic to the guerrillas.

Mr. Duarte also announced a broad amnesty law that is to apply to all political
crimes - absolving both rightist gunmen and leftist rebels from punishment, and
probably leading to the release of an estimated 500 prisoners accused of being
rebels. Some rebel political leaders may return to El Salvador soon under the
amnesty, according to diplomats here.

Guatemala Announces Amnesty

In addition, Mr. Duarte called on all outside states to stop aiding the
Marxist-led guerrillas in El Salvador. He specifically charged that Nicaragua,
Libya, East Germany, Vietnam, Cuba and the Soviet Union had aided the rebels in
the past.

In Guatemala, a small delegation of political exiles returned to the country
this week under the peace treaty to review conditions and consider whether it is
possible to begin new political activities after years of repression by
Government security forces.

In addition, the Government has announced an amnesty for political prisoners, a
law that will have limited effect because the Guatemalan army has killed most
people it captured in recent years, according to human rights organizations and
Guatemalan Government officials.

Little Attention in Honduras

Since a meeting last month with rebel officials, the Guatemalan Government has
failed to find the means to achieve a cease-fire in the rebel war. Fighting was
reported to be continuing in northern Guatemala this week.

In addition, the countryside remains highly militarized, with most adult men
serving in Government-run civil defense forces. Few of the estimated 100,000
Guatemalan refugees from past repression have returned, even though the new
peace treaty calls for the return of refugees and exiles.

In Honduras, the Government appears to have paid little attention to the peace
treaty. It announced the formation of a National Reconciliation Commission, as
mandated in the accord, and also is discussing amnesty for a handful of
prisoners.

But the National Reconciliation Commission has failed so far to raise the
obvious and highly sensitive issue of the presence of Nicaraguan rebels in
Honduras or the issue of the denial of political rights to leftists.

Resistance on Aid

Most political prisoners in Honduras were released in an amnesty last year.

Honduras has resisted complying with the treaty's demand for a complete cutoff
of outside aid and use of territory for rebel groups. The American-backed
Nicaraguan rebels have long used Honduras to supply themselves.

Honduran officials argue that Nicaragua must first negotiate a cease-fire with
the rebels and offer them a broad political amnesty before the rebels can be
expected to lay down their guns and leave Honduras. Costa Rica has supported the
Honduran position.

Costa Rica, the only fully functioning democracy in the region, already complies
with the peace treaty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Westies Informer Tells of Links to Gambino Mob

BYLINE: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 813 words


A killer who turned informer testified yesterday about a dramatic meeting in a
Brooklyn restaurant where the Westies gang joined forces with the Gambino crime
family.

The informer, Francis (Mickey) Featherstone, told the jury in a Federal
racketeering trial in Manhattan that the main defendant, James Coonan, was the
boss of the Westies. He said Mr. Coonan and an associate killed and dismembered
a loan shark, Charles (Ruby) Stein, in 1977.

Mr. Featherstone said he went with Mr. Coonan to a Gambino meeting in a Brooklyn
restaurant in 1978, leaving behind several Westies armed with machine guns and
hand grenades in a Manhattan apartment.

''If they didn't hear from us in two hours,'' Mr. Featherstone said, the heavily
armed gang members were supposed to rush to a Gambino club next to the
restaurant ''and kill everybody in the place.'' #15 at the Table At the
restaurant, he continued, a Gambino member warned them not to admit ''anything
about Ruby's murder or his black book.''

Mr. Featherstone testified that he and Mr. Coonan were escorted into a room at
the rear of the restaurant, where about 15 men were sitting around a large
table. He said the group included Paul Castellano, who was gunned down in 1985,
and other leaders of the Gambino and Genovese crime families.

''Paul asked if we killed Ruby Stein,'' Mr. Featherstone recalled. ''Jimmy said
no.''

He testified that Mr. Castellano, identified as the Gambino boss, told them that
he wanted Mr. Stein's black book, because ''the book has millions of dollars in
shylock loans.''

'Stop Acting Like Cowboys'

''Jimmy denied killing Ruby or knowing where the book was,'' Mr. Featherstone
continued.

He quoted Mr. Castellano as telling them, ''You guys got to stop acting like
cowboys - acting wild.''

'' 'You're going to be with us now,' '' he quoted Mr. Castellano as saying. ''
'If anyone is going to get killed, you have to clear it with us.' ''

Mr. Featherstone testified that Mr. Castellano gave them permission to use his
name in business, but that they would have to give him ''10 percent of
everything we made.''

After the restaurant meeting, the whole group went next door to a club, Mr.
Featherstone testified. He said he and Mr. Coonan hurriedly ended the club
session because two hours were up, ''and we didn't want the guys to come in here
and shoot the place up.''

'Got a Chain of Command'

At a later meeting, he added, a Gambino member compared the crime family to a
military organization and said: ''We got a chain of command. You got to report
to us.'' Mr. Featherstone testified that the slain loan shark, Mr. Stein, had
been associated with Anthony (Fat Tony) Salerno, who was convicted last year as
a top Mafia boss.

''Ruby Stein was Tony Salerno's Meyer Lansky,'' Mr. Featherstone said, adding,
''Meyer Lansky was the old mob's big money earner.''

In his testimony, which began Wednesday, Mr. Featherstone admitted killing at
least three people and trying to kill others. He said he had seen Mr. Coonan
kill and dismember a man who had owed him a $1,250 loan-shark debt.

'I Became His Main Man'

He also said Mr. Coonan had told him that a plan to kill Anthony Scotto, a
dock-union leader, was canceled when a dispute with another union leader was
resolved.

Mr. Featherstone identified all eight defendants in the trial in Federal
District Court. They are accused of playing various roles in the Westies, a
violent gang on the West Side of Manhattan.

Waiving his left hand toward the defense table several feet in front of him, Mr.
Featherstone pointed out Mr. Coonan.

''Jimmy was the boss,'' he said in a soft voice, adding, ''I became his main man
- his right-hand man.''

Mr. Coonan, who was seated behind the table with his hands folded in his lap,
stared at the 39-year-old informer, a slightly built man wearing a brown jacket
and slacks with a white shirt and dark tie.

Veteran of Vietnam

Replying to questions by a prosecutor, Mary Lee Warren, Mr. Featherstone said he
had grown up in Hell's Kitchen, the gang's neighborhood. He said it extended
from Eighth Avenue to the Hudson River between 43d and 59th Streets.

Mr. Featherstone said he joined the Army when he was 17 years and had committed
many crimes ''since I came home from Vietnam in 1967.'' He returned with a
nervous disorder, he said, adding that he had been held in prisons and mental
hospitals before becoming an informer last year.

Mr. Coonan's lawyer, Gerald L. Shargel, has told the jury that Mr. Featherstone
was a ''hopeless alcoholic'' and ''paranoid killer'' who could not be believed.
His cross-examination is to begin next week.

Judge Whitman Knapp adjourned the trial until Monday. The eight defendants are
Mr. Coonan and his wife, Edna; Thomas Collins and his wife, Florence; James
(Jimmy Mack) McElroy, William Bokum, Richard (Muggsy) Ritter and John Halo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Broadway

BYLINE: Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1128 words




The Roosevelts Are Coming

Whether it's going to turn out to be the new, old-fashioned Broadway musical a
lot of people have been waiting and hoping for remains to be seen, but one thing
is certain - ''Teddy and Alice,'' opening Thursday at the Minskoff Theater, is
definitely American. There's Teddy Roosevelt and his daughter, Alice, a score
that is more than half John Philip Sousa, electioneering, and flag waving. Put
them all together and they add up to some $1.6 million in advance sales and more
than 100 theater-party bookings.

The settings should evoke interest, considering they're the closest most people
will ever get to the White House. Robin Wagner, the show's set designer, was
given a private tour of the Presidential manse to photograph the interior, and
was shown photographs of the period in question. But the White House had nothing
to do with the replica of the Stanley Steamer that crashes into a tree onstage,
nor with the convention float shaped like a boat from which Len Cariou (Teddy) -
sitting astride two cannons on the prow - waves the flag and sings, logically
enough, ''Wave the Flag.'' That's strictly theater, and probably owes something
to the current popularity of spectacles.

Oh yes, there's a tiny bit of nice news, maybe not for thee but for 100
someones. The producer Hinks Shimberg is allocating 100 $15 student tickets on
the day of each performance. A facelift and sweet talk won't get you anywhere; a
student I.D. will.

Lithgow to Play a Diplomat

This one isn't happening until next year but it's nice to know that John Lithgow
will be back on stage soon. He'll be starring in ''M. Butterfly,'' David Henry
Hwang's first Broadway play. Based on a newspaper account of a spy scandal
involving a French diplomat and a Chinese opera star, it will be produced by
Stuart Ostrow (''Pippin'') and directed by John Dexter (''Equus'') for a March
20 opening at the Eugene O'Neill Theater.

Duchess Here for 'Phantom'

Goodness only knows what it will cost, but then again, maybe it isn't possible
to put a price tag on an evening that includes the Duchess of York, ''The
Phantom of the Opera'' and a Belle Epoque ball. It will take place Jan. 21 at a
gala preview performance of the awaited Andrew Lloyd Webber musical, and
Fergie's presence will be the royal family's first association with a Broadway
production. The show, directed by Harold Prince, begins performances Jan. 9 at
the Majestic Theater and opens Jan. 26. The Eugene O'Neill Memorial Theater
Center and England's Royal College of Music and Sick Children's Trust will
benefit. Telephone: 989-7877.

Brook Prepares 'Cherry Orchard'

Just a sampling of the cast of ''The Cherry Orchard,'' which Peter Brook will be
staging at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in January - the Academy Award winner
Linda Hunt; the Tony nominee Zeljko Ivanek; Ingmar Bergman's leading actor,
Erland Josephson; Kate Mailer and Rebecca Miller, daughters of the illustrious
writers Norman Mailer and Arthur Miller, and Natasha Parry, the British actress
who is Mr. Brook's wife.

Off and Far From Broadway

More casting - Tammy Grimes for ''Mademoiselle Colombe,'' based on a play by
Jean Anouilh, beginning Thursday at Theater Off Park, 224 Waverly Place
(564-8038).. . . The rock and soap-opera (''General Hospital'') star Jack Wagner
for ''Butterfly,'' which has its premiere Tuesday at Goodspeed-at-Chester in
Chester, Conn. Telephone: (203) 873-8668.. . . Josh Mostel, Dennis Boutsikaris
and Christine Estabrook in ''The Boys Next Door,'' a new play by Tom Griffin
opening Nov. 23 at the Lambs Theater, 130 West 44th Street (997-1780).. . .
George Grizzard, Debra Mooney, Marissa Chibas and Steven Flynn in A. R. Gurney
Jr.'s four-character play ''Another Antigone,'' set to open in January at
Playwrights Horizons.

A Busy 'Mice and Men' Co-Star

Jay Patterson's mother died when he was still in high school. He realized then,
he said, that he wasn't going to be around forever and that it was important to
pursue the career he really wanted. That year he went into five shows in the
school dramatic society. He hasn't stopped acting since.

Mr. Patterson, a co-star of the Roundabout Theater Company's production of ''Of
Mice and Men,'' is one of the more fortunate actors. He's worked almost
steadily, both in films and on the stage, since his arrival from Cincinnati, via
Minneapolis and Chicago, seven years ago.

He enjoys making movies, and they pay more (''I'm not a Communist and have
nothing against money''), but, he said, he'll always return to the stage.

''No matter how many films you do, you have to recharge your batteries,'' he
said. ''Any actor who doesn't is a fool.''

At the moment, he's engaged in what he called ''sniffing around for a good place
to study again.''

''You have to work at acting, at learning economy in performing,'' he said. ''I
think it was Jimmy Stewart who said that we actors have to be rescued from our
own good intentions. Most of the time, simpler is better.''

A Reading by Reeve and Grey

Talking about the Roundabout, two of filmdom's hottest stars, Christopher Reeve
and Jennifer Grey, will take part in reading ''Mesmer,'' a new play by Joel
Gross, on Monday at 7:30 P.M. It's open to contributors of $125 or more. If your
hand is poised on your checkbook, telephone 420-1360. The address: 100 East 17th
Street.

Wanted: M. C., Good Condition

It's only a month to the scheduled opening of the annual ''Gimme Shelter'' show
presented by the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company in 20 New York City
hospitals and shelters, and the company's still short of a celebrity master of
ceremonies. If there's anyone with a name out there who's between engagements -
this could be the good deed of the year. Call Marty Kovach at 512-1960.

Sondheim 101

It won't make anyone another Stephen Sondheim, but the theater seminar coming up
tomorrow as part of American Music Week is pretty unusual. Sheila Davis, author
of ''The Craft of Lyric Writing,'' will analyze Sondheim songs - from meter to
figures of speech and music form. The $75 fee covers a daylong lecture and
demonstration at the Singers Forum Foundation, 137 Fifth Avenue, at 20th Street.
Telephone: 674-1143.

3 Women's Plays in Brooklyn

One day it won't be out of the ordinary but, at this point, it is - a repertory
season of three plays, all by women. Marjorie Moon, producer at the Billie
Holiday Theater, has scheduled alternating productions of ''Come and Get These
Memories'' by Pearl Cleage and ''Reunion at Bartersville'' by Celeste Colson
Walker. To be added in January: ''Indigo Blues'' by Judi Ann Mason. The address:
1368 Fulton Street, Restoration Plaza, Brooklyn. Information: (718) 636-0918.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'RUSSKIES,' A COMEDY ADVENTURE

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 644 words


ALL the dopey, daffy, dizzy fun of glasnost is captured by ''Russkies,'' the
heartburning adventure-comedy that opens today at the Manhattan Twin and other
theaters.

The setting is Key West, Fla., during the Fourth of July holiday. When first
seen, the film's three carefully integrated (two white, one black)
all-American-boy heros (aged 11 through 15) are in their clubhouse reading comic
books about a Rambo-like superman, Captain Slammer. It's not giving too much
away to report that, when seen at the end of the movie, the boys are back in
their clubhouse, reading (I kid you not) ''War and Peace.''

In between, Danny, Adam and Jason have found a shipwrecked Russian sailor named
Mischa (Whip Hubley), who, in spite of his slight accent, is just a regular guy,
after all. In the wake of some heavy ideological give-'n'-take (''What about
Afghanistan?'' asks Danny. ''What about Vietnam?'' asks Mischa), the boys take
Mischa on a glorious one-day tour of Key West. ''What means this Fourth July?''
asks Mischa. They buy him a hip wardrobe, introduce him to a Big Mac
cheeseburger and to Adam's beautiful sister, Diane, with whom it's love at first
sight.

Says Mischa: ''I think I know why your country is strong. You have conviction.
You have energy as young men.''

Glasnost is not a one-way street. The warmhearted Mischa teaches the boys that
one doesn't have to be, in their word, ''homo'' to be able to express affection
by throwing a comradely arm around a shoulder. ''I have big family,'' says
Mischa. ''Always hug. Like bears, always hugging.''

Nor does true glasnot run smoothly. A couple of Mischa's shipmates also are
ashore, nosing around the local military base in search of the traitor who's
going to sell them a highly classified secret device. When cornered, these two
sailors don't hesitate to hold Mischa's teen-age friends hostage. At the same
time, the boys must save Mischa from a terrible beating by a local Commie-hater.
Thus we learn that there are good and bad folk everywhere.

However, the big glasnost test comes when young Danny's father, whose own father
was shot by the Russians when they invaded Hungary in 1956, is introduced to
Mischa.

Every now and then, ''Russkies,'' a comic-book movie whose heart is in the right
place, exhibits the lighter side of its comic-book sensibility, as when the
American traitor decides not to sell the secret device to the Russians. ''Call
it corny,'' he says, ''but I'm not selling out my country on the Fourth of
July!''

''Russkies,'' directed by Rick Rosenthal, has the brightly colored look of a
commercial for a high-fiber breakfast cereal, and even talks like one.
''America,'' says the expansive Mischa, ''takes such big bite of life! Such
color! Such freedom!'' The cast members, most of whom come out of television
commercials and soap operas, have perfect complexions and capped teeth.

''Russkies,'' which has been rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''),
contains some mildly vulgar words.

Pink-Colored Glasses

RUSSKIES, directed by Rick Rosenthal; screenplay by Alan Jay Glueckman, Sheldon
Lettich and Michael Nankin; director of photography Reed Smoot; edited by Antony
Gibbs; music by James Newton Howard; production designer Linda Pearl; produced
by Mark Levinson and Scott Rosenfelt; released by New Century Entertainment
Company. At Manhattan Twin, 59th Street and Third Avenue; 23d Street West
Triplex, between Eighth and Ninth Avenues; Metro Twin, Broadway at 99th Street.
Running time: 98 minutes.

This film is rated PG.

Mischa... Whip Hubley
Danny... Leaf Phoenix
Adam... Peter Billingsley
Jason... Stefan DeSalle
Diane... Susan Walters
Raimy... Patrick Kilpatrick
Sulock... Vic Polizos
Mr. Vandermeer... Charles Frank
Mrs. Vandermeer... Susan Blanchard
Sergeant Kovac... Benjamin Hendrickson
Mrs. Kovac... Carole King

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Appointee to Security Post Is Praised

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 647 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON Nov. 5


Hardly anyone has a bad word for Lieut. Gen. Colin L. Powell of the Army, who is
about to become President Reagan's new national security adviser.

Not only his fellow Army officers speak highly of him, but civilian government
officials who have dealt with him over the years sing his praises. A former
commanding officer said of him: ''He has style. People grow to like him and work
with him.''

A State Department official who has been working with him on policy questions
said, ''Powell is really a terrific guy; smart, and a joy to work with.''

General Powell will move up to replace Frank C. Carlucci when Mr. Carlucci takes
over from Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger. The national security adviser
does not have to be confirmed by the Senate.

Those who have dealt with the general in the Pentagon view him as an
accomplished bureaucrat who, as a military assistant to Mr. Weinberger, shielded
him from unnecessary visitors and relieved him of the burden of detailed
supervision.

'One of the Brightest Lights'

The 50-year-old old general, now one of the highest-ranking black officials in
the Reagan Administration, is ''one of the brightest lights in the Army,''
according to one of his former commanders, Gen. Glenn Otis, commander of United
States Army Forces in Europe. General Powell was a corps commander in Germany
under General Otis before his current job as deputy national security adviser.

General Powell also received high marks from staff members on the National
Security Council. ''It was a breath of fresh air when he arrived here,'' said
one.

The staff had been demoralized by the Iran-contra disclosures under the the
former national security adviser, Rear Adm. John M. Poindexter, and his
assistant, Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North.

General Powell is not new to the corridors of power in Washington. Early in his
Army career, as a major, he was named a White House Fellow, a prestigious
position of Government middle management. In that internship post he worked for
Mr. Weinberger when he headed the Office of Management and Budget as well as for
Mr. Carlucci, who was Mr. Weinberger's deputy.

Later he served on the Army staff, on the staff of Secretary of Defense Harold
Brown in the Carter Administration and as military assistant to the Deputy
Secretary of Defense and later Secretary of Energy, Charles W. Duncan Jr. In
1983, when he had two stars compared to the present three, General Powell became
military assistant to Mr. Weinberger.

Born in South Bronx

General Powell was born and brought up in the South Bronx by parents who were
Jamaican immigrants, both of whom worked in the garment district in Manhattan.
He attended City College of New York, where he was in the Reserve Officers
Training Corps, and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Army when he
graduated in 1958.

He served two tours in Vietnam. He also commanded a battalion in Korea, a
brigade in the 101st Airborne Divison at Fort Campbell, Ky., and was assistant
division commander of the Fourth Infantry Division at Fort Carson, Colo.

General Powell is taking over as national security adviser at a time when there
is public uncertainty over military officers serving on the security council
staff in the wake of the performances of Admiral Poindexter and Colonel North.
In an earlier interview with The New York Times, the General maintained that it
was essential that the council staff have the benefit of the ideas and insights
of military officers.

In that interview, however, General Powell did say that he believed the office
of national security adviser should be held by a civilian. When General Powell
is appointed, he will be the fourth military officer to hold the post since its
inception in 1953. In addition to Admiral Poindexter, Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr.
of the Army and Lieut. Gen. Brent Scowcroft of the Air Force held the post.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lieut. Gen. Colin L. Powell (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Gore Steps Up Bid for Center in Race

BYLINE: By WARREN WEAVER Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 6


Senator Albert Gore Jr. is intensifying his efforts to cast the 1988 Democratic
Presidential race as a contest between one moderate in the center of the party
spectrum, himself, and five other candidates on the left.

''It's no secret that mine is the only campaign that is not carefully crafting
its message to meet all the liberal litmus tests,'' the Tennessean said this
week as he left for a six-day swing that will include several debates with his
opponents.

''Mine is the only campaign that is not jealously guarding its left flank,'' he
said in an interview. ''Mine is the only campaign not moving inexorably to the
left to prevent anyone from being farther to the left.''

In stressing his differences with the other Democratic contenders, he said he
was opposing ''a neo-isolationist impulse'' in the party that grew out of the
Vietnam War and that proved disastrous to four out of its last five of its
Presidential candidates.

Exaggerations Charged

In the last month Senator Gore has underscored differences in national security
and foreign policy that he sees between himself and rivals like Representative
Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, Senator Paul Simon of Illinois and Gov. Michael
S. Dukakis of Massachusetts. As a result of this offensive, he said, ''My
campaign has gotten a tremendous boost, no doubt about it.''

The other Democratic candidates, who include the Rev. Jesse Jackson and former
Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona, have accused the Senator of misrepresenting their
positions and of exaggerating some individual differences between them into a
broad philosophical gulf. In response, Mr. Gore said, ''It is nothing new for me
to be criticized from the left for supporting national defense.''

Representative Gephardt recently compiled a list of 16 military and foreign
policy issues on which he and Mr. Gore had voted alike, including a freeze on
nuclear weapons, a smaller intercontinental missile, deployment of a defense
against missile attack, interpretation of the treaty limiting anti-missile
systems, a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing, the second strategic arms
treaty and the Stealth radar-evading bomber.

Votes Called 'Selected'

Senator Gore rejected this argument of proximity. ''With a carefully selected
number of votes that ignores hundreds of others,'' he said, ''you can make up a
list that shows whatever you want it to.''

Voting records of the three Democratic candidates in Congress tend to show that
Senator Gore has some basis for contending he has given stronger support to
military measures than Senator Simon or Mr. Gephardt, but not much stronger. The
American Security Council, which rates all members of Congress every two years
on their support for a strong military establishment, gave Senator Gore a score
of 20 out of 100 in 1986, down from 40, 50 and 40 in 1980, 1982 and 1984.

The council gave Mr. Gephardt a 22 last year, a shade above Mr. Gore, but his
earlier ratings fluctuated considerably, from 10 in 1980 to 90 in 1982 down to
10 again in 1984. Senator Simon's numbers were more consistent: 0, 13, 10 and 0
in the last four reports.

But many members of Congress received much higher ratings than Senator Gore. For
example, Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, with whom the Tennessean often identifies
himself, got 90 in 1986, 70 in 1984 and 90 in 1982.

In speeches, Senator Gore does not normally identify the opponent whose national
security position he is criticizing, preferring to use a phrase like, ''Some say
. . .'' Asked to specify which Democrats had advocated ''the politics of
retreat, complacency and doubt,'' one of his favorite phrases, he said,
''Neo-isolationism in the party has not been placed in proper perspective.''

''Proposals for withdrawing our armed forces from South Korea,'' suggested by
Governor Dukakis under certain circumstances, he said, ''represent the politics
of retreat. The policy of halting all flight testing of ballistic missiles is
the politics of complacency; except for Bruce Babbitt, all my opponents endorse
that. The call for removal of American flags on the tankers in the Persian Gulf
and removal of American ships from their mission there is a policy of doubt; all
my opponents are opposed to the mission in the Persian Gulf, and some have
proposed removing the flags.''

Sees Problems in Iowa

When questioned, Senator Gore conceded that his military stance was not likely
to be as popular in Iowa, where the first major Presidential test takes place
next February, as in the rest of the country. He said his goal in Iowa was to
carry the state a year from now as the Democratic Presidential nominee, an
implicit concession that he is unlikely to do well in the caucuses there early
next year.

He is more optimistic about the first primary a week later in New Hampshire,
where he said he finds ''a larger number of moderate Democrats.''

The Senator denies that his centrist campaign is tailored for March 8, when a
dozen Southern states, among others, will hold Presidential primaries.

''I'm forcefully articulating my views in the campaign,'' he said, ''and I hope
my message will find a receptive audience.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Albert Gore Jr. (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A Widening Pattern of Abuse Exemplified in Steinberg Case

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1533 words


For more than a decade, friends and police investigators say, Joel B. Steinberg
physically and emotionally abused his lover, Hedda Nussbaum. And in that time,
they say, a woman who once was an intelligent and effective editor and author
seemed to lose all self-respect and become unable to extricate or defend
herself.

But only recently, authorities believe, did Mr. Steinberg's abuse of Ms.
Nussbaum turn to violence against their 6-year-old daughter, Elizabeth. Last
Monday, the girl was found near death in the family's Greenwich Village
apartment, and in succeeding days, her death and the arrest of her adoptive
parents for murder have underlined the widespread problems of wife and child
abuse, and how closely connected they are.

Child and Wife Abuse Linked

The Nussbaum-Steinberg relationship, experts said, fits a rough pattern of
behavior characteristic among abusers and the abused, a pattern that crosses
racial and socioeconomic lines.

According to Karla Digirolamo, executive director of New York State's Governor's
Commission on Domestic Violence, ''We're finding more child abuse associated
with wife abuse than before.'' The usual assumption, she said, has been that
''husband beats wife, wife beats kids, kids beat dog, but we're finding it much
more common that the abuser in a family abuses everyone.''

Ms. Digirolamo and other experts, such as Dr. Penelope Grace, a specialist in
family violence at the Harvard Medical School and Children's Hospital in Boston,
stress that the study and understanding of domestic violence are developing, but
agree that child abuse is correlated with spouse abuse 30 percent to 40 percent
of the time.

They also agree on a pattern of psychological behavior in abusive relationships
that seems to fit much of what is known about the Steinberg case.

The experts speak of wife abuse as a complicated and cumulative cycle of
tension, belittlement, violence, remorse and reconciliation that can lead to a
paralysis of will and extinction of self-respect.

Sometimes known as ''the battered women's syndrome,'' the cycle depends, these
experts say, on the usually deliberate undermining of a woman's sense of
authority, independence and self-worth by a possessive, demanding and overly
critical man who feels the need to control the behavior of all those around him.

The result can be a psychological trauma, says Courtney Esposito, a consultant
to the Division on Women of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, that
is not unlike that suffered by American prisoners of war in Vietnam or the
American hostages in Iran. ''There is a sense of being trapped,'' said Ms.
Esposito, who says she was a battered wife. ''You live in terror and your
thinking is altered.''

''Battering is physically and psychologically cumulative,'' said Prudence Glass
Greenblatt of the Battered Women's Defense Committee, which aided Karen Straw,
recently acquitted in the murder of her husband. ''The memory of the violence
and the threat of it happening again is as real as the event, and it's part of
the control.''

Violence Denied or Minimized

''A woman feels loss of control and often a sense of responsibility for the
violence,'' Ms. Digirolamo said. ''There is a cognitive dissonance between the
reality of the violence and the usual periods of remorse from someone who is,
after all, the partner in a love relationship.

''How do you assimilate that fact that the person who loves you is beating you?
Or that the person you love is beating you, so that even your love is worth
nothing?''

Ms. Digirolamo said that like Ms. Nussbaum, many women deny the violence or
minimize it. ''They think, 'Well, if I behave, I can stop this, he'll stop
beating me,' '' she said.

If a woman is beaten for being late with dinner, Ms. Greenblatt said, ''she'll
get dinner ready on time but get beaten for something else.'' She said one woman
recalled that just before she was beaten, her husband would say, ''You know, I
feel sorry for you, you can't do anything right.''

Conditioned Helplessness

This sense of blame and responsibility is often reinforced, especially in
traditional communities, the experts say, by clergymen, therapists or doctors.
''Even your mother will tell you it must be your own fault,'' Ms. Greenblatt
said, ''and that you can't abandon the children.''

''There develops a conditioned helplessness,'' Ms. Digirolamo said, ''which is
magnified by fear - some women believe they are safer at home where they know
the danger'' than out in an unsupportive world where they may be pursued.

''Most men who are batterers don't just batter,'' Dr. Grace said. ''They isolate
a woman, intimidate her in all areas. They destroy her self-confidence with
great intentionality, so a paralysis develops.''

The presence of children in a relationship complicates it further, experts say.
For some women, apparently as in the case of Ms. Nussbaum, the desire to protect
the children will cause them to stay. For other women, the same desire will be
the catalyst that finally emboldens them to leave or seek help.

Societal Impediments

According to David Adams, a founder in 1977 of Emerge, which provides therapy to
male batterers in Massachusetts: ''Often the battering man is not abusive to the
kids, especially when they're young. But as they grow older, that can sometimes
change.''

Larry Weinberg, an author who was close to Ms. Nussbaum, Mr. Steinberg and their
daughter, said he believed this pattern fits the relationship he knew. Mr.
Steinberg, who is a lawyer, saw Elizabeth ''as a complicit partner or ally
against Hedda,'' Mr. Weinberg said.

He said he believed that Elizabeth became old enough ''to try to intervene and
defend Hedda, and suddenly bore the brunt'' of Mr. Steinberg's rage. (The
Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morganthau, is investigating whether
Elizabeth was ever legally adopted by Mr. Steinberg and Ms. Nussbaum.) At the
same time, the experts said, there are societal impediments to any woman leaving
a relationship, let alone a woman who has undergone a long period of trauma and
abuse. ''When a woman leaves, what protection does she have?'' Dr. Grace said.
''It would be nice if a woman walked out the door and it ended, when in fact
it's just begun.''

When a woman leaves the home, Ms. Greenblatt said, ''she risks losing everything
- her children, her house, her possessions, even grandmother's furniture.'' In
custody battles, she said, courts often will reward children to battering
fathers because of desertion if there is no formal evidence of child abuse, and
in child-abuse cases, ''the woman stands charged too, with neglect and
complicity, as Hedda Nussbaum is.''

Few women except the wealthy, the experts said, can afford to leave the home and
live decently, yet to enter a battered women's shelter, a woman must be on
welfare. According to Ms. Digirolamo, between 20 percent and 40 percent of
homeless people in New York City are battered women.

According to recent studies cited by Ms. Esposito, 20 percent of women who enter
hospital emergency rooms for injuries have been battered, as well as 45 percent
of the mothers of abused or neglected children and 25 percent of women who
commit suicide.

Dr. Ronald Chez of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey said
there were 6 million battered women in America; other estimates range from 3
million to 12 million. Susan Schechter, author of ''Women and Male Violence,''
said there were 1.8 million battered married women in 1980, but said that figure
did not include violence against single women or divorcees. ''There are teen-age
date batterers, too,'' she said.

Edmund Stubbing, a New York City policeman for 18 years who now works with the
Victims Services Agency, estimated that at least 350,000 calls a year to the
city's emergency number, 911, concern domestic violence. In one Bronx precinct
with a population of 120,000, he said, 15 percent of households called the
police for help with domestic disputes, and over three years, 55 percent of
those households called more than once.

To Mr. Stubbing and city police and court officials, there is a strong
correlation between poverty and domestic violence, but many outside experts say
wife and child abuse cut fairly evenly across racial and socioeconomic lines.

Those with money are better able to avoid public disclosure than the poor, these
experts said, and can afford private treatment, housing, medical attention and
legal advice.

''Everyone can believe that a poor, unemployed man beats his wife,'' Dr. Grace
said. ''What's harder to believe is that the upper-class person, the White House
staffer or the lawyer, does it, because there appears to be nothing wrong with
them.''

Ms. Greenblatt, though acknowledging a greater societal sensitivity to the
issues of domestic violence, said she believed that there remain ''significant
religious, cultural and political supports'' for wife beating.

''It's like the 'rule of thumb' in British common law,'' she said. ''It meant a
man could not beat his wife with a stick thicker than the width of his thumb. It
is only comparatively recently that battering has been criminalized.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Fear of AIDS Surfaces in Permissive Bangkok

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


In Bangkok, where by conservative estimates several hundred thousand people make
their living in the sex industry, fears of AIDS have been slow to surface. But
the complacency may soon be over.

Threatened by declining business, bars and massage parlors - some with hundreds
of young women employed to serve busloads of Japanese and Middle Eastern men on
package sex tours -are beginning to test employees.

Police officers have told Bangkok newspapers they will no longer be allowed
advertisements from gay bars. Government health agencies have begun to do their
own testing and to accumulate some statistics. So far, the figures are not
alarming.

Bangkok, with at least five million people, has recorded officially only six
deaths - five Thais and a foreigner. Three other foreigners with AIDS have gone
home, and may have died since. Ninety-seven people have tested positive for the
virus and 25 others have already developed an AIDS-related condition, most of
them defined as homosexuals or drug addicts, according to Government officials.

Sommatra Troy is one of a growing number of Thais who think this response is far
from adequate.

Ms. Troy, a Thai-American nurse who has come home to start a foundation to
address the potential AIDS problem here, says that in her tours of hospitals,
massage parlors and gay bars over the last few months, she has already heard of
more than half a dozen prostitutes still working despite positive tests for the
virus.

''They fear starvation more than AIDS,'' she said.

The situation alarms and frustrates Ms. Troy and her backers in several Thai
women's organizations who face the problem of Thai unwillingness to air
unpleasant topics. Campaigns on sensitive subjects are bad form.

In her speeches to service clubs, nurses and other interested groups, and her
appearances on television and radio shows, Ms. Troy, who was trained in London
and New York and worked in several American cities before settling in Chicago,
said she believed 600,000 to a million Thais are in a high-risk group.

She said she had found few hospitals that regularly tested blood for the AIDS
virus, some because they cannot afford to, especially in rural areas.

''So I went to the Parliament today and I met with the chairman of the Committee
on Public Health,'' she said. ''I told him a law is very important. There may
not have been a law before, but AIDS is here now.

Ms. Troy says that fewer than 150,000 Thais have been tested, most of them as a
prerequisite to jobs in the Middle East or because they were part of a prison
population that includes drug addicts or foreigners.

Most Thais seem to believe that AIDS can be spread only by Westerners. One large
massage parlor has barred Caucasians.

Ms. Troy, who is 50 years old, said she began to think about coming home after
27 years abroad when she met Khunying Kanitha Wichiencharoen, Thailand's leading
women's rights campaigner, on a visit to Chicago. She now has a ''borrowed''
office in Ms. Kanitha's Emergency Home for Women in Bangkok.

''I knew very little about AIDS until two years ago when I became an admistrator
in a hospice that cared for AIDS victims,'' Ms. Troy said.

''I talked to one of the patients before he died, and he told me, 'My lover was
a Thai,' '' she said. ''Then I thought, 'Thailand must have AIDS.' '' The
thought haunted her.

On her return to Thailand six months ago, Ms. Troy said she was shocked at the
scope of the sex industry and the concurrent abuse of women. She said
prostitutes had told her that clients, especially from the Middle East, refused
to use condoms as a precaution against infection, and that women who objected
were dismissed.

Ms. Troy disagrees with those who say that the Thai sex industry was a product
of the Vietnam War years, when American servicemen visited here in large
numbers.

''There were always massage parlors in Japan and prostitutes in China. Now the
girls tell me that very few Americans go to parlors. It is mostly Japanese and
Middle Easterners.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DRUG USE EMERGES AS CAMPAIGN ISSUE

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 35, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 865 words


Saying that he would ''much rather be here talking about arms control or the
stock market crash,'' Senator Albert Gore Jr. volunteered at a state convention
in Miami yesterday that he had occasionally smoked marijuana as a student and as
a soldier in Vietnam.

In Des Moines, former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona, another Democratic
Presidential hopeful, said yesterday that he had also used marijuana.

The reaction from several of their rivals for the Democratic Presidential
nomination was that they felt such past indiscretions were irrelevant so long as
the candidates no longer used drugs. But, in a year when charges of adultery and
plagiarism have forced two candidates out of the race, it was perhaps inevitable
that disclosures that Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg had used marijuana would create
a new litmus test for politicians.

''I wish that I had not done it, but I did, like tens of millions of Americans
of my generation,'' Mr. Gore said in a morning news conference at the Florida
State Democratic Convention in Miami.

''I'd much rather be here talking about arms control or the stock market
crash,'' said the 39-year-old Tennessean.

Babbitt 'Tried Marijuana'

Mr. Babbitt, in a telephone interview with The Associated Press, said yesterday:
''I was a college student in the 1960's and a civil rights lawyer down South.
Sure I tried marijuana. The only possibly relevant question is, 'Are you a drug
abuser now?' And the answer is obviously not.''

The admissions by Mr. Babbitt and Mr. Gore pointed to an inclination on the part
of candidates to disclose potential indiscretions before fingers are pointed.

As the Rev. Jesse Jackson, one of the three other candidates at the Florida
convention, said, ''Senator Gore's choice to admit his mistake is very different
from his being caught in a lie.''

Mr. Jackson and the two other candidates, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of
Missouri and Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, each said he had never
smoked marijuana. Mr. Gephardt said Mr. Gore's use of marijuana should not
become an issue in the campaign, and Mr. Dukakis said, ''I think youthful
indiscretions are irrelevant.''

Still, in light of the controversy surrounding Judge Ginsburg, the question of
marijuana use has suddenly become another of those issues where the private
actions and personal responsibilities of candidates are being scrutinized.

''We've had the sex test, the plagiarism test and now the marijuana test,'' Mr.
Jackson said Friday, adding that Judge Ginsburg's admission of occasional
marijuana use in the 1960's and 70's should not be the sole factor in the
selection process. Mr. Dukakis also said such indiscretions as the judge's
should not be held against a Presidential or Supreme Court nominee.

Senator Paul Simon of Illinois said he did not think disclosures of marijuana
use by either Judge Ginsburg or some of his rivals for the Democratic nomination
should, on their own, disqualify them for office.

''If we simply try to get people who have made no mistakes, who've never done
anything, we'll probably get Presidents who'll never do anything either,'' said
Mr. Simon, who said the ''total picture'' must be looked at.

For his own part, Mr. Simon, who is 53 years old, said he had never used
marijuana, and did not even know about it when he was in high school and
college.

Use of Drug in Vietnam

Mr. Gore said he last used marijuana when he was 24. He said he first tried the
drug at the end of his junior year at Harvard in 1968 and used it again at the
beginning of his senior year the next fall. He also said he used the drug ''once
or twice'' while off-duty in an Army tour at Bien Hoa, Vietnam; on several
occasions while he was in graduate school at Vanderbilt University and when he
was an employee of a Nashville newspaper.

''During my junior and senior years in college, during those years,'' Mr. Gore
said, 'it was looked at similar to the way moonshine was looked at during
Prohibition days.''

On Friday, Mr. Babbitt was asked at an appearance in Iowa what he thought of the
controversy surrounding Judge Ginsburg's use of marijuana. ''Do you think the
fact that he had an occasional joint while he was a student is of any relevance
at all?'' he asked an audience of 150 students at Drake University in Des
Moines. ''I have a feeling that 50 or 60 or 70 percent of America would be
disqualified if that were the standard.''

A nationwide poll released Friday showed that 70 percent of those surveyed said
it would make no difference in their vote if a Presidential candidate had smoked
marijuana in college, but 27 percent said they would vote against such a
candidate, with the rest expressing no opinion. The poll by the Cable News
Network and U.S.A. Today surveyed 1,005 registered voters from Oct. 25 to Oct.
30. The results had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage
points.

Yesterday, former Gov. Pete du Pont of Delaware, arriving for a Republican
debate in West Des Moines, Iowa, told reporters that he had never smoked
marijuana and that he had required members of his campaign, including himself,
to undergo surprise drug testing. He said everyone had passed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOME VIDEO;
TRAVEL

BYLINE: By Mervyn Rothstein

SECTION: Section 2; Page 34, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 232 words



Washington Monuments
Narrated by Robert Prosky. Produced and written by Peter D. Edwards. Atlas Video
Library. 30 minutes. $19.95. This is a dull, slow-moving, plodding and
superficial attempt at a tourist guide or souvenir that, despite its pretty
pictures, captures none of the historical or present-day excitement of our
nation's capital.

From the Washington Monument, to the Vietnam Memorial, to the Smithsonian
museums, the monotone narration and predictable camerawork give a onceover to
most of the basic tourist sites, with a bit of historical perspective thrown in
- Pierre l'Enfant, the beginnings as Federal City, and so on. There are a couple
of interesting facts - why the Washington Monument changes color partway up (a
dispute over a stone contributed by the Pope, and a long delay in construction
caused in part by the Civil War, led to the use of stone from a deeper part of
the quarry) and which state's year of entry into the Union is incorrectly carved
at the Lincoln Memorial (Ohio).

But the video's basic lack of depth is best illustrated by the narration in the
segment on the Supreme Court Building. The court had so little prestige after it
began hearing cases in 1790, the narrator says, that John Jay, the first Chief
Justice, eventually resigned to become Governor of New York. ''Since then,'' he
continues, ''its importance has increased dramatically.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS FORUM: ECONOMISTS LOOK AT THE MARKET COLLAPSE;
A Falling Dollar Can Only Help

BYLINE: By Joel Kurtzman

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1094 words


LAST weekend, 32 economists from around the country and from Europe gathered at
the Jerome Levy Economics Institute at Bard College to discuss the work of the
late British economist Nicholas Kaldor. Much of the discussion was concerned
with the more esoteric aspects of Lord Kaldor's work - his theories about money
and economic growth.

But a panel was also convened to discuss some of the implications of the recent
stock market collapse. Among those participating were James Tobin, Nobel
laureate in economics and professor at Yale Univeristy; Hyman Minsky, professor
of eocnomics at Washington University; Prof. Meghard Desai of the London School
of Economics, and Edward Nell, professor of economics at the New School for
Social Research.

Business Forum editor Joel Kurtzman attended the conference and selected the
following comments from the panel on the stock market collapse, trade and the
dollar.


PROFESSOR TOBIN: Why did the stock market collapse? The answer is we just don't
know. Nothing was different on the day of the collapse from the week before. I
don't agree that the stocks were overvalued and that was the reason for the
fall. The ratio of stock prices to the value of underlying capital replacement
was about where it was in the 1960's.

We need easier monetary policy. We had a tight monetary policy and a loose
fiscal policy, which gave us the current mix of high interest rates and big
deficit spending. It is, however, a bad policy mix that we needed to keep the
value of the dollar high.

We should return to the deficit ratios of before the Reagan Adminstration. We
ought to legislate a tax increase now but implement it sometime in the future to
make sure we move toward a reasonable deficit.

PROFESSOR MINSKY: If the dollar falls, it will mean a recession in the big
exporting countries. What would their response be to a loss of our market? Don't
forget that they are not powerless. They can lower the value of their currencies
as well. But today's 500-point fall in the Dow may mean that tomorrow we will
see a 1,000-point fall. We must not forget that there were 40 months between
October 1929 and March 1933.

PROFESSOR TOBIN: We just don't need a high value dollar. It hurts our trade
position with other countries. We should let the dollar fall against other
currencies. The idea of a ''free falling dollar'' is just a slogan. It will
never go down to ''zero.'' Our aim should be to get the dollar down to a level
where people begin to expect it to rise, not fall.

So far during the Reagan Administration, the economic policies have been
directed toward fighting inflation. But we have nothing to fear about inflation
in the economy today. There are no production bottlenecks and no shortages of
labor to drive up prices. If we let the value of the dollar fall to increase
exports we would have one quick shot of inflation from an increase in the price
of imports but then it would be over.''

PROFESSOR DESAI: But there is also another important issue. Much of the trade
deficit arises from American multinational companies that manufacture products
for the United States market in different countries around the world. The
portion of the trade deficit that derives from this type of trade will be
difficult to reverse. It represents the fact that production has been
internationalized on a large scale. Today the Germans and the Japanese have not
got the clout to regulate the international economy. This is still the United
States' job.

PROFESSOR TOBIN: The Germans and the Japanese have cooperated in stabilizing the
dollar, but they have not pursued policies that would lead to the expansion of
their own domestic economies. And these are economies that can really use
expansionary domestic policies because Europe has double-digit unemployment and
Japan has unemployment disguised as overcapacity.

PROFESSOR MINSKY: Japan and Germany have a lot at stake in their exports to the
United States - especially their high-end exports. Mercedes Benz is very
important to the German economy and America is its largest market. But if the
stock market remains low and the dollar falls, then sales of Mercedes and of
high-priced Japanese exports will also fall. The Germans and Japanese will have
to decide if they want to have a recession at home or if they want to stimulate
their economies to make up for the loss of our markets.

PROFESSOR NELL: Today's massive third world debt is an additional factor of
unease. But it is not without precident. In 1929 there was the problem of
massive German World War I reparations to the United States and the European
allies. Today, the question is 'what will it take for the third world to earn
its way out of debt?' The answer is that if the third world does earn its way
out of debt it will do so by very seriously penetrating our markets with its
products and by displacing American workers and companies. This is because those
countries can only earn the income they need to pay off their debt if they
export to us and to a lesser extent to Europe and Japan. The uncertainty with
respect to the third world debt situtation has contributed to the nervousness of
the stock markets.

PROFESSOR MINSKY: There was also a Latin American debt in the 1920's. In those
days the debt was in the form of securities - bonds - and when the debtor
countries could not make good on those bonds it hurt a number of banks and
ultimately forced banks out of the bond business.''

PROFESSOR NELL: To support balanced international trade and to cut our trade
deficits, the United States should enter into agreements with other countries
that specify the volume of trade but not its composition. We could easily employ
a system of agreements between our major trading partners where we guarantee to
import a given dollar volume of goods - but no more. If our trading partners
refuse, we can simply cut our imports even more.

At the same time, we must supportdomestic consumption, especially among groups
that haven't yet been brought into economy - by that I mean the poor. Prior to
the 1970's we had the G.I. bill for ex-servicemen which supported education and
housing and later the war on poverty. With the repeal of the draft, the scaling
back of G.I. benefits for Vietnam vets, and the end of the war on poverty, we
lost some of the stimulus effect from this type of consumption. In the 1950's
and 60's, it was vital to our growth. Should there be a recession coming on the
heels of the stock market collapse, a new war on poverty would be a very
plausible long- term cure.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Edward Nell, James Tobin and Hyman Minsky, panelists at Bard
College (Howard Dratch)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THE CONTRADICTIONS OF BOB DOLE

BYLINE: By Martin Tolchin and Jeff Gerth; Martin Tolchin and Jeff Gerth are
reporters in the Washington bureau of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 63, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5357 words


BOB DOLE WAS adamant. The budget deficit, he had said since the beginning of the
Reagan Presidency, was ''the nation's No. 1 priority.'' Now, standing on the
floor of the United States Senate, the tall, crisply tailored Kansan was
elaborating on that theme. Health programs, he said, were ''just another
instance of how Congress puts spending on automatic pilot.''

But later, in the privacy of a House-Senate conference, he took quite a
different tack. In a whispered conversation in an ornate room in the Longworth
House Office Building, Senator Dole advised Representative Henry Waxman, the
liberal Democratic chairman of a key House subcommittee, to ignore his
pronouncements on austerity and press for expansion of Medicaid's prenatal-care
program. The proposal became law - with Bob Dole's silent support.

It was a virtuoso performance that left few traces, a tactic at which the
64-year-old Mr. Dole excels. He is a nocturnal legislator, introducing bills
without hearings or debate on behalf of interests public and private. He is a
master of compromise, a necessary talent for a Senate leader. But there remains
a question that has troubled political observers for years and may be a central
issue in Mr. Dole's campaign for the 1988 Republican nomination for President,
which he is scheduled to announce formally tomorrow: What does Bob Dole stand
for?

''Bob waits to see which way the wind is blowing,'' says Nancy Landon Kassebaum,
the junior Republican Senator from Kansas. ''There's always a question: Does he
have a vision? You won't see him creating an agenda.''

In a year in which the character of potential Presidents has become a dominant
issue, Bob Dole is a man of self-contained contrasts and conflicts. He has a
meanness of spirit but a capacity for compassion. He is a strident Republican
partisan who woos Democrats and independent voters. He is an expert at building
political coalitions, yet is a loner with few close friends.

An examination of Senator Dole's life and record reveals a host of
contradictions. Acknowledged by his peers as a consummate governmental insider,
Mr. Dole is basing his 1988 candidacy on the affirmation that he will be the
''hands-on President'' that ''most Americans are looking for.'' Yet he professes
a lack of involvement in a series of bitter, controversial campaign episodes
dating from the start of his political career.

Although he is campaigning for President as a fiscal conservative and calling
the budget deficit ''the single biggest black cloud over this country,'' Mr.
Dole was the architect of the 1985 agricultural bill that accounted for 12
percent of last year's total budget deficit.

The Senator has also decried the influence of ''the special interests'' in
politics. ''A guy walking out on the scaffolding should have the same rights as
some big-city banker,'' he says. But he has promoted legislation that benefited
key fund-raisers and friends. More significantly, the Doles received
preferential treatment in the acquisition of Florida property from Dwayne O.
Andreas, the chairman of a large agribusiness company that has been a major
beneficiary of the Senator's legislative efforts.

Sitting in his office just off the Senate floor, portraits of previous
Republican leaders on the walls and a stunning view of the Washington Monument
outside his window, Mr. Dole shrugs off the apparent contradictions. ''I may not
be totally predictable,'' he says in the flat nasal tones of his native Kansas.
''I'm not certain that's all bad.''

The unpredictability is part of a driving ambition that now sees him in his
third campaign for national office. That ambition - the strongest constant in
Bob Dole's life - was forged during a difficult, Depression-era childhood on the
Middle Western plains and by a World War II injury that kept him hospitalized
for three years and left him permanently without the use of his right arm.
Although most observers agree that he has mellowed considerably since his 1975
marriage to Elizabeth Hanford, who recently resigned as Secretary of
Transportation in the Reagan Cabinet to campaign for her husband, that injury
has left him with an enduring edge of bitterness.

The White House would be the culmination of a quest for power that contrasts
with the powerlessness of his poverty-ridden early years and the helplessness
that followed the war wound. ''Whether you really made a difference, whether you
really did anything while you were here,'' says Mr. Dole. explaining his drive
with the half-sentences and second-person references that mark his style. All
Bob Dole wants, he adds, is to be ''a success story.''

RUSSELL, Kan., could be the setting for a Sinclair Lewis novel. Union Pacific
railroad tracks divide the town and a grain elevator dominates the skyline. Main
Street, six blocks long, boasts a roller rink, movie theater, several shops and
two drugstores. The only hint of the town's claim to national prominence is a
billboard at the intersection of Routes 70 and 281 that proclaims: ''Welcome to
Bob Dole Country.''

It was in this tiny farming, cattle and oil community, 285 miles west of Kansas
City, that Robert Joseph Dole was born on July 22, 1923 to Doran and Bina Dole.
They were stern parents. From his mother, ''Bobby Joe'' Dole recalls receiving a
weekly spanking. ''No good reason - just must be Saturday,'' he says. And his
father, who ran a cream station where farmers sold their dairy products and
purchased bootleg liquor, ''never asked you to do something twice,'' says
Kenneth Dole, 63, the Senator's younger brother, who still lives in Russell.

During the Depression, the Doles were engaged in a constant struggle against
foreclosure. Kenneth was afflicted with osteomyelitis, a crippling bone
infection that strained the family budget. The brothers shared a twin bed; their
two sisters - Gloria, now 65, and Norma Jean, 62 - slept in another twin bed in
the same room. One year, to pay the bills, the family rented out the first floor
of their house and moved into the basement.

In high school, Bob Dole earned membership in the National Honor Society and was
captain of the basketball team, played end on the football team and almost broke
the track team's indoor record for the quarter mile. His daily regimen began at
5:30 A.M. - when he performed household chores, ran, did pushups, lifted weights
and, for $2 a week, delivered the Salina Journal - and ended at 11 P.M., when
Dawson's drugstore, where he was a soda jerk, closed shop.

With a personal loan of $300 from a local banker (who told him to wear a hat
because ''anybody without a hat is not moving up in the world''), Mr. Dole went
to the University of Kansas to study to become a doctor. In 1943, he left school
and enlisted in the Army.

Two years later, the newly commissioned second lieutenant was assigned to the
85th regiment of the 10th Mountain Division, an elite corps of skiers and
mountain climbers that only recently had arrived in Italy. ''Typical army,'' the
Senator recalls. ''I was not a skier. I am not a mountain climber. I came from
the plains of Kansas and wound up in the mountain division.''

At 10 A.M. on April 14, 1945, his regiment tried to take Hill 913 in the
Apennine Mountains, 40 miles south of Bologna. Under a hail of flaming metal,
Bob Dole was struck -whether by rifle, machine gun, mortar or artillery fire, no
one knew. It was three weeks before the end of the war in Europe.

''My radio guy's name was Symms and he had been hit,'' Mr. Dole says. ''I was
trying to get him back into this little ravine, and once I was backed in there,
I must have raised up, and I felt this sting. . . I remember somebody came by
and put my arms across my chest, which was a relief because I didn't know where
they were.''

Bob Dole was awarded two Bronze Stars for his heroism in storming the mountain.
''I don't know if I was ever brave,'' he says. ''You know, there are some people
who do things like fall on a grenade or stand in front of something to protect
somebody. I didn't have that kind of experience. And that's bravery to me.''

AT 21, THE body he had nurtured with predawn exercise was in tatters. He was
shipped from hospital to hospital to hospital; along the way, doctors removed an
infected kidney. And he began the long, slow process of rehabilitation. His
right hand was useless; he learned to write and to button his shirts with his
left hand, which itself was virtually devoid of feeling.

Mr. Dole resented his enforced dependence, and it was at this time that his
temperament as a self-reliant loner began to emerge. ''I went through a period
of almost complete dependence,'' Mr. Dole says. ''Even in the bathrooms, they
had to come in and help you. You go through this period, and you almost get
stubborn the other way: 'I don't want anybody to help me. I can get it myself.
Don't touch me.' ''

Shortly before his discharge from a Veterans Administration hospital in
Michigan, Mr. Dole met Phyllis Holden, an occupational therapist from New
Hampshire, who worked with psychiatric patients. (He was not her patient;
indeed, Mr. Dole says he has never received psychological counseling.) She had
worked with so many disabled men that she didn't consider him handicapped. They
fell in love and were married three months later.

After attending the University of Arizona for a year on the G.I. Bill, Mr. Dole
transferred to Washburn University in Topeka, Kan. The V.A. provided him with a
primitive wire recorder to take down lectures, a memento he still keeps in his
apartment in Washington's Watergate complex. He spent his evenings painstakingly
transcribing the lectures. ''I learned early on that you didn't help him unless
he asked,'' Phyllis recalled recently. In 1952, he was awarded both his
bachelor's degree and his law degree, magna cum laude.

While he was still in law school, several area politicians persuaded him to run
for the State Legislature. His parents were New Deal Democrats, but the local
Republican leader told him that there were twice as many Republicans as
Democrats in Russell County. ''I made an on-the-spot philosophical judgment that
I'd always wanted to be a Republican,'' the Senator quips.

He ran as a war hero and won, serving a term in the Legislature during his final
year in college. After his graduation, he returned to Russell with his law
degree and political experience, and won the post of Russell County Attorney.

For a young politician, Mr. Dole was surprisingly uneasy with people - a trait
that marks him to this day. Russ Townsley, the editor of the Russell Daily News,
recalls evenings spent with the Doles. The two wives would chat in the kitchen
while the two men read their newspapers in the living room. ''There wasn't a lot
of idle chatter,'' Mr. Townsley says.

Although Mr. Dole capitalized on his war experience in his first political
campaign, he rarely spoke of his early struggles during his subsequent career as
a national politician. Instead, he consistently projected an unemotional,
pragmatic mien. Now, however, in an obvious effort to humanize his remote
character, he speaks of the hardships of his youth.

''My grandparents were tenant farmers,'' he told an audience in St. Cloud,
Minn., in late September. ''Some made it, and some didn't. And they didn't. As
County Attorney, I had to approve welfare checks and two of those went to my
grandparents.''

The memory lingers, finding expression in his desire to help people whom
conservatives often have ignored. ''There are groups in this country who have to
turn to the Government for help,'' he told an Elks Club dinner in Shenandoah,
Iowa, last spring. ''They may be very poor people. They may be disabled. They
may be senior citizens. They may be dependent children. We do have a
responsibility, when nobody else is going to do it.''

But such sentiments, representing what some observers have labeled the ''new
Dole,'' did not always characterize his ideology. During his eight years in the
House of Representatives, Mr. Dole opposed most of the underpinnings of
President Kennedy's New Frontier and President Johnson's Great Society. A
typical rural legislator, he voted against the first of the big antipoverty
programs in 1964, against aid to impoverished Appalachia, against subsidies for
urban mass-transportation projects and against Medicare.

Mr. Dole jettisoned some of his conservative views in 1974, but only when he
faced a difficult Senate re-election contest. He opposed the Nixon
Administration's proposal to slash funds for the antipoverty program he had
voted against 10 years earlier. He co-sponsored, with Democratic Senator George
McGovern - a man he had previously attacked as a ''partner-in-mudslinging''
against President Nixon - proposals to strengthen the food-stamp program and to
establish new programs for school breakfasts and nutrition supplements for
infants and pregnant women. (Some of these programs benefited his farm
constituents as well.) When he began to eye national office, Mr. Dole sought
more avidly to broaden his base. In the 1980's, for example, he created a
nonprofit foundation to channel money to projects for the disabled. And he
played a significant role in civil-rights legislation, sponsoring the bill that
made Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday a national holiday and strongly
supporting an extension of the Voting Rights Act. Said Joseph L. Rauh Jr., a
Washington lawyer and leading civil rights advocate: ''We wouldn't have gotten
the Voting Rights extension if not for Bob Dole.''

BUT IF MR. DOLE'S EARLY experiences with poverty and his wounding in the war
bred a deeply felt compassion, they also engendered a bitterness that has
plagued his political career.

It first surfaced during his initial campaign for Congress, in 1960. Mr. Dole's
Republican primary race was marred by a whispering campaign alleging that his
opponent, Keith Sebelius, had a drinking problem.

Mr. Dole, asked recently about the alcoholism charge (which is vehemently denied
by Mr. Sebelius's former associates), said: ''I don't know where it came from.''
But those familiar with Mr. Dole's reluctance to delegate authority are
convinced that he ran all aspects of that campaign and was responsible for the
rumor's prevalence.

Whatever the source, the rumor gave Mr. Dole the edge to gain a primary victory,
and he handily won the general election. ''There was an undercurrent about
drinking that worked well in the Bible Belt,'' recalled Norbert Dreiling, the
former state Democratic chairman. Mr. Sebelius eventually succeeded Mr. Dole in
the House. But the whispering campaign engendered a lifelong enmity between the
Sebelius family and Mr. Dole, who was pointedly not invited back to the home
after attending Mr. Sebelius's 1982 funeral.

After four terms in the House, Mr. Dole succeeded a retiring Kansas Republican
in the United States Senate. There, and as Republican national chairman, he
attracted national attention for vigorously defending President Nixon's Vietnam
policies and his handling of Watergate.

His strident support for President Nixon became a major issue in his bitter
Senate re-election campaign in 1974 against Democratic Representative William R.
Roy, a Topeka obstetrician, gynecologist and lawyer. Just two weeks before
Election Day, polls indicated that Dr. Roy was leading.

The Dole forces counterattacked with a campaign to brand Dr. Roy an
''abortionist.'' The doctor had indeed performed several abortions, but only to
save the lives of the mothers and only with the approval of the administration
of the Roman Catholic hospital with which he was affiliated.

''I got picketed every place I went,'' Dr. Roy recalled. ''The last Sunday, they
leafleted the parking lots of Roman Catholic churches with photos of fetuses in
garbage cans.''

Senator Dole - who supports overturning the Supreme Court's Roe v. Wade decision
and prefers that the states set their own laws regarding abortion - now recalls
the picketing as the work of some campaign enthusiasts. But here again, the
evidence suggests that he was personally involved. Dr. Roy, for example, vividly
remembers that Mr. Dole spoke at several Catholic high schools during the
campaign's last week and ''the last thing he said was, 'When you go home, ask
your mother if she knows how many abortions Dr. Roy has performed.' '' The
Senator was narrowly re-elected.

Mr. Dole's 1976 Vice-Presidential campaign with President Gerald R. Ford was
similarly marked by its strident tactics. The best remembered moment of that
race is probably Mr. Dole's televised debate with Walter F. Mondale, the
Democratic nominee for Vice President. Senator Dole called World Wars I and II,
the Korean and Vietnam conflicts ''Democrat wars.'' He continued: ''If we added
up the killed and wounded in Democrat wars in this century, it would be about
1.6 million Americans, enough to fill the city of Detroit.''

The reference to ''Democrat wars,'' suggested by Ford strategists, provoked a
furor. It burnished Mr. Dole's lingering image as a hatchet man and, some
suggested, cost President Ford the close election to Jimmy Carter.

Erasing the stigma from 1976 was a major motivation behind Bob Dole's first run
for the Republican Presidential nomination. But the 1980 campaign, too, proved
an embarrassment and exacerbated his reputation as a man who lashes out when
events turn against him. The ill-fated campaign (he withdrew in March, after
receiving only 607 votes out of 145,000 cast in the New Hampshire primary)
spawned a lawsuit, and accusations of campaign mismanagement and illegalities.

In March 1979, Mr. Dole had hired a Washington political consultant, Thomas D.
Bell Jr., to manage his race. By the summer, the campaign was short of money,
Mr. Dole was still low in the polls and Mr. Bell was in the process of leaving.
On the eve of his departure, Mr. Dole praised him at a staff meeting; but then,
as Mr. Bell was exiting, the Senator unexpectedly handed him a letter alleging
unauthorized expenditures, mismanagement and illegal campaign practices. The
accusations later reappeared in the lawsuit Senator Dole's campaign committee
filed against Mr. Bell and his company.

Mr. Dole claims a dim memory of the dispute. ''It probably may have happened,''
he said recently, when asked about the meeting and the letter. ''I think there
were a lot of unauthorized expenditures.''

But several former campaign staff members, who requested anonymity, said that
Mr. Dole had knowledge of or orally approved virtually every significant
expenditure or activity in the brief 1980 race. The aides added that Mr. Dole
filed the lawsuit because legally, he wanted to postpone having to pay the
campaign debts, and psychologically, he had to find a victim. ''The lawsuit is
part of his dark side,'' recalled one former aide. ''Dole's inclination is to
find a victim or scapegoat.''

In April 1980, just before Senator Dole was scheduled to testify in the case,
his campaign committee dropped its lawsuit against Mr. Bell.

PARADOXICALLY, Bob Dole has a knack for turning his victims into admirers. Bill
Roy, his Democratic Senate opponent in 1974, now believes Mr. Dole is doing a
''good job.'' And, although the Senator left his first wife in 1972 - walking
into their Washington home one evening after 23 years of marriage and one
daughter and announcing, simply, ''I want out'' - his former wife currently
makes and sells ''Dole for President'' buttons back home in Topeka.

''Some people think it's weird,'' says Phyllis Macey, who subsequently married a
wealthy Kansas rancher and, after his death, wed a retired school administrator.
''I make a little money off them, and he'd make a good President.''

Bob Dole has softened. ''Old age,'' he quips. But friends and colleagues trace
it to another source - his 1975 marriage to Elizabeth Hanford, an ambitious,
politically savvy lawyer 13 years his junior.

They met shortly after Mr. Dole's divorce. She was a consumer affairs specialist
in the Nixon White House. She went to see the Republican national chairman to
discuss a consumer plank in the 1972 Republican platform.

''I knew his name but didn't know what he looked like,'' Mrs. Dole recalled
recently. ''Well, the door opened and he came in. . . I just looked up and
thought, 'Goodness, he's an attractive man.' '' He called her a few days later,
and ''we had so much in common, we talked for 40 minutes about government,
politics, mutual friends.'' Three years later, the woman who had been told by
friends, ''Elizabeth, you're not going to find anyone strong enough for you,''
married the Senator.

Elizabeth Hanford's childhood could not have been more different from Bob
Dole's. Her family was part of the gentry in Salisbury, N.C., where her father
owned the largest wholesale floral supply company in the Southeast. (Today, her
net worth is between $1 million and $3 million, according to Congressional
financial reports required of legislators and their spouses; Senator Dole's
personal net worth is between $196,000 and $510,000.) She had always been a
perfectionist. Her mother, Mary Hanford, recalled the day that ''Liddy''
received the letter informing her that she was accepted at Duke University, but
would not get a scholarship. Her pride wounded, she cried at the table, went up
to her room, returned to the table and wept some more. Finally, her brother John
told her, ''Liddy, Dad's the one who should be crying. He's going to have to pay
the bills.''

Like her husband, Elizabeth Dole has changed her politics. She came to
Washington in 1966 as a Great Society Democrat, to work at the Department of
Health, Education and Welfare. She did not register as a Republican until 1975,
two years after her appointment by President Nixon to the Federal Trade
Commission.

After their marriage, Bob and Elizabeth Dole quickly became celebrated as the
capital's ''power couple.'' They have attempted to exert firm control over their
growing reputation. In late 1985, when Cosmopolitan magazine was preparing to
publish an article on them, the Doles demanded to see the manuscript. They
strenuously objected to suggestions that ''rumors are all over the Hill'' that
''the marriage is shaky.''

''I have never, ever had so much concern on the part of an interviewed person,''
says Helen Gurley Brown, the magazine's editor. ''They were just crazed with
anxiety.''

The Doles claimed the article was filled with ''inaccuracies.'' ''We have a
wonderful, warm relationship that we have been able to enjoy over the years,''
Mrs. Dole affirms. The Doles subsequently were allowed to delete the offending
passages from the manuscript.

The Cosmopolitan episode shows the extent to which the Doles mirror each other.
Both desire complete control over their work, and both are protective of their
collective image, recognizing its importance to the political ambitions they
share.

THOSE AMBITIONS recently have seen Bob Dole again follow his historical pattern
of shifting his positions to woo important constituencies.

Having moved to the center on social issues in the 1970's, Mr. Dole, as the
Senate majority leader in 1985-86, skipped back to the right, unabashedly
courting his party's conservatives (a critical Republican primary voting bloc)
by championing their agenda on abortion, school prayer and gun control on the
Senate floor.

Mr. Dole's attempts to win the right fly in the face of campaign speeches
designed to broaden his appeal to moderate Democrats and independents. Moreover,
they also have hurt fellow Republicans, according to some of his colleagues.
Senator Dole engineered the Senate vote to eliminate Social Security
cost-of-living increases for 1986, a position that even the Reagan
Administration ultimately rejected as politically untenable during an election
year. The attempt forced Republican Senators to cast unpopular votes in the
conservative effort to cut the deficit, and kept the Senate in session until
October, preventing vulnerable incumbents from campaigning.

''He subverted the majority leadership to his own Presidential ambitions,''
asserts Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., a Connecticut Republican. ''He wanted
conservative support in his quest for the Presidency.'' Senator Dole dismisses
the charge, calling Senator Weicker ''a maverick.''

Mr. Dole's Presidential candidacy may have led him into other contradictions. In
raising approximately $15 million for various campaigns during the last decade,
the Senator maintains that he has assiduously avoided close connections between
campaign contributors and legislation. ''I set my own little rule and tried to
avoid appearance of a conflict,'' he explained recently. ''I didn't want anybody
brought into this office. . .to say, 'We'll raise money if you do this.' ''

But on occasion, Mr. Dole appears to have strayed from this standard. Several
top business executives whose industries have benefited from the Senator's
legislative efforts have raised funds for various Dole campaigns and currently
serve on his Presidential finance committee.

One of the Senator's campaign fund-raisers, for example, is David W. Broome. In
1985, Mr. Dole held discussions on a textile-quota bill with Mr. Broome, then a
lobbyist for Burlington Industries, the large textile manufacturer - after Mr.
Broome had raised $600,000 for the Senator's political action committee. Mr.
Dole supported the bill, in sharp contrast to other farm-state Senators who
feared retaliatory quotas if it passed. ''This industry was under particular
strain and needed help,'' Mr. Dole said recently in a prepared statement
explaining his support for the legislation.

Another of Senator Dole's longtime fund-raisers is William J. Clark, the
chairman of the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company. In 1986, Mr. Clark
discussed with Senator Dole provisions of the tax-reform bill then pending in
Congress. Subsequently, in a private Saturday session of the Finance Committee,
the Senator introduced a controversial amendment to the 1986 tax act to stop the
Internal Revenue Service from questioning certain reinsurance agreements used by
Mass Mutual and some other companies. In the early months of his Presidential
campaign, the single largest source of contributions - more than $30,000 - was
Mass Mutual executives.

A more serious conflict may be Senator Dole's relationship with Dwayne Andreas.
Mr. Andreas is the chairman of Archer-Daniels-Midland, the $4.74 billion
commodities company based in Decatur, Ill., that is the leading American
producer of ethanol, a corn byproduct used to make alcohol fuels. Senator Dole
has long been regarded as ethanol's leading advocate in Congress; his efforts
included successful opposition to a 1982 proposal by President Reagan to
eliminate a Federal subsidy for the fuel.

At about the same time in 1982, the Doles acquired an apartment in the Sea View
Hotel, a 40-year-old ocean-front resort in Bal Harbour, Fla. The hotel is
structured like a cooperative, with residents holding shares in the corporation
rather than the titles to individual units. The shareholders include such
members of Washington's political elite as the White House chief of staff,
Howard H. Baker Jr., and Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr., the former Speaker of the
House. The Sea View's chairman, secretary, treasurer and major stockholder is
Dwayne Andreas. With his help, the Doles purchased their apartment.

The Doles' relationship with Mr. Andreas raises questions not only because of
the Senator's legislative efforts on his behalf, but because Mr. Andreas's past
financial dealings with political figures in both parties have been
controversial. In 1973, for example, the Watergate special prosecutor charged
him with making an illegal corporate contribution to Hubert Humphrey's 1968
Presidential campaign. Mr. Andreas argued that the funds were a loan to the
Humphrey campaign from a corporation he headed. He was acquitted after a trial
before a judge.

Mr. Dole initiated the purchase of the Sea View apartment, according to Robert
Strauss, the former Democratic national chairman, who sits on
Archer-Daniels-Midland's board and also owns a Sea View unit. Several months
after the Senator inquired about the availability of an apartment, the Doles
acquired 75 shares - 3.4 percent of the total number -that had belonged to Mr.
Andreas. The price for the three-room unit totaled $150,000.

There appears to be little doubt that the Doles received preferential treatment
from Mr. Andreas, if only in having access to the shares. ''Dwayne Andreas seems
to have complete control of everything that goes on here,'' said James G. Brock,
a member of the Sea View's board of directors, who added that he had friends who
would have bid on the property had they known it was available. The sale, said
another former Sea View official who handled the transaction, ''was basically
consummated'' as a ''personal thing'' by Mr. Andreas.

The actual ownership of the Doles' shares is clouded by conflicting records. The
current stockholders list and the minutes for the Sea View's 1982 board meeting
state that the Senator and Mrs. Dole are the owners. However, the original deed
between the hotel and the Doles, dated March 19, 1982, lists only Mrs. Dole as
the owner. And a subsequent deed, also dated March 19, 1982 (but actually
executed several months later), lists Mrs. Dole and her brother, John Hanford,
as the owners, according to Mari Maseng, the Dole campaign's communications
director. Mrs. Dole said she and her brother bought the apartment (dividing the
cost equally) because they both wanted ''a place we could use as a little family
retreat -Mother is getting up in years.''

The value of the Doles' unit is also in dispute. Mrs. Dole said the
$50,000-per-room price they paid was fair-market value because ''the market is
what other people pay.'' However, an equivalent three-room unit in a less
desirable location in the building was sold for $190,000 three months before the
Doles purchased their apartment, according to Sea View officials. That price
conforms to the actual market value of the Doles' unit, according to an
independent estimate prepared for The New York Times by Lawrence R. Sherry,
managing partner of the Miami office of Kenneth Leventhal & Company, a leading
accounting firm specializing in real estate.

In an interview, Senator Dole consistently expressed no knowledge of the details
of the Sea View transaction. ''It's not my property, so I don't run around
keeping numbers on it,'' he said. ''Check with Elizabeth - she bought it.'' He
denied helping Mr. Andreas or Archer-Daniels-Midland on legislation, and noted
that his efforts on ethanol have aided a significant part of his farm
constituency. ''There is a lot of interest in ethanol; it didn't all come from
A-D-M,'' he said.

BOB DOLE EXPLAINS his politics simply.

''I'm fairly consistently conservative on the economic side, foreign-policy
side, defense side,'' he says. But his complexity is evident in his 1988
Presidential campaign, a candidacy that is part Kansas roots and part Washington
expertise; part populism and part pragmatism; part conservatism and part
moderation. ''I'm here today because I know where I'm from,'' he told cheering
Minnesotans at the state's Republican convention in September. But where he is
from, if history is any indication, is no guide to where he will be.

''He was a bitter, mean son of a bitch; I wondered what was burning so deeply
inside his gut,'' says Dr. Bill Roy, the Senator's 1974 opponent. ''But I talked
to Bob Dole in 1982 at Keith Sebelius's funeral. I told him: 'I think you're
doing a good job in the Finance Committee.'

''The old Bob Dole would have said, 'If you think so, I must be doing something
wrong,' '' says Dr. Roy. ''The new Bob Dole said, 'If I am, you're in part
responsibile. I found out in that Senate campaign that if I didn't change my
ways, I wasn't going anywhere.' ''

Perhaps Senator Dole puts it best. ''If there's anything I am,'' he says,
sitting in his Senate office and musing on the trials of his past and his hopes
for the future, ''it's a survivor.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article in The Times Magazine on Nov. 8 about the political style of Senator
Bob Dole misstated conditions under which Dr. William R. Roy, a political rival
of Senator Dole's in a 1984 campaign, had performed therapeutic abortions. Only
one took place at a Roman Catholic hospital; the reference should not have been
plural.

GRAPHIC: Photos of Sen. Robert Dole (Kenneth Jarecke/Contact Press Images); Dole
with Nicaraguan Pres. Daniel Ortega (Juana Anderson/Contact Press Images); Dole
with Pete Du Pont and Alexander Haig Jr. (Peter Blakely/Picture Group); Dole
visiting American Legion station (Kenneth Jarecke/Contact Press Images) (pg.
64); Dole with wife, Elizabeth Hanford Dole (Kenneth Jarecke/Contact Press
Imagaes) (pg.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAN THE MENNONITES SURVIVE SUCCESS?

BYLINE: By Paul W. Cohen; Paul W. Cohen, a freelance writer, is working on a
book about the farm crisis.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 114, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2918 words


A HANDFUL OF MEN come coasting down the hill on gearless bicycles. They are
wearing dark wide-brimmed straw hats, plain blue workshirts and black pants held
up by suspenders. They round the corner at the end of the cornfield and pull up
to a half-constructed church where 40 or so men, most of them farmers, are
already at work. Horses hitched to shiny black buggies snort and swish their
tails. A table saw whines and hammers pound as freshly cut siding is handed up
the scaffolding.

The Old Order Mennonites, an ultraconservative group, are raising a church in
the rolling farmland of Lancaster County, Pa. No foreman barks orders, no wages
will be paid, but on the third day of construction, the building, a rectangular
structure with no steeple - nothing to promote pride or encourage vanity - is
almost complete.

A few miles south, a very different Mennonite-run construction project is under
way. Cranes and bulldozers and union crews are completing the second phase of a
1,250-person retirement community at Willow Valley. A family-owned empire on
nearly 300 acres of land, Willow Valley, a combined retirement community,
corporate and conference center and vacation resort, also includes two motels, a
shopping mall, a condominium complex, three restaurants, several swimming pools,
a supermarket and a golf course. The main motel's lobby speaks not of humility,
but of ''Dynasty,'' with pink pastel walls, Oriental rugs, potted palm trees and
a gleaming chandelier.

Sixty-seven-year-old John Thomas Sr. and his wife, Florence, founded Willow
Valley in 1965, with 8 acres of land and a simple 30-unit inn. Mrs. Thomas still
wears a homemade, traditional Mennonite dress and a white ''prayer covering''
cap on her head. But Mr. Thomas gave up his ''plain suit,'' with its black,
collarless jacket, a separation from fashion, after the first motel was built,
around 1970. A few years later, he began wearing a tie and now looks no
different from any other successful businessman.

''My grandfather was a Mennonite preacher who went to church in a horse and
buggy,'' he says. ''My father was one of the first Mennonites to buy a car. I
flew the Concorde and got back before I left.'' He leans back in his black
leather Willow Valley office chair and beams as he adds, ''That's how far we've
come.''

Unlike the Old Orders or the Thomases, though, most Mennonites feel caught
between the traditions of the past and the escalating demands of the present. As
recently as 20 years ago, their austere dress and rigid code of behavior defined
and isolated the 25,000-population Lancaster community, the Mennonites' cultural
base in the United States, having been an early major settlement.

But the life style and isolation that have for three centuries kept the
''corrupt'' outside world at arm's length are fast disappearing, spurred by a
local economic boom. A burgeoning population, rapid residential and commercial
growth and a $400-million-a-year tourist industry contribute to the loss of
between 2,000 and 8,000 acres of Lancaster farmland a year. And, among many
Mennonites, farming is giving way to law, medicine and real estate development.

Old values and identities don't die easily, but without a self-contained
community to sustain them, Mennonites risk being subsumed by a culture they have
always considered sinful. Whether it is possible to be a professional and
humble, in the Mennonite sense, living within mainstream culture and still not
living like it, is a question with which many Mennonites must now grapple.

''In the old days, we knew how we were different,'' says Emerson Lesher, a
Mennonite psychologist in Lancaster and author of ''The Muppie Manual: The
Mennonite Urban Professional's Handbook for Humility and Success.''

''Now we don't know that,'' he says, ''and I feel like we're trying to decide if
we can still keep this thing together.''

This ''thing'' began more than 400 years ago, during the Reformation, in Europe.
Mennonites are descended from Swiss and South German Anabaptists whose basic
tenets were a belief in adult baptism, or baptism upon confession of faith, and
a commitment to pacifism. After the early Anabaptist leaders had been executed
by the Swiss, French, Dutch and South German states, the Mennonites, who take
their name from the Anabaptist leader Menno Simons, carried their traditions to
the United States in the late 17th century, forming what is now known as the
Mennonite Church, or Old Mennonites. With the other main groups, the Old Orders,
the General Conference Mennonite Church and the Mennonite Brethren Church, who
divide on mostly ideological grounds but overlap somewhat geographically,
Mennonites now number 190,000 in the United States and Canada.

In Lancaster County, as modernization slowly transformed the society around
them, the Old Mennonites and Old Orders put into practice the biblical
injunction to be a ''light unto the world'' by appearing noticeably different
and by leading a simple, land-based life that spurned ''worldly'' pleasures and
products.

THE FIRST KRAYBILL in Lancaster County bought his farm in 1772.
Sixty-six-year-old Simon Kraybill still lives on a farm in the Bossler Corner
area. But his seven children have all moved away and taken up professions in
cities.

When they were growing up, contact with non-Mennonites was limited. They went to
a Mennonite high school, and their church served as both a place of worship and
a social center. On Saturday nights, the older children took their dates to
church youth meetings, where they heard talks on everything from the evils of
bowling alleys to the perils of necking and petting.

''At that time, I was never quite sure what it was like to pet,'' says Eugene
Kraybill, 38, who until recently was a reporter for The Lancaster Intelligencer
Journal but now lives in Australia. ''I sort of envisioned a dog.''

Restrictions extended to such worldly entertainment as television, movies,
drinking and dancing. ''All the people around us were doing all these things
that were wicked and sinful, and we didn't,'' says 34-year-old Ron Kraybill, who
holds a Master of Divinity degree from Harvard and serves as director of the
Mennonite Conciliation Service. ''It was like we were living on an island of
redeemed people in the middle of the heathen.''

''I felt very different then, and in a sense, inferior,'' Ron says. ''When you
don't interact with outside people, it really creates a sense of living on a
minority island.'' Few people questioned why they were different or doubted that
the island would last forever. ''I felt very secure in my tradition,'' says
39-year-old Elvin Kraybill, a Lancaster lawyer. ''There was little ambiguity,''
adds his brother Ron. ''You knew exactly what the limits were.''

The world within those limits was marked by frugality and obedience to
authority. Flouting of community and church rules was rare. Accumulation of
wealth was an alien concept. One acted as a steward of God's gifts, and took
only as much as was necessary. Success, in the material sense, was suspect, at
best. ''If you're successful, you're either immoral or unethical,'' says Dr.
Lesher. ''That's been a sort of motif in the culture.''

But to live in such a world meant you looked different, even strange, and a lot
of Mennonites growing up during the 1950's and 60's felt ashamed of their
identity. The opportunity to shed the visible symbols of that identity came when
the young men served in hospitals as conscientious objectors during World War
II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War. And later, some of them worked in
Mennonite missions in Africa and Central America. And when they came home to a
booming economy that was geared more toward development and sales than toward
the small family farm, many of them traded their plain clothes for business
suits, their Bible studies for therapy sessions. But the sense of separateness,
of coming from a culture with different values, remained.

JUST NORTH OF LANCASTER, in the middle of a strip of used-car dealerships,
fast-food stores and factory outlets, the Chamber of Commerce last summer put up
a huge billboard that read ''Lancaster County: The Sweet Smell of Success.''

''What do the people who put that billboard up think is success?'' asks Elvin
Kraybill. ''My tradition calls us to be faithful, and not simply successful.''

The conflict between wealth and faithfulness is something Leon Hurst, a
42-year-old Mennonite pastor who also runs a profitable construction business,
confronts every day of the week, and twice on Sundays. He receives no salary as
pastor, a position for which he was chosen by lot from the congregation, but the
building boom has blessed him with enough money to build a large suburban-style
home with a two-car garage, enjoy a television set, and to take modest
vacations.

Sitting on a thick-cushioned couch in his air-conditioned den, Mr. Hurst
explains his church's attitude toward wealth: ''Affluence often leads to
spiritual coldness and indifference. You get to the point where you say, 'I'm
doing quite well without God, thank you.' '' But the thought that he might be
living quite well without God is a frightening one for Mr. Hurst. ''I drive home
and look at the way we're living and I wonder how good a steward am I?''

The search for the simple life has created a host of seemingly arbitrary rules.
Merv Stoltzfus moved in the early 1970's from the family farm to study at
Eastern Mennonite College, in Harrisonburg, Va. Now an optometrist, at the age
of 36 he owns a town house in Lancaster, and a condominium at the Maryland
shore; strives to give 10 percent of his income to the church, and accepts
welfare patients. Yet, the key to simplicity is still buried somewhere out on
the old farm. ''You don't know what's appropriate and what isn't appropriate,''
he says. ''Maybe it's not appropriate to own a condo.''

Patterns that were mapped in detail during the old days broke down when
Mennnonites left the culture of rooted farming communities. ''You basically feel
like you're traveling on uncharted territory,'' says Eugene Kraybill, ''and that
can be pretty frightening.''

His brother Ron, who lives on the edge of a racially mixed poor section of
downtown Lancaster, is thinking about working with Mennonite missions abroad.
Yet he still dreams of retiring to life on a farm in Bossler Corner. ''I still
have real roots there,'' he says. ''And sometimes I think, who am I to break
this link of rootedness?''

For some Mennonites, particularly women, the struggle has centered not on
searching for roots, but on breaking loose from them. In the Mennonite hierarchy
of God-Man-Woman, women were expected to marry young and respect the absolute
authority of their husbands. Dating was more of a screening process than a
romantic adventure, according to a Mennonite woman, now middle-aged, who prefers
not to be identified. She rejected that process. ''I sowed my wild oats,'' she
says. ''I resisted what was expected of a single person. I was living in a
different world from the people who were giving me easy answers.''

In the mid-1970's, those two worlds collided. She became pregnant and had an
abortion, sinful for a Mennonite. The community and family reaction was
predictable: ''They said, 'Well, if you do that, then you could kill a person,
You have no morals.' . . . And I just don't think I'm an immoral person.''

She adds: ''They don't even have to choose. It's a road map for them.''

Not all modern Mennonites struggle to reconcile rootedness and detachment,
simplicity and affluence. Paul Hurst went from a modest Mennonite dairy farm to
alternative service to the military in Boston during the Vietnam War to a
lucrative career selling Lancaster County real estate. ''There's nothing wrong
with success,'' the 43-year-old real-estate man says. ''It's just an end result
of being a good steward of our time and of maintaining a good work ethic.''

Nor does he feel any particular attachment to the land. Mennonites who sell the
family farm at today's pumped-up prices, he says, are the rightful recipients of
the love and care that went into maintaining that land for generations. Prime
productive land should be protected, he believes, but he feels that the needs of
the present take precedence over sentimental longings for the past: ''If the
best use of that land now happens to be for a highway or for residential
expansion, then that is what is right for today.''

His sentiments are echoed by John Thomas Sr. of Willow Valley, who contends that
''God needs good businessmen.''

God has been blessed in recent years by a number of good Mennonite businessmen,
including the heads of at least half-a-dozen multimillion-dollar companies in
Lancaster County. The certainty of their success is matched only by the powerful
reaction against them in the Mennonite community.

Ron Kraybill has particularly harsh words for Mennonites who see dollars rather
than spiritual values in Lancaster County's farmland: ''Sometimes I think we
don't know what we've got. Then I realize that people know enough to package and
market it, yet it would appear to me that in the end it's like throwing pearls
to swine.''

MARKETING MENNONITE traditions has rarely been an issue for the Old Order
Mennonites, who split from the main body of the church more than a century ago.
The two principal Old Order groups - the Wengers, who continue to use the horse
and buggy, and the Hornings, or Black Bumper Mennonites, whose cars' bumpers are
painted black -have managed to fend off change since 1927, when the two groups
split over use of the automobile. In recent years, though, even they have begun
to falter.

Church teaching, stressing strict obedience to authority and separation from a
sinful world, no longer goes unquestioned at the Upper Weaverland church, a
white stone meeting house in which the Wengers and the Hornings worship on
alternate Sundays. Today is Black Bumper Sunday, but some of the cars in the
parking lot have tips and tails that flash with chrome.

As the black cars file out of the parking lot, two members of the congregation
are locked in a discussion about patterns - plain suits and black cars -and
principles - humility and nonconformity.

''I believe there can be more than one pattern to a principle, but I don't know
how long a principle can stand if the patterns change,'' says I. Mark Nolt, 35,
a carpenter who works for the Horst Group. ''If there's no pattern applied to
modesty, do you think the principle stays?''

''It can, but we rarely see it,'' says Galen Hurst, 25, a teacher at a Mennonite
elementary school.

''People need reminding,'' says Mr. Nolt.

''I think people ought to have a right to wonder why they're doing something,''
says Mr. Hurst.

THOUGH THE CONTRADICTIONS between belief and life style crop up everywhere,
there is one place where they have been held at bay. It is the ''Mennonite
Ghetto,'' a cluster of more than a dozen households in the poverty-stricken
black and Puerto Rican section of downtown Lancaster known as the Seventh Ward.
Simplicity for these Mennonites means driving $500 cars and buying clothes at
the Salvation Army store. Community means ''checking in'' on your brother's
psyche during 1960's-style get-togethers or working in Nicaragua on development
projects. And pacifism stands for supporting the nuclear-freeze movement or
withholding taxes that might end up at the Pentagon.

But an uncompromising radicalism in life style and beliefs links the Mennonite
ghetto to the traditional farming community. Frank Albrecht's harsh version of
simplicity might satisfy an ultraconservative Old Order Mennonite. He buys his
clothes at Goodwill, and reuses envelopes, which in addition to pleasing God,
saves paper, which conserves forests, which helps stop the erosion that damages
the world's food supply.

Unlike the traditional Mennonites, though, Mr. Albrecht, a 29-year-old teacher
in a public high school, stresses integration and action rather than separation
and retreat. Nor is his expression of pacifism a strictly religious one. He
harbors Central American refugees in his home, and has withheld 50 percent of
his taxes from the Government so as not to contribute to the military. When the
Internal Revenue Service levied $5,000 in back taxes and penalties on him, his
church and the ghetto community came up with the funds. ''Talk about faith,'' he
says. ''I didn't know how I was going to pay my bills.''

Simplicity, pacifism and a bare-bones version of a Mennonite community - these
values may persist in the alien environment of the Seventh Ward, but only a
handful of Mennonites choose to live there. Most still cling to a farm-bred
identity that is now little more than a memory to some.

When Leon Hurst's father grew too old to farm, he and his wife moved 100 yards
up the hill to a small suburban-style ranch house. Mr. Hurst eventually slipped
into forgetfulness and confusion, and shortly before he died he began to wander
outside in the middle of the night. Each time, he ended up on the farm. The
first time was right after a rainstorm, and Mrs. Hurst found him there, covered
with mud. Another time, the family who had bought their old house called to tell
Mrs. Hurst they'd found her husband there. Mrs. Hurst says: ''So often he said,
'Let's go home,' and I said, 'You are home. Don't you remember?' But he just
couldn't seem to remember. He'd walk over to the window and look out at the old
farm. . . . That was hard.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Rev. Leon Hurst and his daughter, Audrey, (J. Ross
Baughman/Visions); John Thomas Sr. and his wife, Florence (David H. Wells) (pg.
116)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 8, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 66, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 903 words




$

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     2    WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Avon, $5.95.)
            Iran during the month following the Shah's
            departure.

 2     5    THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $4.95.)
            Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New
            York family begun in ''Evergreen.''

 3     1    GARDEN OF SHADOWS, by V. C. Andrews.
            (Pocket, $4.95.) The beginnings of the evil that
            beset the Dollanganger family in four previously
            published novels.

 4     4    FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen
            Coonts. (Pocket, $4.95.) Navy aviators in the
            Vietnam War.

 5     6    A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Warner,
            $4.95.) Comdr. Adam Dalgliesh investigates a
            brutal double murder.

 6     2    KENTUCKY! by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam,
            $4.50.) The latest in the ''Wagons West'' series tells
            of a plot to assassinate President Grant.

 7     12   IT, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)
            Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman
            who grew up in a small Maine town.

 8     17   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley,
            $4.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
            World War III.

 9     3    PAPER MONEY, by Ken Follett. (Signet/NAL,
            $3.95.) Crime, high finance and journalism form
            the threads of this newly reissued 1977 thriller.

10 *   5    FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov.
            (Del Rey/Ballantine, $4.95.) The hero of the
            ''Foundation'' series searches for Earth.

11     6    VALE OF THE VOLE, by Piers Anthony. (Avon,
            $3.95.) Esk, the son of an ogre and a nymph,
            defends the inhabitants of a paradise.

12 *   5    I AM THE ONLY RUNNING FOOTMAN, by
            Martha Grimes. (Dell, $3.95.) Scotland Yard's
            Superintendent Jury on the trail of a strangler.

13     78   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom
            Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
            brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

14 *   1    ALL FOR THE LOVE OF DADDY, by Marcia
            Rose. (Ballantine, $4.95.) A family crisis after a
            tycoon decides to sell his business.

15     6    DREAMS ARE NOT ENOUGH, by Jacqueline
            Briskin. (Berkley, $4.50.) A California family
            dynasty out to conquer the world.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction

 1     5    ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
            Wambaugh. (Bantam, $4.95.) A case involving the
            1979 murder of a high school teacher.

 2    211   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
            (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
            spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 3     28   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Berkley, $6.95.)
            Anecdotes and ruminations by the television star.

 4     37   NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.
            (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
            author says, and we must confront them to grow.

 5     53   WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.
            (North Point, $12.50.) A woman's adventures
            flying in Africa and across the Atlantic in the 30's.

 6     1    PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon
            Eisenhower. (Zebra, $4.50.) The biography of the
            former First Lady, written by her daughter.

 7     4    ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Avon,
            $4.50.) The comedian's autobiography, taking her
            up to age 26.

 8 *   7    THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Avon,
            $5.50.) The confrontation between America's Ford
            Motor Company and Japan's Nissan.

 9 *   10   KAFFIR BOY, by Mark Mathabane. (Plume/
            NAL, $8.95.) Coming-of-age in South Africa.

10 *   1    WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney.
            (Berkley, $3.95.) Essays on contemporary life by
            the journalist and television commentator.

11 *   3    ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John
            Madden with Dave Anderson. (Jove, $3.95.)
            Observations on football.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1     2    THE FAR SIDE OBSERVER, by Gary Larson.
            (Andrews & McMeel, $5.95.) A new collection of
            cartoons.

 2     11   BILLY AND THE BOINGERS BOOTLEG, by
            Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $7.95.) More
            ''Bloom County'' cartoon strips.

 3     1    GARFIELD SWALLOWS HIS PRIDE, by Jim
            Davis. (Ballantine, $5.95.) The 14th collection of
            cartoons about a fat cat.

 4     22   THE BOOK OF QUESTIONS, by Gregory Stock.
            (Workman, $3.95.) Provocative and challenging
            questions to ask yourself in order to learn more
            about yourself.

 5     28   CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson.
            (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $6.95.) Cartoons
            about a boy, his toy tiger and his parents.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TEARS AND RIOTS, LOVE AND REGRETS

BYLINE: By JIM MILLER; Jim Miller is a book and music critic for Newsweek. His
books include '' 'Democracy Is in the Streets': From Port Huron to the Siege of
Chicago'' and ''Rousseau: Dreamer of Democracy.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2058 words



THE SIXTIES
Years of Hope, Days of Rage. By Todd Gitlin. 513 pp. New York: Bantam Books.
$19.95.

THE 1960's in some respects was a decade like any other: a fixed span of time
filled with otherwise disparate events. But ''The Sixties'' also came to mean
something more: a style, a mood, a spirit of youthful rebelliousness with its
own marketable aura of excess, adventure and innocent, shoot-for-the-moon
idealism. Once that spirit was spent, as Todd Gitlin writes in ''The Sixties,''
a compelling new firsthand account of the era, the decade quickly ''receded into
haze and myth,'' leaving behind only a few ''lingering images of nobility and
violence,'' of charismatic martyrs and mobs in the street, ''a collage of
fragments scooped together as if a whole decade took place in an instant.''
Today when pundits debate a possible resurrection of the 60's, they usually have
in mind a superficially similar pastiche of trends, from paisleyed fashion and
renewed evidence of dissent on campus to well-publicized displays of political
conscience by popular rock stars.

Mr. Gitlin's ambitious effort to cut through the nostalgia and myth surrounding
the 60's takes an unusual form. Working, as he puts it, ''at the edge of history
and autobiography,'' he has written a wide-ranging narrative that oscillates
between the first and third person, incorporating both new research on key
episodes and potted histories of folk-rock music, hippies, the origins of the
women's movement and so forth.

What is important in the book - and what makes it required reading for anyone
who wants to grasp the youthful spirit of the time - is the author's highly
personal chronicle of the rise and violent collapse of the New Left. Without
false sentimentality, he re-creates the political odyssey of the radicals of his
generation, as well as his own role in that odyssey.

He is less successful in recounting the political-cultural odyssey of the nation
as a whole. Despite his professed aim ''to reclaim the actual Sixties from 'the
Sixties,' '' Mr. Gitlin does not offer anything approaching a comprehensive
account of the time. He says little about the Kennedys and the Rev. Martin
Luther King Jr. and nothing about the complex fate of Government policies like
the War on Poverty, which helped trigger the contemporary crisis of American
liberalism. (The best survey of this aspect of the 60's is Allen J. Matusow's
splendid ''Unraveling of America.'') Mr. Gitlin treats the Vietnam War - along
with the general prosperity of the decade (perhaps the central defining feature
of the time) - only in passing. His chronicle of the emergence of drugs and the
counterculture is cursory, and his forays into pop-cultural criticism often
fatuous. (According to Mr. Gitlin, the actor James Dean's essential ''message''
was that ''homelessness is the truth of the human condition when society, all
organized, sanitized, and insured to provide security, denies the rock-bottom
fact that life ends.'' So that was it!) In many respects the book's most
valuable parts are autobiographical. Mr. Gitlin was born in 1943. Growing up in
the Bronx, the middle-class son of liberal Jewish parents, he was, as he
recalls, ''studious and clean-cut,'' a straight-arrow fan of Adlai Stevenson.
Still, his own sense of his Jewish heritage made him uncomfortable with
political quietism: ''We learned when we were children that massacres really
happen and the private life is not enough; and if not now, when?''

As a freshman at Harvard University in 1959, Mr. Gitlin discovered Dostoyevsky,
Nietzsche, Kafka and, above all, Camus's ''Myth of Sisyphus.'' He also began to
learn about left-wing politics. In the summer of 1960, he fell in love with a
daughter of former Communists. She introduced him to folk music - perhaps the
most enduring and influential artifact of the Communist Party's popular-front
policies - and to ''the forbidden world of wholesale political criticism,'' an
''outlaw culture'' that fascinated him.

In his sophomore year, Mr. Gitlin became involved in a liberal campus peace
group called Tocsin that reflected the fresh surge of political activism in
America in 1960. But it took a speech by the Harvard professor Barrington Moore
Jr. in the midst of the Cuban missile crisis in the fall of 1962 to turn him
into a radical. Professions of pacifism, declared Mr. Moore in his speech,
merely reinforced ''the general mystification'' of power in America; what was
necessary was unflinching criticism of ''a destructive system.'' Shortly
afterward, Mr. Gitlin met Tom Hayden, Al Haber and the other young leaders of a
tiny organization called Students for a Democratic Society. With their talk of
creating a new, more democratic form of society, the leaders of S.D.S. held out
the promise of constructive social change. ''I wanted to be like them,'' Mr.
Gitlin writes. ''These exalted, clear, somehow devout souls so loved the
world.'' Less than a year later, he succeeded Mr. Hayden as president of S.D.S.

From then on, Mr. Gitlin was a participant, or friend of participants, in most
of the events he recounts in detail: the 1962 meeting of S.D.S. that ratified
the famous ''Port Huron Statement,'' with its call for ''participatory
democracy''; the showdown between the black militants of the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee and liberals like Hubert H. Humphrey at the 1964
Democratic National Convention; the confrontations of Stop the Draft Week in
1967, Chicago in 1968 and People's Park in Berkeley, Calif., in 1969; the
factional death of S.D.S. in 1969; the killings at Kent State in 1970.

At times, particularly when he is dealing with some of the most chaotic episodes
of the late 60's, Mr. Gitlin seems overwhelmed by his material: ''How can I
convey the texture of this gone time so that you and I, reader, will be able to
grasp, remember, believe that astonishing things actually happened, and made
sense to the many who made them happen and were overtaken by them?'' Yet when he
settles down to the work of carefully reconstructing the key events, he succeeds
admirably in bringing this ''gone time'' back to life.

Consider the bizarre happenings in June 1967 at a small camp in upstate
Michigan. At the time, the Vietnam War was escalating and ghettos in America
were smoldering; many activists were becoming frustrated and angry; it was the
era of black power and, with the Beatles' ''Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club
Band'' in the air and LSD on the streets, it was also the summer of love.
Against this backdrop, several S.D.S. veterans had called for a ''Back to the
Drawing Boards'' retreat in Michigan, in an effort to rekindle the intellectual
spark and spirit of hope that had animated ''The Port Huron Statement.''

WHEN news of the planned conference reached the Haight-Ashbury neighborhood of
San Francisco, the unofficial capital of the burgeoning counterculture, a trio
of anarchist hipsters resolved to make the trip to Michigan, in order to blow
the minds of the stodgy New Left. Led by a former beat poet named Peter Berg,
this group, calling itself the Diggers (after a group of socialists avant la
lettre in 17th-century England), had been distributing free food in the Haight,
coining slogans that reflected their ecological and radically egalitarian views
(''SEW THE RAGS OF SURPLUS INTO TEPEES'') and touting LSD as a tool for blasting
free of entrenched hang-ups and uncovering the lost ''tense of presence'' of
childhood.

On the first night of the ''Drawing Boards'' meeting, as Mr. Gitlin describes
the scene, Tom Hayden was giving the keynote speech. Suddenly three men barged
into the room. As the meeting ground to a halt, Mr. Berg started to prowl across
the room. ''Property is the enemy,'' he declared. ''Burn it, destroy it, give it
away.'' The other Diggers turned off the lights while one of them recited a poem
by Gary Snyder entitled ''A Curse on the Men in the Pentagon, Washington, D.C.''
The Diggers' makeshift theatrics left this roomful of seasoned activists
strangely paralyzed - a symptom, as Mr. Gitlin points out, of the growing
confusion and weakness for empty posturing that was plaguing the New Left.
Nobody moved to evict the intruders. One onlooker, Abbie Hoffman, was in fact so
deeply impressed that he decided a few months later to imitate the Diggers'
outrageous antics when he rebaptized himself as a Yippie. The Diggers, Mr.
Gitlin writes, ''were our anarchist bad conscience. . . . We had cast ourselves
adrift from con-ventional ideals of legitimate authority, but we possessed no
clear authority principle to mobilize against the Diggers' takeover style.''

Tragicomic parables like this one, made vivid through a number of interviews
with the participants, enliven the last half of ''The Sixties.'' Taken together,
they help to explain why the student movement came to grief. It seems sadly
prophetic that Bernadine Dohrn, a future leader of the terrorist group
Weatherman, responded to the news of Martin Luther King Jr.'s death in March
1968 by bursting into tears - and then rushing to Times Square to run riot. And
then there is Mr. Gitlin himself, in Chicago in August 1968, watching National
Guardsmen roll down Michigan Avenue in jeeps outfitted with barbed-wire cages
and gloating at the prospect of confrontation: ''At last. We've shown they can
rule only at gunpoint. The world is going to see.''

In those days Mr. Gitlin, though he professed allegiance to the ''revolution,''
was a voice of restraint, publicly warning against ''a fetishism of the
streets.'' Privately, he was even more critical: ''The Left is its own worst
enemy,'' he wrote in one letter from the late 60's that he quotes here. ''Often
I'm glad we're in no position to take power: if we did, the only honorable
sequel would be abdication.'' The end for him came in the early 70's. Unnerved
by events like the death in March 1970 of three Weathermen who were trying to
build a bomb in a Greenwich Village brownstone, Mr. Gitlin halfheartedly drifted
into the human potential movement. ''I took down my own Malcolm X and Cuban
posters,'' he writes, ''replaced them with Van Gogh, Degas, and Renoir.''
Eventually, he returned to graduate school at the University of California,
Berkeley, where he is now an associate professor of sociology.

Mr. Gitlin's retrospective asssessment of the meaning of his life and times in
the 60's is understandably ambivalent. At several points, he upbraids both the
New Left - it had ''no serious intention of ruling'' -and himself: he was
''living in a bubble. . . . Narcissus admiring himself in a TV screen.'' He was
wrong, he now concedes, to embrace the Communist regimes of Cuba and North
Vietnam so uncritically. And the political vision of participatory democracy, he
declares, ''presupposed a society, a community of values, that simply did not
exist.''

All this is fair enough. But the fact remains - Mr. Gitlin's own experience
proves it - that to live the life of a radical democrat in the 60's was also to
live a life of uncommon intensity and political seriousness; in a creditable
effort to hasten the end of an unjust and cruel war, it was to brave
intimidating shows of official force and also to share in moments of almost
unbearable excitement. By recapturing some of this excitement, as well as
admitting the follies that went along with it, Mr. Gitlin has written one of the
best books yet on the left-wing politics and culture of the 1960's.

WHEN THE WEIRD TURN PRO

For many - who knows, perhaps, most - of the movement veterans, some version of
New Left politics continued, but in a chastened, confused, and antiapocalyptic
key. As the economy foundered in the Seventies, and the movement's moral
imperatives grew more burdensome, many wearied of the life of the professional
radical; we scooped together our bona fides (I enrolled in Berkeley's Ph.D.
program in sociology in 1974, for example, after nine years out of school), or
resumed half-completed dissertations, or otherwise set out on the track that
middle-class upbringing and education had prepared us for before Sixties
politics had intervened. We became professionals and managers, and made the
acquaintance of credit cards and small domestic pleasures. (Hunter S. Thompson:
''When the going gets tough, the weird turn pro.'')

From ''The Sixties.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of demonstrators taunting police and National Guardsmen with
Facist salute outside 1968 Democratic convention headquarters in Chicago (Black
Star/Henry Wilheim)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER OPINION;
A VETERAN OF VIETNAM IS WELCOMED HOME

BYLINE: By DEBORAH F. FARRELL; Deborah F. Farrell lives in Peekskill.

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 38, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 969 words


VETERANS DAY marks the culmination of the period preceding Thanksgiving,
Christmas and New Year's that I have come to think of as Minor Holiday Season I.
Before our older child, Elizabeth, entered public kindergarten five years ago,
Columbus Day and Veterans Day had been seen by my husband, Tom, and I as an
extra day to sleep late, hit the sales racks or catch up on household chores.

And Halloween, in the six years of our marriage before children, was a time to
buy our favorite candies. Children had seldom played trick or treat at the doors
of strangers in the primarily child-free apartment buildings where we lived, so
we indulged our sweet tooths in the surfeit of leftovers.

Minor Holiday Season II, including Valentine's Day, Lincoln's and Washington's
birthdays, St. Patrick's Day and Memorial Day, had similarly brought little
excitement or authentically appropriate celebration to our house.

But when Elizabeth's kindergarten class burst from school one October afternoon,
sporting colorful construction paper ship captain's hats and exuberantly
chanting a song about Columbus's voyage, I began to suspect that these holidays
we'd nearly ignored would never be the same for us.

As the school year progressed we observed that the teachers capitalized upon
these events as learning catalysts to capture the children's attention. Art,
music, reading, writing assignments, storytime, social studies - even cooking
and nutrition lessons - focused on the holidays.

Through all of these days, including the winter and spring occasions of Minor
Holiday Season II, Tom and I were regaled with dinnertime lessons from Elizabeth
about Lincoln freeing slaves, the making of the flag, and other socio-cultural
and historical facts learned in school.

But it was when Veterans Day of that year came along that we were most
personally touched by the genuineness, innocence and simplicity of a child's
comprehension of the importance of life's little and not-so-little
commemorations and celebrations.

My husband had served two years in the Army in Vietnam. But like most of his
friends, he did not advertise the experience, and chose not to march in
patriotic parades or join veterans' groups.

While he had once told me, when pressed, that Vietnam had paradoxically been the
best and the worst two years of his life, it had seemed on the surface as if the
time had never existed for him.

All that appeared to remain was a small box in the attic with a few momentos of
his Army service.

Tom had gone directly from the steaming heat of Southeast Asia to a large
Northeastern college campus, bitter not just from the mountainous New England
January cold, but from the protests, marches and petitions over the conflict in
Vietnam.

Like so many of his Army peers, he had stepped without pause into the spot where
he had left off. College, marriage, graduate schools, career, children, a house
- all followed one another in quick succession.

There was no punctuation point at the end of the chapter of his life that had
been Vietnam. Blessed by being without physical or mental disabilities, he had
said that his only feeling toward that divisive and tumultuous conflict was an
attitude of gratitude that he had emerged from the experience as well as he had.
Not surprisingly, then, our daughter knew nothing about Vietnam or her daddy's
days as a soldier.

On the eve of Veterans Day, 1982, our dinnertime, as usual, was marked by
Elizabeth's non-stop chatter about her day in school. With the best professorial
mien a five-year-old could muster, she began to lecture to us on the true
meaning of Veterans Day.

Adding a personal anecdote to her lesson, she related, obviously impressed, that
the uncle of one of her classmates had served in Vietnam.

''And Mrs. Dowd,'' she said of her teacher, ''told us we should be proud of
those who served our country.''

I glanced at my husband across the table, and he nodded. ''Do you know that
Daddy served in Vietnam?'' I asked her.

Her eyes widened. ''Really! Wow!' she said. Then, without missing a beat, ''Did
you shoot anyone?''

After he told her that fortunately he had neither shot anyone nor been injured
himself, she animatedly peppered him with questions about the Army and Vietnam,
which ended only, at her insistence, with Tom's promise to show her the box of
momentos in the attic.

There was not much there: some medals and letters of commendations, a few faded
and cracked photos of ceremonies marking the decorations.

But to my husband's surprise, Elizabeth touched them with a simple and quiet
reverance and asked to bring them downstairs.

She was clearly impressed with her own father's connection to the solemn and
honorable event, Veterans Day, that she had learned about in school.

Five years later, the medals, papers and photos are still in the attic. They are
in a safe place, yet they are not hidden.

Although we may not join in parades or lay wreathes this Veterans Day, the
personal ambivalence about this ''minor'' holiday in our house is gone.

History may never clearly digest and develop simple conclusions or moral
judgments about the socially and politically intricate U.S. involvement in
Vietnam. But with our daughter's help, my husband had arrived at a comfortable,
personal summation of his work there.

''As a teenager in a totally alien environment, I had faced such ambiguities
about Vietnam,'' my husband said after his encounter with our daughter. ''I had
always considered my experience in the context of the time.

''But Elizabeth gave me a child's simple perspective, without all the
complexities and nuances of the entire Vietnam socio-political experience,'' he
continued. ''She saw it simply as one person's efforts at service and honor.

''It was kind of like the coming home party that had never been.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of portion of Vietnam War Veterans' memorial at Lasdon Park in
Somers

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER OPINION;
A CIVILIAN RECALLS HIS 'GOOD WAR'

BYLINE: By STAN HARVEY; Stan Harvey lives in Mamaroneck.

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 38, Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 802 words


IT was my examination for the draft in 1940 that saved my life - just as that
ceremony led to the opposite outcome for so many of my generation. My chest
X-ray revealed advanced tuberculosis, and the news that there were to be more
germs than Germans in my future. Being infected in both lungs I was considered
unlikely to recover -a bit of trivia not revealed to me at the time. My fate, as
that of my sounder brothers, was left a mystery.

We marched off to our respective battlefields to serve for an undertermined
length of time, equally bewildered at being so rudely snatched from our chosen
courses in life. The question of whether 'tis better to die a civilian or a
soldier holds no intrinsic interest at age 21, but in a hospital full of
limited-action patients the frailest topic becomes acceptable conversation, and
the question got its share of attention.

''Consumption'' was the more picturesque name for a disease much celebrated in
music and literature. Those feverish heroes and heroines expiring in song and
story have lent a romantic aura to death by tuberculosis - raised death to an
art form, one might say. Still, even at its most attractive, this romantic
languor didn't hold a candle to the glamour war held in the 1940's.

To my generation Thomas Mann was a fine artist, but we were Hemingway men. In
our boyhoods we had played interminably with little metal figures of soldiers
frozen into combat poses - not toy doctors and nurses. One thinks of the sickly
child Winston Churchill entertaining himself with his hundreds of toy soldiers
spread out on the bed, his powerful future already at work. Ghastly as we knew
the war to be from the graphic radio and newspaper coverage, it was still life
out there, death where we were.

So there were times when I envied my R.O.T.C. buddies who became the first line
of defense against Fascism. The mortality rate of those early inductees was
awesome, but then the silent sniper at work in our calm white world was
tireless. You could share a lively game of cards with a buddy whose bed would be
empty the next morning. In the hospital death was quiet, clean, refined, and
usually crept in and out politely at night - a far cry from the muddy hell of
Normandy and Anzio.

A kind of foxhole camaraderie forms quickly in a hospital. Friendships
flourished in the hot house atmosphere which confined us, often ending just as
quickly with a final hemorrhage. Life in the hospital seemed as quixotic as it
must have been at the front lines. The most lively patients sometimes went into
an abrupt decline, while a limp victim might suddenly take up his bed and walk.
Atheists are just as scarce in hospitals as in foxholes, and where I was the
miraculous cure was greatly respected.

Sidetracked from life as we were, plenty of dust from the march of history
nevertheless drifted our way. The war was to produce the drugs that cured
tuberculosis and many other afflictions, as well as the means to halt some
deadly social and economic ills. Our hospital staff was cut to the core, many
having been called to war service. This circumstance probably prodded some of us
to health. Where once we would have lain on our beds like so many chocolates in
a box, complete bed rest was the privilege of only the most feeble. We changed
our own beds, collected our trays, mopped the baths, and in general performed
our version of KP, probably stimulating our fevered systems a little toward
health.

The staff defections felt most keenly were those of the student nurses, at least
four of whom I was passionately in love with. We, of course, mooned over the
reigning pin-up queens of the era - Betty Grable, Lana Turner and, most of all,
Rita Hayworth - but they belonged to everyone. Our true goddesses were the
nurses who, so purely and crisply enveloped in white, far outshone those glamour
girls in sex appeal. Their being called away to lavish their skills and smiles
on the men in uniform gave new meaning to the expression that war is hell.

I returned to civilian life at about the same time as the other veterans who
made it through. My health had never been better, so I must have had a ''good
war.'' Just as World War II was the last war with any romantic potential,
tuberculosis was the last picturesque illness. In both war and disease, all but
the nastiest forms have now been eliminated.

I have continued to be a draft dodger, being over-age for the Korean conflict,
having children who were too young for Vietnam. Both my sons are now registered
for the draft, but they have lost more friends to cancer than to war. I still
have my toy soldiers -certifiable antiques now. For some reason I never shared
them with my children when they were small. They're pretty valuable, and I
suppose I didn't want them broken. They're my toys, after all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of portion of Vietnam War Veterans' memorial at Lasdon Park in
Somers

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FINDING PEACE AT THE SINK

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER BENFEY; Christopher Benfey, the author of ''Emily
Dickinson and the Problem of Others,'' is at work on a study of Stephen Crane.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 19, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 886 words



PACO'S STORY
By Larry Heinemann. 210 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. Cloth, $15.95.
Penguin Books. Paper, $4.50.

PACO SULLIVAN, the dishwasher at the Texas Lunch, is a mystery to the people of
Boone. One day he walks into town, leaning on his black hickory cane, looking
for a job and a place to sleep. The scars on his arms are a lure for women and a
challenge to men. Everyone wants to know Paco's story, and they often end up
telling him theirs: Ernest Monroe, owner and operator of the Texas Lunch,
wounded at Iwo Jima; Jesse the drifter, back from the war, with his own ideas
for a Vietnam memorial. But Paco keeps washing coffee mugs by hand, glancing
from time to time across the street to the Geronimo Hotel. In a room next to
his, Cathy, the owner's tease of a niece, spys on him from behind the blinds.

Larry Heinemann's second novel - his first was the much admired ''Close
Quarters,'' based on his combat experience in Vietnam - has a plot as spare as
that of a movie western. (When Paco leaves town he rides into the sunset.) But
the odd way the author narrates ''Paco's Story'' gives this fine novel its eerie
and unsettling force. The story is told from beyond the grave, in the garrulous,
seen-it-all voice of one of Paco's former buddies, a voice we often seem to be
hearing from inside Paco's head. ''Let's begin,'' he says, ''with the first
clean fact, James: This ain't no war story.'' It is never quite clear who James
is - a fellow ghost? the reader? - but already, in this first sentence, we know
two things this book will tackle: how, if not in a ''war story,'' you can write
about war; and how you can become ''clean'' if you've been to war and returned.

Paco Sullivan, we learn, is the sole survivor of a massacre at a Vietnam base
camp called Harriette. Paco's legs are held together by pins and screws and his
mind is held together by pain killers and whisky. The repeated ritual of washing
dishes steadies him and keeps at bay the ghosts that haunt him at night. Mr.
Heinemann describes the act of washing dishes as though it's a baptism, a way of
cleansing himself of the past. ''Now, James . . . let's settle this matter of
how Paco washes dishes by hand.'' And for several pages we trace the progress of
glassware, dishes, coffee mugs through Paco's scarred hands, and we know that
much of his satisfaction is that ''the work is sloppy but methodical -
everything has a place.''

Mr. Heinemann has a good eye for satire, and he lets his ghostly narrator
ruminate on the mysteries of American fast food. ''You can always tell the
clientele by the look of what's parked in the lot,'' he remarks, and a brief
essay on customers follows. When a cousin of that sentence turns up 40 pages
later, ''you can always tell the class of a place by the look of the menu they
give you,'' we know what to expect: sly observations on waitresses dressed like
''a cross between meter maids and registered nurses,'' or on menus with ''a
short snappy narrative [that] describes every little thing as succulent, piping
hot, tangy, or chewy; the coffee is famous, the refills endless.''

Indeed, the scenes in the Texas Lunch are so vividly and generously imagined
that when the inevitable nightmares and memories of Vietnam intrude - the
hideous rape of a Vietcong woman, the massacre at Harriette - they seem almost
obligatory, concessions to the demands of the genre. Mr. Heinemann is highly
conscious of the conventions of war novels; readers may notice allusions, for
example, to Norman Mailer's ''Naked and the Dead.'' He knows he's giving his
audience what it expects: ''Any carny worth his cashbox . . . will tell you that
most folks will shell out hard-earned, greenback cash, every time, to see
artfully performed, urgently fascinating, grisly and gruesome carnage.'' But in
''Paco's Story'' he's after something more subtle than the carny's art.

PACO isn't just a mystery to the townspeople; he remains a mystery to the reader
as well. Toward the end of the novel we learn that Paco's special talent in his
company was setting ingenious booby traps. It comes as a surprise, for he has
shown no particular inventiveness in his relations with the people of Boone.
Maybe he doesn't think they're worth it. Maybe he's run out of improvisation.
Even the rascal Cathy has a hard time getting Paco to perk up. But beneath Mr.
Heinemann's simple plot one sometimes senses the presence of a suppressed
picaresque novel - in a different time, in a different world, Paco might have
adventures in Boone as wild as Huck Finn's. (Even the unlikely and unexplained
name, Paco Sullivan, suggests a trickster.) Instead Paco the booby-trapper, the
man of cunning, has found a momentary and ambiguous peace washing dishes.

When Walt Whitman said that ''the real war will never get in the books,'' he was
stating a simple fact. War is unwriteable. The Vietnam War continues to elude
our attempts to represent it, just as the sublimity of storms and volcanos
challenged artists of earlier generations. Mr. Heinemann's carefully crafted,
oblique narrative suggests that the right words are not going to be found in
ever-more-graphic, frontal approaches to ''gruesome carnage.'' Its horrors may
be as forcefully conveyed by a haunting scene in a greasy spoon as by the
tearing of human flesh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Moralism Wins Again

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 741 words


Numerous valid reasons appeared to be developing for the rejection of Douglas H.
Ginsburg, President Reagan's second-choice nominee for a Supreme Court seat. In
the end, however, Judge Ginsburg became one more victim of a moralistic new
standard that is more deplorable than the private behavior it condemns.

Literally millions of Americans older and younger than Judge Ginsburg have
smoked marijuana, often or occasionally. Literally millions still do, and aim to
keep on.

I am not now and never have been one of them, but it seems to me unfair and
hypocritical to suggest that behavior so widespread and so widely accepted
should prevent someone from holding high office - even a Supreme Court seat.

It's true that Judge Ginsburg, like all those other pot smokers, was breaking
the law. So were those who drank homemade booze during Prohibition, or who until
recently in numerous states or localities drank any kind of liquor. So are those
today who drink it past a certain blood-alcohol level, or before they reach a
certain age.

It's true, too, that Judge Ginsburg was being considered for a law-enforcement
position. But he already holds one, on the United States Court of Appeals.
Should he resign it, though he clearly has not been incapacitated by past
behavior?

He also may have evaded the question of drug use (not, of course, meaning
alcohol use, although alcohol is the most used and abused drug among Americans)
when he sought employment at the Justice Department.

That's another serious offense -and another committed all the time by
job-seekers without number, most of whom go on to respectable lives and careers.

Should none but certifiably pure lawyers who never smoked marijuana, fudged a
resume, or broke any law be eligible for judgeships?

If so, Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist should step down; he once was fined
for speeding in Vermont. And a kind of generational vendetta will have been
carried out; not many who went to law school after 1960 would be eligible for
the bench.

The root problem, however, was not law-breaking or an evasion on an ambitious
young lawyer's application; it was the deed itself, the use of drugs, even if
only marijuana. The response - in part, a rush by conservatives to be rid of a
nominee whose ''confirmability'' they had come to doubt -was righteously
moralistic on the part of a public spurred on by the press's dubious new trend
toward intrusive inquiry.

Already that combination has driven Gary Hart and Joseph Biden from the
Presidential race, and damaged the Pat Robertson campaign. Rumors without
evidence persist about Governor Mario Cuomo of New York. He, Governor Bill
Clinton of Arkansas and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia all cited the burdens of
unrelenting press scrutiny of their families and private lives as one reason
they would not run for the Presidency. Who knows how many other able persons
stay out of public life for that reason?

In the wake of the Ginsburg withdrawal, Senator Albert Gore and former Governor
Bruce Babbitt, both Democratic candidates for President, have felt forced to
disclose that they, too, like so many Americans, smoked marijuana in the past -
in Senator Gore's case while he was a soldier in Vietnam, as well as when he was
a student and when he was a young reporter.

The political consequences remain to be seen, although as Mr. Babbitt put it,
''I have a feeling that 50 or 60 or 70 percent of America would be
disqualified'' if pot-smoking were the standard.

What's happening here? Why this sudden piety about public life in a society
reeking of liquor, offering the world's most demanding market for drugs, in
which it takes an epidemic of a fatal disease to curb free-wheeling sexual
behavior? Is this new standard a reaction from an older, Puritanical America
that never approved these developments? Or is it instead a taste for new
sensations, new diversions, in a society becoming jaded by its own excess? Or
both?

Either way, the press risks much in its eagerness to hold public figures to the
new standard of moralism. Aside from the hypocrisy of editors and reporters,
themselves not unfamiliar with adultry and marijuana, freedom of inquiry is too
important to be called into question by intrusive, arrogant and sanctimonious
prying into private lives and behavior.

Isn't the public that enjoys the resulting headlines being taught to consider a
free press as no more than a gossip column or a scandal sheet?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TENURE AS COURT NOMINEE STRETCHED BY A TRAFFIC JAM

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 301 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg was stuck for an hour in traffic Saturday as he headed
to the White House, delaying his announcement that he was ending his bid to join
the Supreme Court, the White House says.

The announcement was originally scheduled to be made at 2 P.M. but it was
delayed until about 3 P.M. The Washington Post reported today that unidentified
sources in the Reagan Administration had said Judge Ginsburg had expressed
second thoughts about withdrawing.

The newspaper article said that at a meeting with three White House officials,
Judge Ginsburg agreed to proceed with his statement after he was told that
reporters had been informed he was withdrawing.

'Definitely Not True'

''That is definitely not true,'' said one of the three, Marlin Fitzwater, the
Presidential spokesman. The other officials were A. B. Culvahouse Jr., the White
House counsel, and Kenneth M. Duberstein, the deputy White House chief of staff.

Mr. Fitzwater continued: ''He met with us when he got there, and he immediately
showed us the statement he had written in longhand. He read it to us, and then I
went down and announced the briefing. There was no discussion of anything other
than the withdrawal statement.''

He said the only delay ''was because Ginsburg got caught in the veterans
march.''

''They wouldn't let traffic through, so after a while, he had to get out of his
car and walk to the White House,'' he said.

Vietnam veterans were marching to a rally at the Capitol to call attention to
2,400 Americans still listed as missing in Southeast Asia.

Judge Ginsburg had called President Reagan at Camp David, the Presidential
retreat in Maryland, at about 11:30 A.M. to ask that his name be withdrawn, said
Mr. Fitzwater, who added that the judge carried his withdrawal statement with
him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Gottlieb Reign Alters The New Yorker

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1438 words


Nine months after taking over as editor of The New Yorker, following a
tumultuous outcry by authors and editors protesting the ouster of his
predecessor, Robert Gottlieb is beginning to put his stamp on one of the
nation's best-known magazines.

Change is most apparent in the less formal atmosphere at the magazine, typified
by Mr. Gottlieb's casual hobnobbing with the staff and his sneakers and
open-neck shirts - a marked sartorial contrast to William Shawn, who was rarely
without coat and tie.

Substantive changes, if less obvious, include a strong ideological point of
view, a more risque tone, the editor's fascination with kitsch and the
appointment of several new critics who themselves have received mixed reviews
from New Yorker staff members and committed readers.

A widely discussed example of ideological assertiveness was the four-page Talk
of the Town article in the Aug. 3 issue strongly opposing the nomination of
Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court of the United States.

While articles in the magazine's comment section during the Shawn era sharply
criticized the American involvement in Vietnam, and later were critical of many
aspects of the Reagan Administration, the anti-Bork article, written by Renata
Adler, took up the entire front-of-the-book section - a section that, in the
memory of some veteran writers, had rarely if ever been devoted to a single
subject. Moreover, the article broke new ground, several New Yorker staffers
suggested, by committing the magazine to a particular position at the outset of
a public controversy.

New Words

Another change in The New Yorker is its tone. While four-letter words appeared
only rarely in The New Yorker during Mr. Shawn's editorship, a short story by
Robert Stone last June entitled ''Helping'' contained repeated use of one
four-letter word.

''Eustace Tilley must be spinning in his grave,'' one longtime New Yorker
watcher said, referring to the well-known symbolic personification of the
magazine. But a source at the magazine said few readers seemed to be offended.
''In fact,'' he added, ''people wrote in and said, 'Now you're finally running
real fiction.' ''

Mr. Gottlieb's editorial stamp is also apparent in his passion for kitsch,
exemplified by the garish statues of Elvis Presley and the Lone Ranger among the
knickknacks on his desk. But few longtime New Yorker staff members seem to share
that taste, which probably accounts for their general annoyance with a recent
article about a convention of Scottish terrier fanciers. The piece was written
by Jane and Michael Stern, who wrote a book for Mr. Gottlieb on Elvis Presley.

Mr. Gottlieb is known to regard the ''Wee Scots'' piece as something that
readers either relate to or not, but which, in any case, is not worth all the
fuss. Others agree. ''There is bound to be occasional Gottlieb kitsch in the New
Yorker; he's a kitsch-y guy,'' said a Gottlieb admirer, Jonathan Galassi, an
editor at Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Ken Auletta, a New Yorker contributor, said
Mr. Shawn probably would not have run the ''Wee Scots'' piece, ''and there will
be keepers of the flame who see that as a transgression and violation of the
spirit of the magazine.'' But Mr. Gottlieb will not cheapen or commercialize the
magazine, he added, because ''that's not his style.''

Critical Measure

Outsiders say that Mr. Gottlieb's success will be measured largely by the
quality of the critics he appoints, and they say the few appointments he has
made so far do not match the caliber of such Shawn appointments as, for example,
Kenneth Tynan (drama), Harold Rosenberg (art), Pauline Kael (movies), Whitney
Balliett (jazz) and Andrew Porter (music).

The new crop of critics includes Terrance Rafferty, who will primarily review
fiction; Judith Thurman, who will primarily review nonfiction; Mimi Kramer, who
shares the theater coverage with Edith Oliver; and Alistair Macaulay, a young
British dance critic who will fill in for about six months while Arlene Croce is
on a leave of absence.

Mr. Rafferty has drawn favorable reaction with his recent review of the
so-called Brat Pack of young novelists, scoring not only their literary lapses
and pretentions but also criticizing the literary milieu that has given them
birth.

On the other hand, the talk has been less enthusiastic about Ms. Kramer's recent
review of the Broadway revival of ''Cabaret,'' in which after stating she had
never seen the original but had only heard the original cast recording, she
proceeded to disparage the ''delicatessen humor'' Jack Gilford had brought to
the 1966 production.

Meanwhile, most longtime New Yorker critics and reviewers remain, including
George Steiner and John Updike, who many think write some of the most incisive
book criticism to be found anywhere. Mr. Updike has also continued to write
poems, and has written at least one Talk of the Town article and an article from
Finland.

''Bob's been very encouraging to me, and has run everything I've written, very
rapidly,'' Mr. Updike said. ''He is quick to use the telephone and fairly chatty
when he gets on it.''

Appointment of a Deputy

Mr. Gottlieb is putting more writers on salary, in a departure from the usual
practice of signing them to yearly contracts and allowing them to draw advances
against future earnings. And he has appointed a deputy editor, Charles McGrath,
who himself had been widely rumored as the likely successor to Mr. Shawn.

That appointment was welcomed by the staff, because Mr. McGrath is well
respected and represents The New Yorker tradition. That tradition was much on
the minds of the more than 150 New Yorker staff members who early this year
signed an open letter asking Mr. Gottlieb not to accept the editorship, although
the protest was largely directed at the sudden ouster of Mr. Shawn, then 79, by
S. I. Newhouse Jr., whose family owns the magazine.

Although Mr. Gottlieb has not replaced Mr. Shawn in the affections of New Yorker
staffers, most of the hostility and skepticism appear to have given way to
respect, if only grudging. Sources say that Mr. Gottlieb is amenable to
suggestions and that it is at least possible to argue with him about potential
changes or cuts in stories - something almost no one dared do with Mr. Shawn,
because he was held in such awe.

And, for the time being at least, Mr. Gottlieb has managed to calm fears, which
were widespread when he was appointed, that he would curtail most overseas
travel.

''He has been perfectly approachable,'' said Alex Shoumatoff, consistently one
of the farthest-flung of The New Yorker's far-flung correspondents.
''Fortunately, he's aware that there are many hot stories in the tropics and the
desert.''

Links to the News

To the surprise of those who thought that Mr. Gottlieb's interests were
primarily literary and cultural, the new editor has shown a nose for stories
tied to the news. The current issue contains the first part of a three-part
article on the Federal Reserve System, by William Greider. Mr. Gottlieb also has
bought from Mr. Galassi excerpts from a forthcoming book about the West Bank by
a young Israeli journalist, David Grossman. And he assigned the recent two-part
series on Iraq by Milton Viorst.

''I wrote a huge amount, they cut a little, we discussed it and I lost,'' Mr.
Viorst said. ''But it was all done professionally.''

John Hersey, a New Yorker writer for more than four decades, praised Mr.
Gottlieb for providing ''a very creative suggestion.''

''I arranged with Bob to go to Moscow to cover the convention of International
Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War,'' Mr. Hersey said recently. ''It
was his notion for me to also go into my impressions of Moscow, after being away
40 years, that lent a dimension to the piece.''

Similarly, although Raymond Bonner did not know Mr. Gottlieb, he met with him
last June, at which time Mr. Gottlieb asked if he would like to go to Peru.
After having discussed the purpose of his visit only vaguely, he left a week
later and traveled the country for more than five weeks.

Mr. Bonner recently handed in a 25,000-word piece about the Shining Path
guerrillas and the Government of Peru's embattled president, Alan Garcia. Less
than 24 hours later he received a phone call from Mr. Gottlieb. ''He said:
'We've got a piece. It needs work, but that's what we're here for,' '' Mr.
Bonner recalled.

Mr. Bonner turned in his expense account on Wednesday and received a check two
days later. ''For a freelance writer,'' he said, ''my experience with Gottlieb
and The New Yorker was like dying and going to journalistic heaven.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robert Gottlieb (NYT/Angel Franco)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words



International    A3-17


 Central bankers of industrial nations called on their governments to adopt
budgetary policies aimed at reducing trade imbalances and stabilizing exchange
rates. The bankers were meeting for the first time since the stock market
plunge.    Page A1


 Direct U.S.-Nicaraguan discussions could be held soon if the Sandinistas began
''serious negotiations'' with the American-backed rebels, President Reagan said
in an address at the State Department.    A1


 In Nicaragua, the first session between rebel leaders and an intermediary in
talks with the Government may be held as early as next week, according to
American Congressmen who have just visited Nicaragua and rebel officials.    A16


 The popularity of Peru's President, Alan Garcia, is tumbling and there is
growing disenchantment with his Government. The Social Democrat has become a
lightning rod for opposition from left and right.    A1


 A bomb in Sri Lanka killed 32 people and wounded more than 75, the police said.
The bomb, which had apparently been placed ina private bus, went off as office
workers were returning home in a commercial district of Colombo.    A1
 The explosion in Northern Ireland that killed 11 people in the town of
Enniskillen brought out the familiar rituals of mourning and sectarian rage in
the town's citizens that are a commonplace part of life in the tortured
province.    A3


 News analysis: The Amman meeting of Arab governments could signal a turning
point. For the first time, the focus of such a meeting is not the Palestinians
and Zionism, but Iran and Islamic revolution.    A8


 Pristina journal: Code of clans

    A4


 Dubcek has brush with politics

    A7


 Tunisians attempt change

    A9


 1,100 held as Bangladesh bans protest in capital

    A11


 Fear is new to Americans in Philippines

    A13


National    A18-33, B20, D34-35


 The likely Supreme Court nominee is Judge Anthony M. Kennedy, the White House
said. Administration backbiting intensified because of the embarrassment caused
by the withdrawal of one previous candidate and the defeat of another.    A1


 Judge Kennedy's judicial style more closely resembles that of Justice Lewis F.
Powell Jr., the pragmatic centrist who retired in June, than that of Judge
Robert H. Bork, the President's first nominee for the seat.    A1


 The F.B.I. has begun an inquiry to determine whether its agents mishandled
background investigations in recent years that failed to detect past marijuana
use by Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, bureau officials said.    D34


 Marijuana use is insufficient reason for disqualifying someone as either
President or a Supreme Court Justice, a majority of Americans believe, according
to a New York Times/CBS News Poll.    D35


 An agreement to clean up PCB's and other toxic wastes was reached between the
Texas Eastern Corporation and the Environmental Protection Agency. The wastes
had been disposed of in 14 states along its 10,000-mile natural gas pipeline.
    A1


 Stock prices fell sharply yesterday amid nervousness over the dollar's
continuing slide and the resumption of unrestricted program trading. The Dow
Jones industrial average finished at 1,900.20, off 58.85 points.    D1
 Bob Dole is running for President. Calling himself a candidate of America's
heartland, the Senate minority leader formally announced his Presidential drive
and pledged that erasing the budget deficit would be the heart of his
Presidency.    A18


 Sons and daughters of alcoholics are being found by researchers to have
specific biochemical and behavioral differences in their responses to alcohol
that may be a key to why these children are likely to become alcohol abusers.
    C1


 A Civil War battlefield is threatened by commercial development. While 3,200
acres of the Antietam battlefield are within the National Park System, thousands
of acres more as well as the surrounding vistas are privately owned.    A18


 Austin journal: A divided town

    A18


 Democrats prepare counteroffer on deficit

    A20


 Supreme Court will rule on teen-ager chastity law

    A24


 Idled farmland could hit record

    A26


 Suit seeks to alter Birmingham voting system

    A28


 McFarlane testifies at Deaver trial

    A33


 Washington Talk    B20


 A pre-summit push on rights
 On the Vietnam memorial, 24 more names
Regional    B1-4, B7


 Hope for the South Bronx can be seen on a single block on Vyse Avenue. The
block is emblematic of what went wrong in the South Bronx and of the forces that
are slowly returning people to the neighborhoods there.    B1


 The Museum of the American Indian in New York City would be housed in the
Custom House in lower Manhattan under a proposal that has united the highest New
York State, local and Congressional leaders.    B2


 A reduction in density on Broadway, Seventh Avenue and more than a dozen side
streets around the theater district was called for in a proposal submitted to
the New York City Planning Commission.    B2


 Help for minority-group children was called for by Governor Cuomo. ''When you
look at the disaster that is the New York City school system,'' the Governor
said, ''you have to feel concern.''    B3
 The dumping of leaves in landfills is beginning to be seen by officials
throughout the New York metropolitan region as lunacy. Some communities are
turning to composting to create a potentially valuable commodity.    B1


 Two New York State senators pleaded not guilty to charges that they conspired
to steal public money to finance election campaigns. They were arraigned in
State Supreme Court and released without bail.    B2


 A woman pushed onto the subway in Manhattan as a train pulled into the station
survived by squeezing into a crawl space underneath the platform. A suspect was
arrested.    B3


 New York City transit official suspended

    B4


 Teen-ager sentenced in murder-conspiracy case

    B4


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Manila's Push for Common Policy On U.S. Bases Surprises Its Allies

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 630 words

DATELINE: KOTA KINABALU, Malaysia, Nov. 8


An unexpected bid by Manila to forge a common Southeast Asian policy in support
of American military bases in the Philippines has brought consternation to
neighboring capitals, according to regional officials and private analysts
meeting here to discuss Pacific security.

The Philippines Foreign Minister, Raul Manglapus, has just completed a tour of
three of Manila's partners in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations -
Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore -ostensibly to assure them that a meeting of
the group can take place safely in Manila in December.

Indonesia and Brunei are also members of the association.

Regional governments are worried about the volatility of the atmosphere in
Manila. On the eve of Mr. Manglapus's trip, explosives were found in the
conference center where the meeting, the third in the association's 20-year
history, is to be held Dec. 14-16.

But most governments in the region have decided to go ahead with the Manila
meeting as a vote of confidence in the Government of President Corazon C.
Aquino.

Region's Support Important

''It is very important for the region to support her,'' Jusuf Wanandi, director
of Jakarta's Center for Stratetic and International Studies and a member of the
Indonesian Parliament, said in an interview today. ''This is a signal of her
credibility.''

Mr. Wanandi and others attending the 16th Williamsburg Conference on Asia and
the Pacific said they were taken by surprise by Mr. Manglapus's apparent effort
to get regional backing for the continued presence of the American bases.

Non-Communist Southeast Asian nations agree more or less that a United States
military presence is desirable now for a range of reasons. But several
governments, including those of Malaysia and Indonesia, do not want to harm
their relations with the Nonaligned Movement, a major grouping of developing
countries, and other organizations by making a public statement on this issue.

Asean nations are also committed to establishing what they call a ''zone of
peace, freedom and neutrality'' in the region. The American bases have posed a
problem for this concept, but there is reluctance to see them go because of the
large Soviet military presence at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam.

Shift in Power Feared

''If the Americans left, who would fill the gap?'' Mr. Wanandi asked. ''The
Soviet Union? China? Japan? It could create a whole new balance of forces in the
region.''

Filipino commentators attending the Williamsburg Conference said Mr. Manglapus's
aim might be to internationalize the issue of the American use of Clark Air Base
and Subic Bay Naval Station. This might help Mrs. Aquino extricate the issue
from an emotional nationalistic debate in the Philippines.

Negotiations to renew American leases on the bases begin next year.

Discussions about the economic, political and military situation in the
Philippines played a major part in the conference, in which more than 50
government officials, diplomats, business leaders and scholars from Pacific rim
countries took part. The annual conferences are named for the site in Virginia
of the first meeting, in 1971.

Participants in this year's conference, sponsored by the Asia Society of New
York and Malaysia's Institute for Strategic and International Studies, came from
the United States, Japan, China, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and South Korea.
Hong Kong is also represented, along with all the members of Asean except
Brunei.

The United States delegation included Michael H. Armacost, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs; David F. Lambertson, Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for East Asia and the Pacific, and Cyrus R. Vance, who was Secretary of
State in the Carter Administration. Mr. Vance is co-chairman of the conference.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Weinberger's Exit: What It Means

BYLINE: By James Reston; James Reston is the senior columnist of The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


It's reassuring these days to walk along Pennsylvania Avenue from the Treasury
Department past the White House. The buildings seem so sturdy and changeless in
the Indian-summer sun.

But of course change is now the order of the day here. Since the stock market
hiccup, Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger and all the noisiest loyalists
have departed. The balance of the economy has changed, the balance of the
Cabinet has changed and the Administration is groping haphazardly toward the end
while Washington turns its attention to a changing Presidential campaign.

Only a few short weeks ago, the Republicans were saying that everything was as
sound as the dollar, and the Democrats were in despair. There had been 59 months
of spending and borrowing and economic growth, unemployment was below 6 percent
for the first time in 10 years, General Secretary Mikhail S. Gorbachev was
coming to town to sign the first nuclear arms reduction treaty since the
invention of the atom bomb, and Vice President Bush was running ahead in the
campaign popularity polls.

The Wall Street crash hasn't changed all that, but it sent a shudder through the
country and raised the hopes of the Democrats that they might win in 1988, even
with a team of uninspiring second-raters. Their main hope lies in the bad
economic news, in the alarming budget and trade deficits, to which they have
contributed; in the economic weakness in the farm, energy, textile, timber,
steel and mining sectors, and in the historic record of past campaigns.

They have lost four of the last five Presidential elections, and, as Kevin
Phillips of the American Political Report has pointed out, they have never taken
the White House away from the Republicans in this century except in years of
economic distress: 1912, 1932, 1960 and 1976.

It is possible, however, that Wall Street will recover from its nervous
breakdown and that with the help of West Germany and Japan the President and
Congress will come to their senses and restore the recovery of 1983-87. But the
chances are that uncertainty will reduce consumer spending and prolong anxiety
in the country through most of next year's campaign.

If so, this may encourage the unhappy and reckless thought that the Democrats
can go on loitering along and win with any of their present candidates, rather
than drafting Governor Cuomo of New York or Senators Bill Bradley of New Jersey
or Sam Nunn of Georgia.

Meanwhile, we may see in the coming year a more coherent and less ideological
and confrontational Reagan Administration. Obviously, as the Ginsburg fiasco
suggests, the Administration is a long way from harmony on some important
domestic matters. But with Frank Carlucci at Defense instead of Mr. Weinberger,
Bill Webster at the C.I.A. instead of Bill Casey, Vernon Walters at the United
Nations instead of Jeane Kirkpatrick and General Powell at the National Security
Council instead of Admiral Poindexter, George Shultz and the other moderate
survivors will have less trouble in the field of foreign policy.

Mr. Weinberger, with the aid of Richard Perle, his Assistant for International
Affairs, was the most stubborn defender of ever-larger defense budgets,
including deployment of the President's ''Star Wars'' program, and he was much
more skeptical than Mr. Shultz and Paul Nitze in their efforts to reach a
nuclear arms treaty with the Soviets.

In 1981 and 1982, alarmed by a 20 percent cut in defense spending in the decade
of the 70's, he persuaded Congress to increase the Pentagon's budget by 12
percent, and by 1985 the military budget was larger than at the peak of the
Vietnam War.

But as the budget deficit increased, the military budget was cut by 4.2 percent
in fiscal 1986, by another 2.5 percent in fiscal '87, and it faced further cuts
this year.

Mr. Weinberger is entitled to the praise Mr. Reagan showered on him during his
Rose Garden resignation for strengthening the power and morale of the armed
forces, but he never saw any relationship between his defense expenditures and
the budget deficit, and it never occurred to him that occasionally his critics
might have a point.

In fairness, he was more cautious about using arms than some of his opponents;
he merely wanted to collect them in the belief that having them would deter
aggression. But he could see he was losing his battles, and, with an ailing
wife, decided to go home.

Without him, the internal fight for the President's support will undoubtedly go
on, but it will be less strident. The only remaining member of the original
Reagan Cabinet is Samuel R. Pierce Jr., the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development. It's odd that all the hard-liners on foreign policy chose to leave
before the end.

Nothing has really been settled. As George Shultz said during the Iran-contra
hearings, nothing is ever settled in Washington, especially under Mr. Reagan,
who changes his mind on most things depending on who last advised him in the
Oval Office.

Now, however, most of his advisers, to the dismay of the supply-siders, will be
the backsliders who think they can cut a deal with the Soviets and even with
Congress.

Maybe he just wanted a little peace in the White House for a change, and after
the last seven contentious years, nobody could blame him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: VIETNAM LEGACY;
The Memorial's List Grows by 24

BYLINE: By HILARY STOUT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 860 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The names are freshly etched in black granite on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial:
Samuel Richard Bird, Steven Mark Connell, Carl Eugene Gronquist Jr. The first, a
27-year-old Army captain, was shot while climbing out of a helicopter and died
17 years later, in 1984; the second, a 20-year-old Marine private, was shot
while on patrol and died at home in Utah after a year and a half, and the third,
a 33-year-old Navy lieutenant, died when his plane crashed while landing after a
mission.

Their names and those of 21 others are the latest to be carved on the wall of
the memorial. On Wednesday, Veterans Day, members of their families will arrive
at the wall from places like Wichita, Kan., and West Valley, Utah, to search out
the newest names amid 58,132 others listed on the low, dark monument to
Americans killed or missing in the Vietnam War.

About 80 relatives of the 24 men -fathers, mothers, stepmothers, widows,
brothers and sisters - are expected to attend the ceremony, organized by the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund and sponsored by Marlboro Country Music, a
country music tour promoted by Philip Morris that is also paying to lodge the
families during their stay in the capital. On Tuesday night, Marlboro Country
Music will sponsor a benefit concert at Constitution Hall to raise money for the
project.

'We Feel So Honored'

Private Connell's mother, Georgia Turner, is borrowing money to fly from Utah
with five of his six brothers and sisters. ''We feel so honored and grateful
that they're doing this,'' she said over the telephone the other day.

Until very recently, not all the families knew about the ceremony, or that the
name of their loved one was finally on the wall. The Defense Department notified
known relatives as it approved each of the 24 names for inclusion in a process
that began about a year and a half ago and ended last month. There, however, the
department's role largely ended.

Although the monument was transferred to Government ownership in 1984, its
upkeep is still privately financed, by the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, which
built the wall and is paying the cost of adding the 24 names, at about $1,800
each. Because the ceremony too is to be privately run, it was the sponsor that
needed to track down the families. The Defense Department would not release
their names and addresses, for privacy reasons, but did agree to mail
sponsor-written letters advising the families of the ceremony and telling them
whom to call.

Still, it was only after the music tour had issued a press release that was
picked up by news agencies and printed in hundreds of newspapers around the
country that many of the families learned that the new names had in fact already
been inscribed on the wall, in work that was finished last week, well in time
for Wednesday's ceremony.

Fourth Addition Since 1982

This is the fourth group of names to be added since the monument was dedicated
in 1982, and reflects a criteria change that was adopted three years later. The
new standards allow inclusion of the names of those killed outside of a combat
zone if they were going to or returning from a combat mission, as well as those
who died of war-related injuries long after being wounded.

They are people like Lieutenant Gronquist and his partner, Cmdr. Valentin George
Matula, who died in 1965 when their plane crashed on their attempt to land on an
aircraft carrier.

They are people like Private Connell, whose mother had thought that his name was
on the memorial from the start. Last year two of his high school classmates came
here to see it and returned to Utah to tell her it was not there. She petitioned
the Navy. When his name was approved, she cried. ''I was happy and sad at the
same time,'' she said. ''He was such a good boy.'' One particularly poignant
story behind the new names is that of Captain Bird.

As a young first lieutenant he led the honor guard that carried John F.
Kennedy's coffin from the White House to the Capitol in ceremonies for the slain
President in November 1963. The nation saw him on television and in photographs.

Three years later he requested transfer to Vietnam. Six months after he arrived,
he was shot in the head on his 27th birthday, Jan. 27, 1967.

He lived the last 17 years of his life with the use of one limb, his right arm.
Back in his hometown, Wichita, Kan., he married his childhood sweetheart and
gave numerous speeches to church groups about his experience and his faith.

Dole's Help Was Sought

After he died of a generally deteriorating physical condition on Oct. 18, 1984,
members of the American Legion asked Senator Bob Dole to help get his name on
the wall. On Wednesday his father, Richard Bird, a 78-year-old art gallery
owner, will be in Washington along with the honoree's stepmother, Pauline, and
widow, Annette, to see the name Samuel Richard Bird.

''My feeling is that although it didn't bother Sam too much, there was a lot of
disrespect for Vietnam vets,'' Mr. Bird said. Of the war, he added, his son felt
that ''it was the right thing, and he had a Commander in Chief who said go to
war. I'm glad to realize Sam is getting respect.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

An Upset at the Book Awards

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 974 words


In a stunning literary upset, Larry Heinemann, a 43-year-old Army veteran who
said he was still embittered by his experience as an infantryman in Vietnam, won
the 1987 National Book Award for fiction with his second novel, ''Paco's
Story,'' the story of a wounded Vietnam veteran's efforts to readjust to
civilian life.

Richard Rhodes, the author of four novels and four books of nonfiction, won the
nonfiction prize for ''The Making of the Atomic Bomb,'' a detailed account of
the origins and early development of nuclear weapons.

Most of the black-tie audience that filled the Grand Ballroom of the Pierre
Hotel seemed surprised that two ostensible ''antiwar'' books were the year's
winners. Asked if he could explain why, Mr. Rhodes, a 50-year-old resident of
Kansas City, Mo., smiled and replied, ''You'll have to ask the judges about
that.''

But most of the surprise resulted from the widespread feeling that the fiction
winner would almost certainly be either Toni Morrison for ''Beloved,'' or Philip
Roth for ''The Counterlife.'' When Mr. Heinemann's name was announced, a brief
silence gripped the ballroom, followed by uncertain applause.

'Came for the Party'

''This is an interesting surprise,'' Mr. Heinemann told the audience, adding
that he had come from his home in Chicago to participate in a reading earlier in
the evening at the Manhattan Theater Club and then to attend the awards dinner.
Later he said, ''I didn't come here expecting to win. I came here for the
party.''

But if it turned out to be a surprise party for Mr. Heinemann, he was at a loss
for words only briefly. Toward the end of his acceptance speech he sharply
criticized what he said was the re-emerging notion that the United States could
have won the Vietnam War. After citing what he said were the baneful results of
the American military presence in Vietnam, which he said included napalm and
aerial bombing, he mentioned that 20 years ago this very night he was in
Vietnam.

''You are people who can make a difference,'' he concluded, ''so I'm warning
you: If we allow the same thing to happen in Central America it will be the
shame of our lives.''

Both winners will receive checks for $10,000 and a special plaque designed by
Louise Nevelson.

The winners were chosen from 10 nominees, who in turn were chosen last month
from more than 300 names submitted by publishers. Each nominated author will
receive $1,000.

'Agonizing Vote'

Hilma Wolitzer, chairman of the three-judge fiction panel, said that all five
nominees were worthy of the prize, and that the judges arrived at their decision
after an ''agonizing down-to-the-wire deliberation'' and ''an agonizing vote.''
The other two fiction judges, Richard Eder and Gloria Naylor, concurred that all
five books were deserving. But Mr. Eder said that Mr. Heinemann was ''in no
sense a compromise candidate,'' as were some past winners when judges were
unable to agree. He and Ms. Naylor said that the judges had cast votes for only
two books. They declined to name the other book.

Mr. Heinemann's novel, published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux, was described in
The New York Times Book Review as ''carefully crafted'' and a ''fine novel.''

The other fiction nominees were ''The Northern Lights'' by Howard Norman (Summit
Books) and ''That Night'' by Alice McDermott (Farrar, Strauss & Giroux).

Mr. Rhodes, a Yale graduate, concluded his book by saying that to blame science
for the nuclear dilemma ''confuses the messenger with the message.'' Physicists
did not invent nuclear fission; they discovered it, he added. In his review of
Mr. Rhodes's book in The Times, John Gross wrote that its strength was the
author's ''clarity, forcefulness, the ability to marshal complicated facts and
arguments without impeding the narrative flow.''

Last night Mr. Rhodes said he had written his book to answer a question that
disturbed him. ''I could not believe that a species as clever and as long-lived
as ours could be hellbent on destroying itself,'' he said. ''It seemed to me
that by looking back at the beginning of this cataclysmic change in human
affairs in this century I might find an explanation at least, which is better
than nothing at all, better than what looks like insanity. But I hoped that I
might find some source of hope. I think I found that. I tried to make it the
underlying theme of the book.''

The author and critic William Gass, who was the main speaker of the evening,
paid tribute to the craft of writing, and alluded to ''the prickle of the right
word'' and ''the landscape of a human spirit brought to hitherto unrealized
perfection.''

The nonfiction nominees, in addition to Mr. Rhodes, whose book was published by
Simon & Schuster, were: David Herbert Donald, ''Look Homeward: A Life of Thomas
Wolfe'' (Little, Brown); James Gleick, ''Chaos: Making a New Science''
(Viking/Penguin); Claudia Koonz, ''Mothers in the Fatherland'' (St. Martin's
Press), and Robert A. M. Stern, Gregory Gilmartin and Thomas Mellins, ''New York
1930: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Two World Wars'' (Rizzoli).

The nonfiction panel consisted of Justin Kaplan, chairman; Frank Freidel, Diane
Johnson, Robert Kotlowitz and Carol Rinzler.

Although the National Book Awards were started in 1950, the name was changed in
1980 to the American Book Awards - it reverted only this year - and the format
has been changed several times. In 1983, for example, 27 winners were chosen
from 96 nominees.

''There was a thought in those days that the book awards should out-Oscar the
Oscars,'' said Lawrence Hughes, the chairman of the board of directors of the
National Book Awards and the president of the Hearst Trade Book Group. ''But
book people are really not actors, and there's a realization now that we should
not try to reward things like who did the best book blurb.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard Rhodes and Larry Heinemann (NYT/Lori Grinker)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Gore's Fears Are Eased On Issue of Marijuana

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 35, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: MACON, Ga., Nov. 9


On his way to meet Senator Albert Gore Jr. this morning, DuBose Porter stopped
by Ma Hawkins's Coffee Shop to hear what the folks were saying about the
Presidential candidate, who has admitted that he smoked marijuana years ago.

''There was a lot of talk, a lot of kidding,'' said Mr. Porter, who is a state
legislator and a local newspaper editor, ''but nothing real serious.''

A shrug, a cluck and maybe a mild scolding for a ''youthful indiscretion'' were
pretty much the general reaction as Senator Gore barnstormed across Georgia
today. It was the first test of how his admission was being received by the
Southern voters in whom he has vested much of his hope for the Democratic
Presidential nomination.

Casting the First Stone

''I'm of the philosophy that he who is without sin should cast the first
stone,'' said Mayor James Jernigan of Columbus, Ga., an earlier stop on the
Tennessee Senator's swing today. ''I can't do it.''

As he traveled in a small plane from Columbus to Albany to Macon and then on to
Augusta, Senator Gore was acutely interested in the reaction.

''I'm tentatively relieved about how supportive it has been,'' he said.'' The
only thing I can do is be very open and talk about something that tens of
millions of my generation have shared.''

He said he wished he had not used marijuana, but that he stopped in 1972 because
''It was a false experience.''

On Saturday the Senator said he had smoked marijuana on several occasions as a
college student at Harvard, as an Army reporter in Vietnam and as a journalist
in his home state of Tennessee.

'I Guess Everybody Slips'

''The little incident?'' said Edna Kenbrick, a 76-year-old member of the
Columbus City Council. ''I guess everybody slips. He was forthright enough to
come forward and say he did it. He did not continue and it was in his youth -not
that he isn't still young.'' Mr. Gore is 39 years old.

Mark Baker, 27, the news director of radio station WGUS in Augusta, walked up to
Mr. Gore, shook his hand and said: ''If they disqualified everyone who ever
smoked a joint, Nancy Reagan would be the only one left.'' The Senator winced,
slapped Mr. Baker on the shoulder and walked on.

Mr. Gore, trailing in public opinion polls in Iowa and New Hampshire, is
pressing for a strong showing on the biggest day of the primary election season,
March 8, when most of the voting will be in the South.

At each campaign stop the Senator stressed the importance of the March 8 voting,
a combination put together by Democrats who say they were hoping to nominate a
Presidential contender who would be more moderate than the party's two previous
candidates and who would have a better chance of winning the general election.

Mr. Gore's trip seemed to break into two parts: his conversations with voters
and his conversations with reporters.

The reporters asked repeated questions about his marijuana use and the response
to it. ''I really debated whether to ask him,'' said Mary Ann Bergerson, a
television reporter for Channel 11 in Atlanta, who opened the news conference in
Colombus with a question about his use of marijuana. ''But I think the public
wants to know. They can assess. I think it's a valid issue.''

On the other hand, the voters who met with him asked about the economy (he said
the deficit must be cut). They asked what would happen to Georgia's numerous
military bases if the military budget was cut (he would offer plans for
conversion if that became necessary). They asked if he would raise taxes (he
would not rule it out).

But only twice during the day did they ask about the marijuana issue, and then
it was to learn, in one case, why he had admitted anything and, in another case,
whether he thought the press was making too much of it.

Mr. Gore voluntarily disclosed that he had smoked marijuana after a furor over
marijuana smoking led Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg to withdraw from consideration
as a Supreme Court nominee. Twice in the months before Judge Ginsburg was
nominated, Mr. Gore said, the Presidential hopeful had acknowleged to reporters
''off the record'' that he had smoked marijuana, but nothing was published after
those acknowledgments. ''They didn't think it had sufficient relevance to
warrant the invasion of privacy which it would entail,'' he said, referring to
the two reporters. ''A very sensible judgment which I commend to others.''

'M Question' for Babbitt

HOUSTON, Nov. 9 (Special to The New York Times) - The only people asking Bruce
Babbitt ''the M question,'' as he calls it, were reporters.

Instead, talk today centered on the topic of oil, as 20 of Houston's business
and energy leaders gathered at a private downtown club for sandwiches and
give-and-take with Mr. Babbitt, the former Governor of Arizona. Many sought to
change his mind on the oil import fee, which he opposes.

''To us, our business is more important than to worry about his personal life,''
said Steve Pringle of the International Association of Drilling Contractors.
''We're more interested in worrying about getting him converted to be a
pro-energy official.''

Mr. Babbitt dealt impatiently with questions about his use of marijuana at a
short news conference held before he addressed the business group. ''There has
to be a line somewhere,'' he said. ''Would these facts have precluded me from
voting for a candidate? No. But the American people will judge that.'' He
repeated his earlier assertion that ''it was a mistake,'' but that ''the '60's
were a rather different time.''

Bill Ramsey, director of the Harris County Democratic Party, said no one seemed
worried about the marijuana issue. ''There have been no calls,'' he said. ''We
haven't had anything from the general public.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Albert Gore Jr. with the Rev. Jesse Jackson (AP);
Bruce Babbitt (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Past Marijuana Use Held Insufficient Reason to Rule Out Candidate

BYLINE: By RICHARD J. MEISLIN

SECTION: Section D; Page 35, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1028 words


A majority of Americans say that having tried marijuana is insufficient reason
to disqualify someone from serving as either President or as a Supreme Court
Justice, according to a New York Times/CBS News Poll.

The nationwide survey of 589 adults was conducted by telephone on Sunday, the
day after Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg asked that his nomination to the Supreme
Court be withdrawn, largely because of the furor created by his disclosure that
he had smoked marijuana.

In the wake of Judge Ginsburg's withdrawal, the latest among aspirants to high
office in a year in which there has been unusual focus on candidates' personal
character, more than two-thirds also said they believed there was ''too much
attention being paid to the private lives of people seeking high public
office.'' More than half also said news organizations were ''probing too
deeply'' into the private lives of these office-seekers.

Since Judge Ginsburg's withdrawal, two Democratic Presidential candidates,
Senator Albert Gore Jr. and former Gov. Bruce Babbitt, have also acknowledged
they that experimented with marijuana when they were younger., Several other
Presidential contenders have said they believed past marijuana use to be
irrelevant to a candidate's qualifications so long as a candidate was not using
the drug now.

Response on High Court

Most Americans seem to agree. Fifty-eight percent of those polled said they did
not think having ''ever smoked marijuana'' should disqualify someone from
serving on the Supreme Court. When those who initially said it should disqualify
someone were questioned further, an additional 21 percent said marijuana use
should not disqualify a candidate if he ''only smoked it in college.'' But 16
percent said it should disqualify such a person.

The response for President was almost identical. The margin of sampling error in
the survey was plus or minus four percentage points.

Those who described themselves as political conservatives were far more likely
to view having tried marijuana, whether only in college or not, as a
disqualifying factor for serving on the Supreme Court. It was those
conservatives whom the Reagan Administration had hoped would become the base of
support for Judge Ginsburg's nomination to the Supreme Court.

More than a third of all those surveyed -and more than half of those under the
age of 45 - admitted having tried marijuana themselves, and they did not seem
surprised that public officials now in their 30's and 40's would have. Twenty
percent said they believed most of these public officials in this age range had
tried marijuana, 37 percent said they thought about half had, 24 percent said
that a quarter had tried it and 12 percent said they thought ''only a few'' had.


Gore and Babbitt Admissions

Judge Ginsburg is 41 years old. Of the Democratic Presidential candidates who
admitted trying marijuana, Senator Gore of Tennessee, who said he had
occasionally smoked marijuana as a student and as a soldier in Vietnam, is 39,
and former Governor Babbitt of Arizona, who said he had tried it ''like tens of
millions of Americans of my generation,'' is 49.

When the question was not limited to public officials, experimentation with
marijuana was viewed as even more likely among people now in their 30's and
40's. When the question was asked, ''How many Americans who are now in their
30's and 40's do you think have ever smoked marijuana,'' 28 percent said that
most in this category had tried it, 44 percent said about half, 18 percent said
a quarter and only 4 percent said they believed that ''only a few'' had tried
it.

Those who admitted having tried marijuana themselves were substantially less
likely to think having done so was reason to keep someone from the Supreme Court
or the Presidency. They were also far more likely than those who had not tried
the drug to think that too much attention was being paid to the private lives of
people seeking high public office, and that news organizations were probing too
deeply into officials' private lives rather than ''getting at what the public
ought to know.''

The poll indicated that Judge Ginsburg, who was nominated nine days before his
withdrawal, had only started to make an impression on the American public.
Forty-two percent said they had not heard enough about Judge Ginsburg to form an
opinion, and 17 percent said they were undecided about him. Nineteen percent
said they had a favorable opinion of him and 20 percent said they had an
unfavorable opinion.

Without any prompting, a third of those questioned identified marijuana use as
the ''main reason'' for Judge Ginsburg's withdrawal, and another 22 percent gave
political reasons. Forty-six percent said the judge had done ''the right thing''
in withdrawing his nomination; 32 percent said he should have gone ahead and
attempted to be confirmed.

How the Poll Was Conducted

The latest New York Times Poll is based on telephone interviews conducted on
Sunday with 589 adults around the United States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen so as to
insure that each region of the country was represented in proportion to its
population. For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random
digits, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted residential numbers.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of
residential telephones and to adjust for variations in the sample relating to
region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on such samples will differ
by no more than 4 percentage points in either direction from what would have
been obtained by interviewing all adult Americans. The error for smaller
subgroups is larger. For example, the potential error for women is plus or minus
5 percentage points, and for men it is plus or minus 6 percentage points.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Prince Weighs Cambodia Talks

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 180 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 10


Prince Norodom Sihanouk is planning to travel to France this week amid reports
that he may meet there before the end of the year with Cambodia's Prime
Minister, a spokesman for the Prince said here today.

The Prince, the former Cambodian head of state, leads one of three armies
battling the Government in Cambodia, which is backed by Vietnam.

The proposed meeting, still unscheduled, has the backing of China, Japan and
several Southeast Asian nations, the Prince's office said.

Asian diplomats say that the Chinese have relaxed their demands for a
Beijing-backed Communist government in Cambodia, and now accept the possibility
of a neutral, non-Communist government if that is what Cambodians want. Prince
Sihanouk has said this is his aim.

On. Oct. 31, Prince Sihanouk, who is now in Beijing, dismissed the idea of
returning to Phnom Penh under its present government. But he has not ruled out a
meeting with Prime Minister Hun Sen if the Cambodian leader will agree to two
conditions: a personal request for an audience from Mr. Hun Sen and full public
disclosure.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Vote In Assembly

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 333 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Nov. 10


Following is the roll-call vote today in the General Assembly on a resolution
calling on the Soviet Union to withdraw its forces from Afghanistan:

IN FAVOR - 123
Albania
Antigua & Barbuda
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Butan
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Britain
Brunei
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada  Central Af.

Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Costa Rica
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Fiji
France
Gabon
Gambia
Germany, West  Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea

Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Iceland
Indonesia
Iran
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Kuwait
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Luxembourg
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Qatar
Rwanda
St. Kitts & Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent & Grenada
Samoa
Sao Tome & Principe  Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Somalia
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad & Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
U. Arab Emirates
United States
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe


AGAINST - 19
Afghanistan
Angola
Bulgaria
Byelorussia
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Ethiopia
Germany, East
Hungary
Laos
Libya
Madagascar
Mongolia
Poland
Soviet Union
Syria
Ukraine
Vietnam
Yemen
%
ABSTENTIONS - 11
Algeria
Benin
Burkina Faso
Congo
Cyprus
Finland
India
Iraq
Mali
Nicaragua
Uganda

ABSENT OR NOT VOTING - 5
Cape Verde
Mozambique
Rumania
Seychelles
Yemen, Southern

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

War Heroes, War Powers

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 404 words


The essence of battle, says the historian John Keegan, is ''the behavior of men
struggling to reconcile their instinct for self-preservation, their sense of
honor and the achievement of some aim over which other men are ready to kill
them.'' Most Americans are never called to endure this fearful struggle.
Veterans Day salutes the 28 million people for whom the call came, and honors
those who died in the country's wars.

In times of peace, the sacrifice of those who secured it becomes easy to take
for granted. With the volunteer army, the rigors of warfare seem even more
remote for most young Americans. All the more reason to keep in mind those who
bore the consequences when diplomacy failed, even in peacetime. During this
Administration, American troops have been under fire in Lebanon, Grenada and
Libya. Sailors at this hour are in danger in the Persian Gulf.

Vietnam veterans know the bitterness of fighting in an unpopular war. The scars
are now slowly healing as they receive more generous recognition. To prevent
future Vietnams, Congress has tried to close the hiatus in the constitutional
authority to commit troops to battle. But the War Powers Act of 1973 has so far
proved a pitiful Band-Aid. The Framers appointed the President as Commander in
Chief, and gave Congress the power to raise armies and declare war. But
Presidents have often refused to share responsibility, and Congress has been too
ready to let Presidents get into war alone, then criticize if things go wrong.
Presidents have used force abroad in some 200 incidents since 1787, yet Congress
has formally declared war only five times.

The War Powers Act aimed to restore the shared responsibility by having the
President report to Congress when he has placed American troops in imminent
danger, and to withdraw them in 60 days unless Congress approves. But Mr.
Reagan, like his predecessors, has evaded the act, declaring it an
unconstitutional limit on executive power, and Congress has once again failed to
enforce it.

If Americans are to risk their lives to preserve their system of government, it
should be as the Constitution requires, under the shared responsibility of the
President and Congress. If the War Powers Act cannot work as envisaged, then
some better remedy is needed to insure that any future hostility is the shared
intent of President and Congress, and that its veterans are heroes of an
undisputed cause.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Big Congressional War Powers Surrender

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 612 words


To the Editor:

In ''Missing the Point on War Powers'' (Op-Ed, Oct. 28), Representative Stephen
J. Solarz has unwittingly given us a clear example of how the War Powers
Resolution should not be used - namely, as a legal instrument to bestow on the
Administration after-the-fact Congressional blessings for a still questionable
and highly debatable military policy. This contradicts the spirit of the
resolution and all it was meant to achieve by reducing Congress to a rubber
stamp for policies it had no role in formulating.

The initial goal of the resolution was to restore some semblance of the
constitutionally intended balance between the executive and the legislature in
foreign relations. It is a balance that has been all but lost to the
ever-expanding foreign-policy apparatus within the executive branch of the
United States Government.

The paradox of the War Powers Resolution, however, is that contrary to popular
belief, it did not restore power to the Legislature but gave tacit approval - in
the form of a 60-day grace period - to Presidential claims of sole authority to
undertake military initiatives.

This superconstitutional power to commit United States troops without a
Congressional declaration of war is contrary to Alexander Hamilton's description
of Presidential power as consisting of ''only the occasional command of such
part of the militia of the nation as by legislative provision may be called into
the actual service of the union.''

Inherent in these words is the concept that Congress should be involved at the
beginning of the decision-making process - not somewhere in the middle. The War
Powers Resolution, by asking only that a President consult Congress when
possible (which usually means telling a few senators what he has made up his
mind to do), has reduced the role of Congress to one of ''advice and consent''
in an area where it was to take the lead.

Then, after 60 days (not 90 days, as Mr. Solarz states), with American lives and
prestige firmly on the line, Congress is to decide whether or not to pull the
plug. Mr. Solarz, using a phrase that has an eerily familiar ring, feels that
most legislators will decide - as he has in the case of our Persian Gulf
operation - to ''stay the course.'' This was not only the rationale behind our
continued presence in Vietnam, but was also behind the Congressional extension
that kept our Marines in Lebanon after the War Powers clock ran out. It was
during this extension that 250 of our servicemen lost their lives.

For this very reason, Representative Solarz suggests, the President need not
fear the War Powers Resolution. History has shown us that Congress is too
spineless to vote against supporting our already committed forces - even if it
has serious doubts about the policy's wisdom.

This makes the War Powers Resolution a potential all-purpose Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution, prematurely binding Congress to a military action when it may need
to keep its options open. Options, such as Congressional power of the purse, are
difficult to consider when you are on record as supporting another course. When
American lives begin to be lost, legislators inevitably become caught between
their vote and growing dissent among their constituencies.

All this does not seem to bother Representative Solarz, perhaps because he
supports the Administration's Persian Gulf policy. Would he, however, be as
generous if the President decided to use his 60 days, granted under the War
Powers Resolution, to make his case in Central America by sending American
troops there?

PATRICIA M. RAVALGI
Program Associate
Council on Foreign Relations
  Washington, Oct. 29, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A Time to Recognize Women Are Veterans Too

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 441 words


To the Editor:

You report that the Federal Commission on Fine Arts has rejected a plan to add a
statue of a woman to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington that would
honor nurses and other women who served in the Vietnam War (Oct. 25). J. Carter
Brown, chairman of the commission and director of the National Gallery of Art,
you state [in early edition], ''said the Commission members felt that the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial is complete as it is,'' and that ''the statue of a
woman would open the door to others seeking added representation for their
ethnic group or military specialty.''

This is an insult to the women of all the services. Women are not an ''ethnic''
or ''specialty'' group. Male statues do not represent the 10,000 women who
served in Vietnam nor the many thousands of women who have served in every one
of this country's wars, notably (in uniform and under combat conditions), the
Civil War, World War I, World War II, the Korean War and, of course, the Vietnam
War. Nor does there appear to be a concern that male statues may ''open the
door'' to demands of ''others seeking added representation for their ethnic
group or military speciality.'' The argument is specious, and it is specifically
sexist.

In 1943, as a lieutenant - then a designated ''relative rank'' - in the United
States Army Nurse Corps, I fought for officer status for male registered nurses,
who were at that time not allowed to hold a rank above that of sergeant. It
seems that all nurses were then considered to be subservient members of the
Medical Corps.

This feeling is apparently still around. It therefore should be of little wonder
that the American Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars and other veterans'
organizations appear to have so few active female members. It is, however,
eminently notable that the Vietnam Veterans of America have chosen for 1987-88 a
woman to be their national commander, a nurse from the Vietnam era!

It is, perhaps, unfortunate that the movement to add a female figure to the
Vietnam War memorial was initiated by a nurse. This may obscure the fact that
all specialties in the services have increasingly been shared by both sexes.
Note the retired female admiral who developed computer science in the Armed
Forces and the many female flyers ferrying bombers.

As long as males downgrade the contributions of women in the services - in the
same ''military specialties'' as men - many of the veterans' organizations will
continue to be almost exclusively male clubs in their communities. It is time
that we recognize that women are veterans too!

BARBARA L. SHAY
North Adams, Mass., Oct. 28, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Lest We Forget

BYLINE: By Michael Norman; Michael Norman is writing a book on his comrades who
fought in Vietnam. This article is adapted from his introduction to another
book, ''The Wall: Images and Offerings From the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.''

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 696 words


They walk as if on hallowed ground. They touch the stone and speak with the
dead. They come to mourn and to remember - an old ritual made new, creating in
this time another timeless moment.

Seeing this, coming upon it at dawn or in the melancholy drizzle of a winter
solstice, it is hard to remember that no one is buried there, that the long
chevron of black granite is a memorial, not a sprawling cairn on a common grave.

The Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., is a sad place -there is no
denying that. It is especially sad for the volunteers and luckless conscripts
who survived the war - men like me, trying to make sense of the senseless,
trying to find a way to remember that will not mock the meaning of the dead.

Some men who cross the years and struggle home say they need no memorial to keep
alive the memory of those cut down beside them. This is true. And yet I am
pleased to see it there stretched out a stone's throw from the Potomac, there
where Lincoln talks of the dead to ''us, the living.''

The memorial is a way back and a way forward. A walk along ''the wall'' makes us
think of the future in the language of the past and, whatever message one draws
from this, it seems unlikely that anyone who makes that walk will be able to
think of war and the men who fight it in quite the same way again.

Gold Star mothers look for the names of their sons, young children the names of
their fathers. Friends and family come, a second cousin from Calumet, a
classmate from Iowa City. Generations pass by the wall, one too young to have
known the war, another too old to have fought it. Tourists come by the busload.
Solitary figures come, standing silently off to one side.

And then there are the veterans. Almost always they weep. Oh, how we weep,
''cursing and sobbing and thinking of the dead,'' wrote Robert Graves.

We mourn the many, we mourn the one, perhaps the first man we saw fall, perhaps
the friend who took our place on a patrol. I have such a name: Panel 50 east,
line 52, Andrew James Payne Jr., a member of Charlie Squad, first platoon, Golf
Company, Second Battalion, 9th Marines, killed April 19, 1968.

Jim had grown up in the sun - red hair, freckles, a mouth full of gleaming white
teeth. He had a paper route and sold road flares and Styrofoam snowmen at
Christmas. He studied at Hoover High, drove a black Ford jalopy and lived on
Thompson Street in Glendale, Calif., with three brothers and a sister.

He was killed on the morning of a hot day on a dusty road near Khe Sanh, shot in
the stomach by an enemy he could not see. He sat in the sun against a rock
bleeding to death while his comrades tried to finish the fight. He may have died
for his country or for his God or for nothing at all.

Today, Veterans Day, is the fifth anniversary of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
Looking back across the five years and all that has been said and written about
that spectral place, the first description of the memorial, the words of the
designer, Maya Lin, seem most apt. She said she wanted to create a journey, a
passage - and indeed she has.

To follow the wall from ground level to its vertex is to walk into the past. As
the long polished panels reflect those that move before them, the names of the
past become etched on the faces of the present and, for a moment, the living and
the dead are one.

To go to the wall is thus to be a part of history, ''to mingle,'' as Stephen
Crane wrote, ''in one of those great affairs of the earth.'' Perhaps this is
part of the memorial's appeal: For the uninitiated, it is a way to get a sense
of an experience they have only read about or have seen flickering on a small
screen. But it is also more than this because the wall has brought war home in a
way television never could. Here is the mystery of death writ in stone 58,156
times. For the living, the mystery was never more palpable.

To touch the wall is to touch the dead, to get close to them. And as those who
never knew war make the crossing and come close to those taken by it, they begin
to understand Vietnam and thus honor the generation of veterans who survived the
war. We have never asked for more than that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
Ere Virtue Ruled

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 754 words


Of the many amazing things about the latest Supreme Court fiasco, the most
amazing is the revelation that there are grown-up people in the United States
who have never smoked marijuana. A number of mildly notorious persons, including
some of the Presidential yearners, have, in fact, seized this occasion to
announce that they have never smoked marijuana.

This raises plenty of questions for them to answer in their next television
show, such as, ''Why weren't you in Vietnam?'' and ''Do you think this country
is ready for a President without enough curiosity to wonder what his children
see in that stuff?''

Do you sense that I am reluctant to get to the point? Very well. Yes, friends,
all this is a prelude to confession. We live in a macabre age this year. Has the
public demand for moral purity ever been more rampant? Or the moral purity more
fraudulent? Or the insistence on public confession of sin more oppressive?
Surely, not since Stalin's purge trials of the 1930's.

But Stalin's secret police, who hounded confessions out of the poor wretches to
be shot, were not under constant pressure to step forward themselves and
confess, as American journalists are today. In the present miserable age, the
journalist hounding public men to make a clean breast of their vileness is
himself constantly pressed to do the same.

Reveal the truth about Candidate Blah - that he likes adultery, or skims the
petty-cash box, or cheated on a college ethics exam - and you are immediately
expected to disclose your own record on adultery, or handling of office funds,
or respecting your college honor code.

All right, enough dawdling. I'll give it to you straight from the shoulder. I
once smoked marijuana. Here is the whole disgusting story.

It was done in the 1960's, late 1960's. Can't remember the exact date. All those
years run together: people screaming and waving placards, everybody in so much
hair they looked right out of a Lon Chaney Jr. ''Wolf Man'' movie.

It was back when people still called it ''pot,'' but it must have been on the
time cusp between ''pot'' and ''grass,'' because I recall saying ''pot'' one
night to a mother of four who was in touch with her children, and she, without
actually saying that I was out of date, told me so by calling it ''grass'' in
her reply.

It was the year when parents tried to be ''in touch with their children,'' which
meant not yelling at them to get a bath and a haircut and to stop playing the
Victrola at wake-the-dead settings. Whatever year that was.

So a friend gave me these two cigarettes already rolled, looking something like
the roll-your-owns Uncle Charlie used to make with Bull Durham, only skinnier. I
will not reveal the friend's name, even if the committee threatens to send me
over for contempt of Congress, but he was not Three Finger Brown or anybody else
major in crime circles.

He had asked, ''Would you like to try some?'' Absolutely, I said. I'd begun to
think nobody would ever ask. I'd begun to feel like a wallflower at the senior
prom. Everybody else was apparently doing the stuff. It was the year you ''did
some grass.'' I wanted to know what it was all about, but until now everybody
had treated me like old folks, too old to be admitted to the group.

In a state of high excitement, I went to a private room and locked the door to
do the felonious deed. Once I do this, I told myself, I will probably never be
the same again. It was not the prospect of becoming a criminal that thrilled me;
it was the fear that I might experience sensations so astoundingly delightful
that I would be unable ever again to live without marijuana. A hopeless slave to
weedy ecstasy: did I dare risk it?

I lit the thing and inhaled, as directed in popular literature. The effect was
not instant. That disappointed me. As a serious martini drinker, I liked the
quick blow to the back of the head you get from gin and vermouth. Marijuana's
failure to produce it made me wonder if children didn't overrate it.

It smelled nasty, too. Like a hamper of dirty gym socks. I finished the first
smoke and lit the second. The fantastically heightened sensitivity to color,
sound and touch, which was supposed to delight me, did not occur. Just a mild
dulling of the mind, like the effect of Scotch whiskey, a drink I use to put
myself to sleep. Sleepy was all I felt now, and I slept well.

Later someone said I hadn't got ''the good stuff.'' I urged him to try a
martini, and he shrank back in horror. The kid didn't even know what ''good
stuff'' was.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
Scenes at the Vietnam Memorial

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 82 words


Rain-soaked combat boots lined up yesterday at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
The boots symbolize missing servicemen and were left from a rally over the
weekend. At right, Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel helping a visitor to the
memorial find a name on the monument. Mr. Hodel, a computer enthusiast, wanted
to try out the computerized catalogue, installed last spring, that directs a
visitor to the location on the monument where a specified name may be located.
(NYT/Paul Hosefros)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Weather Keeps Attendance Down at Veterans Day Parade

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 43 words


Ron Hagell, in beard, marching yesterday with the Manhattan chapter of the
Vietnam Veterans of America during the Veterans Day Parade on Fifth Avenue.
Rain, sleet and subfreezing temperatures kept the number of marchers to 1,000.
(NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A Day to Skid, Shiver and Await Winter

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 758 words


A fast-moving medley of snow, sleet and rain blustered up the East Coast
yesterday, disrupting travel and social schedules, playing havoc with Veterans
Day parades and sending shivering pedestrians to their closets for warmer
clothes.

With a total of 11 inches of snow in Washington, 6 in the Berkshires in
Massachusetts, 3 in Hopatcong, N.J., and half an inch in Manhattan, thousands of
people wondered if winter had arrived six weeks early. The National Weather
Service said it was the earliest snowfall of at least half an inch in New York
City since 1952.

''This is like Siberia,'' said Trooper Joseph Perechinsky at the State Police
barracks in Towanda, Pa. #6 Die in Car Accidents At least six people were killed
in automobile accidents in the Northeast, and in New York City half a dozen
major roads were blocked by accidents during the morning rush. Officials said
the only factor that kept the lines of cars from growing longer was that many
commuters stayed home for the Veterans Day holiday.

To clear streets when slush turned to ice, the New York City Sanitation
Department called in 800 workers on overtime. In Baltimore and Richmond,
highways were closed while crews poured sand and salt on bridges and overpasses.

Two inches of early-morning snow in the Washington area, where temperatures had
soared to 72 on Monday, blanketed Arlington National Cemetery and the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, where Veterans Day activities were scheduled.

Nancy Reagan, the First Lady, canceled a trip to Manhattan because of the storm.
''She's very disappointed,'' said Mrs. Reagan's spokeswoman, Elaine Crispen.

Mrs. Reagan had planned to attend a piano concert at Carnegie Hall by Vladimir
Feltsman.

A Frigid Veterans Parade

People were not the only ones delayed by the weather. A rehearsal-bound caravan
of camels, sheep, donkeys and horse - the supporting cast of ''The Magnificent
Christmas Spectacular'' at Radio City Music Hall -kept a 72-member cast of
Rockettes, elves and, of course, Santa waiting for two hours.

''Stuck in traffic,'' said a Radio City spokeswoman, Ellen Schiebelhuth. The
show opens tomorrow.

Fewer than 1,000 marchers braved the bad weather to join Mayor Koch at the
Veterans Day parade, sponsored by the American Legion. The Mayor walked the
length of the parade route, starting at 39th Street and Fifth Avenue and
finishing in front of the Eternal Light monument at 24th Street. Throughout the
ceremony at the monument, he and other dignitaries remained standing, avoiding
ice-covered chairs.

For those who just had to go out, the going was rough. Arutiun Papazian, a
pianist who lives in Fort Lee, N.J., made it to a noon radio broadcast in
Manhattan just 30 seconds before air time. He blamed the close call on car
trouble, but not the usual kind.

''My car looked like it had a cover of ice on it,'' he said. ''I got the key in
but just couldn't open the door. Then I called for a cab, which was late because
they were busy because of the weather.''

Others watched their step on icy streets. ''I wish I had shoes without holes in
them,'' said Ilene Rosenzweig, a 22-year-old secretary at Columbia Pictures in
Manhattan. She said her outfit had been ruined by what she called ''a very
inconsiderate bus driver.''

''Now my black pants are slush-brown polka-dot and don't match the rest of my
outfit, which is plaid,'' she said.

The bad weather was the result of not one storm, but two. Tom Grant, a
forecaster at the National Weather Service's office in Rockefeller Center, said
the first storm roared through late Tuesday. The second formed early yesterday,
higher up in the atmosphere, where the air was chillier.

As it whizzed up the East Coast, it slowed things down on the ground. Between
5:15 and 6:15 A.M. yesterday, accidents effectively shut six major roads leading
into New York City. The City Traffic Commissioner, Michael Horodniceanu, said
the trouble started when a tractor-trailer flipped over on the Triborough Bridge
at 5:15 A.M.

At 5:30 another tractor-trailer accident blocked the southbound Bruckner
Expressway, setting off a nine-car accident that turned the Bruckner into a
mile-long parking lot for much of the morning. Officials said the evening rush
was heavier than usual but went relatively smoothly.

For others who stood in long lines at garages, snow tires on their minds, it was
an almost inconceivable day.

''Sunday, we were out playing volleyball,'' said Dan Sites, the manager of
Eddie's Tire Outlet in Chambersburg, Pa., ''and now we're shoveling snow.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of women cleaning snow off her car (NYT/Edward Hausne)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

For Homeless Veterans, New Shelter Brings Pride

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 740 words


For Ronald Saladino, an unemployed electrician and a resident of the city's
first shelter for homeless veterans, it is the comradeship, the ''buddy system''
as he calls it, that keeps him from feeling he has hit bottom.

''We learned in the service that you watch each other's back,'' said Mr.
Saladino, a 41-year-old former Transit Authority electrician and a former
resident of the American air base at Da Nang in what was then South Vietnam.
''Rather than being at bottom, here there is pride. There is unity.''

In a bold experiment, the Koch administration, working with the Salvation Army,
has set aside a new city shelter in Queens exclusively for homeless veterans,
with the hope that it can make a difference in their lives.

At present, the shelter houses 100 veterans, with the number scheduled to rise
to 275 in the next few weeks. It can accommodate a maximum of 400 in emergency
situations.

Regaining Self-Respect

Yesterday, as Mayor Koch and representatives of veterans groups arrived to
dedicate the shelter, at 21-10 Borden Avenue in Long Island City, the men who
live there talked about their battles for survival.

Although the experiment is only a few days old, many say they are feeling new
self-respect that they lost in the vast unfriendly and occasionally dangerous
barracks-style shelters run by the city.

''As soon as I walked in here, I felt as if there was a weight taken off my
back,'' said Andrew Rivera, 48, a former computer programmer and former member
of the 82d Airborne Division. ''When I walked into a city shelter in Brooklyn, I
thought I was in an insane asylum.''

The difference, the residents say, is accounted for, in part, by the shelter
itself - a freshly painted, well lighted former factory building, run by an
attentive staff - and in part by echoes of shared military discipline from years
gone by.

Alfred Evans, a 44-year-old combat veteran who keeps his four bronze stars and
other medals with him, said the shelter was paradise compared with other
shelters he has slept in.

''Vietnam vets can relate to each other,'' he said, ''We can kick it around.
There is a funny thing about veterans. There is a closeness there. It is like
being in the service again.''

But as they talked in the cafeteria lounge and made a list of demands to present
to the city, there was anger too. There were no representatives of the Veterans
Administration at the shelter, no job program in place and no way for the public
to tap their ''reservoir of talent.''

If only the city would turn over vacant buildings to them, they said, they could
build their own housing, said Cecil Libert, who has held and lost a series of
government jobs since his discharge from the Air Force in 1960.

A Question From Koch

Robert Hugee, 41, another combat veteran, said, ''We want to make sure we are
steering our own boat.''

After listening to their pleas, Councilman Abraham G. Gerges, a Brooklyn
Democrat who played a key role in the establishment of the shelter, said that he
would try to link individual veterans with construction jobs, but that they were
unlikely to get their own project.

Mayor Koch toured the building and interviewed four veterans.

''Anyone looking for a job?'' he asked.

''Everyone's looking for a job,'' said Jesse Graham, a Vietnam-era Army veteran
who has been homeless much of the last two years.

Mr. Koch then announced that within the week, a city employment program would be
moved into the shelter and that he expected veterans to be given priority in
other programs that prepare homeless people for jobs.

''Of all the people we have to take care of,'' he said, ''at the top of the list
are the veterans.''

City officials estimate that of the 10,000 homeless men in the shelter system,
between 2,500 and 3,000 are veterans.

Mr. Libert said that among these veterans, the feeling of camaraderie went
beyond common military experiences. ''We have all been through the job market,''
he said. ''We have all had our trials and tribulations, not only in Vietnam but
with the society. As nice as this place is, most of us really want to be in a
different situation.''

The shelter is a vast room divided into clusters of about a dozen beds separated
by five-foot high cinder block walls. Each section is color coded, and the men
said they were issued color-coded identification bands they can wear on their
wrists.

''Its my red badge of courage,'' Mr. Saladino said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of homeless veterans (NYT/Barton Silverman)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Book Awards Are Pondered

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 380 words


Although the literary and publishing communities have had two days to recover
from the surprise of seeing ''Paco's Story'' win the 1987 National Book Award
for fiction, they continue to express astonishment that the novel by Larry
Heinemann beat the widely celebrated and praised novels by Toni Morrison and
Philip Roth.

''Everybody and their brother thought Toni Morrison was going to win it,'' said
Gerald Howard, executive editor of Penguin, which published the paperback
edition of ''Paco's Story'' just this week. ''I did, too, but I thought 'Paco's
Story' was going to be a distant second.''

''Paco's Story,'' which was published in hard cover by Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
tells the story of Paco Sullivan, a badly wounded Vietnam veteran, trying to
readjust to civilian life.

Several publishing officials said the award to Mr. Heinemann was good for the
National Book Awards precisely because of its unpredictability.

Gloria Naylor, one of the three judges on the fiction panel, suggested that the
element of surprise was inherent in judging good writing. ''If the award was not
predictable,'' she said yesterday, ''that's because literature isn't
predictable.''

Hilma Wolitzer, chairman of the three-judge fiction panel, repeated yesterday
what she said Monday night at the awards ceremony about the panel's efforts to
pick a winner. ''There was passion and it was agonizing, and it went down to the
wire,'' she said, ''but the winner was decided by majority vote.''

Ms. Naylor and Richard Eder, the other fiction judge, said on Monday night that
they had voted for only two books. There was wide speculation in literary
circles yesterday as to what the other book was.

''A fair number of people have asked me,'' Ms. Naylor said. ''Some have been
overt and several have tried sneaky ways.'' But Ms. Naylor, who won a National
Book Award for fiction in 1983, insisted she had taken a ''blood oath'' not to
reveal the name. Both of the other judges similarly declined to name the
runner-up.

The other nominees, in addition to ''Beloved'' by Ms. Morrison (Alfred A. Knopf)
and ''The Counterlife,'' by Mr. Roth (Farrar, Straus & Giroux), were ''The
Northern Lights'' by Howard Norman (Summit Books) and ''That Night'' by Alice
McDermott (Farrar, Straus & Giroux).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Ballet: Joffrey In 'Clowns'

BYLINE: By ANNA KISSELGOFF

SECTION: Section C; Page 32, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 850 words


WELL, you can go home again. The Joffrey Ballet took one of its biggest gambles
Tuesday night by reviving ''The Clowns,'' a much-talked-about work created by
Gerald Arpino in 1968 and one that seemed inextricably tied to the Ghost of the
Joffrey Past.

With its antiwar message, its disregard of the pure-dance esthetics dominant at
the time, its once-novel theatricality and its cheeky appeal to popularity in
downplaying dancing in favor of visual symbols that everyone could understand,
''The Clowns'' succeeded originally on its self-defined terms.

To bring it back now for the first time since 1975 to the scene of its early
triumph, at the City Center (131 West 55th Street), was to turn the nostalgia
clock back. Two ballets epitomized the new spirit of dance as incarnated by the
company in the turmoil of the 1960's. One was Robert Joffrey's own ''Astarte''
in 1967, a psychedelic mix of sex, rock and film. The other was ''The Clowns,''
an anti-bomb parable that also used mixed-media but harked back as well to more
timeless circus imagery.

In truth, ''The Clowns'' was not heavy on the brain. But it was well done. After
the Vietnam War, the Joffrey, like society around it, went on to other concerns.
Mr. Joffrey, the company's artistic director, turned toward reviving a series of
major 20th- century classics, and Mr. Arpino, the associate director, became the
sophisticated choreographer he was not quite in 1968.

''The Clowns'' is not the work of a mature artist. And yet today its natural
simplicity is its saving grace. It is not a piece to see repeatedly. But in all
frankness, one had to admit that it was good to see it again. ''The Clowns'' has
a certain innocent charm, and it works on two levels -as a Joffrey period piece
and, surprisingly, as a born-again novelty.

Now that the ''dance theater'' genre has been reinvented, especially by European
and Japanese experimental choreographers, Mr. Arpino fits right in. He was there
first, of course. But like the Butoh choreographers, he uses a theme of cyclical
apocalypse and rebirth, and, like the Eureopeans, he sees civilization as the
corrupting force.

Civilization is symbolized by technology in ''The Clowns,'' and more
specifically by plastic - plastic pillows, plastic tubes and, finally, the large
plastic glob that engulfs all the clowns on stage except for the hero.

In this revival the Pierrot destined to relive nuclear disaster and yet
symbolizing hope through his purity is the young Edward Stierle. Unlike Robert
Blankshine, the role's originator, he is childlike and touching rather than an
artificial player on the world's stage. We feel the hurt when the other clowns
turn mean and torment him. The surprise is how much dancing Mr. Arpino includes
in his role. Like Mr. Blankshine, he is a brilliant virtuoso, although different
in quality.

Unfortunately, a few technical malfunctions detracted from the total theatrical
effect. When Mr. Stierle came out trailing a plastic tube, it failed to inflate;
the ''bomb,'' however, mushroomed a bit too early.

A greeting-card allegory about human nature, ''The Clowns'' has some pungent
direct images - the dummies that fall initially from the sky to the whistle of
bombs, the revival of life as heard through Hershy Kay's score and the circus
tricks of the individual clowns, the heartlessness of Tina LeBlanc's female
clown, the mayhem of the ensemble until Mr. Stierle is left alone, as he was at
the start. Allan Lewis conducted.

Miss LeBlanc, partnered beautifully by Glenn Edgerton, was the ballerina in
another revival on this all-Arpino program. This was ''L'Air d'Esprit,'' created
in 1973 in tribute to the Russian ballerina, Olga Spessivtzeva.

The pas de deux alludes to the ballerina's purity as a classical dancer,
especially in Romantic ballet, but its offbeat partnering also recalls that she
worked primarily in a time of feverish experimentalism in the 1920's.

The most striking partnering images have Miss LeBlanc poised on Mr. Edgerton's
nape, both dancers spreading their wings, so to speak. Poised in flight or about
to take off? This aerial metaphor, so congenial to Romantic ballet, is captured
beautifully and succinctly here. The music is by the composer of ''Giselle,''
Adolphe Adam.

Miss LeBlanc's dancing this season is a wonder. The fact that her physique is
the opposite of Spessivtzeva's is irrelevant. The Joffrey is testimony to the
triumphant revenge of its short and anti-anorexic ballerinas. One doubts there
will be any more poetic moment in dance this season than the sight of Miss
LeBlanc in the ''courru'' of her solo here - an extraordinarily fast and light
scurry on toe across the floor.

The program was completed by ''Light Rain,'' seen on opening night, and ''Round
of Angels,'' led by Leslie Carothers and Ashley Wheater as if they were on an
assignment. Surrounded by a circle of five broken-winged male angels as Mahler's
Adagietto seeped into the atmosphere, the purported lovers seemed more concerned
with getting through it all than with projecting the steaminess implied in the
choreography.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Informer at Westies Trial Admits Frequent Lies Under Oath

BYLINE: By JESUS RANGEL

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 367 words


A convicted killer who turned informer at the racketeering trial of several
members of a West Side gang testified under cross-examination yesterday that he
had frequently lied to authorities, even under oath.

His admissions, defense lawyers said, helped support their contention that the
witness, Francis (Mickey) Featherstone, is a ''paranoid killer'' who cannot be
believed.

Mr. Featherstone told a jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan that he made
his living from loan-sharking, gambling, selling drugs and other crimes as the
No. 2 man in the gang, called the Westies.

Eight members of the gang are charged with committing several murders and other
violent crimes to control the Hell's Kitchen area of the West Side of Manhattan.

After contradicting himself several times about his testimony in previous murder
trials, Mr. Featherstone admitted lying numerous times to doctors, to
law-enforcement authorities, to judges trying his cases and to grand juries.

'I'm Telling the Truth'

''Is there any way to tell when you're telling the truth and when you're
lying?'' asked Gerald L. Shargel, the lawyer for James Coonan, the main
defendant and the leader of the Westies.

''Right now, I'm telling the truth; that's all I can say,'' Mr. Featherstone
replied.

These were among the lies Mr. Featherstone said he had told:

* Telling doctors that he was insane during one of his murder trials, in 1970.

* Telling doctors and law-enforcement authorities that he often heard voices
telling him to go back to Vietnam. Mr. Featherstone has testified that he served
in the Army in Vietnam.

* Telling a judge in his 1971 counterfeiting trial that he got up in the middle
of the night and tried to choke his wife because he thought she was a North
Vietnamese agent.

* Saying he cut off ears of prisoners in Vietnam and witnessed tortures there
while also saying he did not dismember bodies as part of the Westies gang
because it made him ''sick.''

''So you took a little bit of truth and sprinkle a few lies in order to confuse
and deceive the person listening?'' Mr. Shargel asked. ''Yes,'' Mr. Featherstone
replied. The witness is expected to continue his cross-examination today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 14, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Richard Rhodes and the Bomb

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 849 words


It took Richard Rhodes five years to research and write ''The Making of the
Atomic Bomb'' - or two years longer than it took the nuclear scientists in New
Mexico to make the bomb that was dropped on Hiroshima.

The literary payload for all that effort was delivered this week for the
50-year-old writer from Kansas City, Kan., when he won the $10,000 National Book
Award for the best nonfiction work of the year from a jury of critics and
fellow-authors.

The journey for Mr. Rhodes's book could be considered even a longer one. It
might be said to have begun in his college years at Yale in the 1950's, when he
took a course linking the humanities and physics that was popularly known as
''physics for poets.'' He did not realize it at the time, but that planted the
atomic seeds far in the back of his mind.

There came the time later when he worked as a publicity writer for Hallmark
Cards in Kansas City, Mo., for eight years. He turned out sales bulletins, a
daily paper for the staff, and eventually edited a line of greeting cards.

Mr. Rhodes did a stint in the Air Force, working as a surgical assistant, which
formed the background for one of his four novels, ''Holy Secret.'' Afterward, he
taught for a year at Westminster College, in Fulton, Mo.

Magazine Writing and Fiction

He felt confident enough to turn to writing full-time in 1970, producing
articles for many of the major national magazines and also fiction on various
themes. Then, ''The Making of the Atomic Bomb'' started to creep up on him.

''In 1976, I received a Guggenheim to write a novel set in Los Alamos,'' Mr.
Rhodes said. ''I found that I couldn't quite bring it off. I thought that the
right way to tell the story would be factually. The making of the bomb is a
story on the scale of Moby Dick. I don't see much of a difference between
writing fiction and fact except, of course, that fact has to be documented.''

Mr. Rhodes said that he also had a ''literary reason'' for undertaking such a
complex scientific story in the 1980's - even following the 300 books and
memoirs that had already appeared on the same general subject and some four
decades after John Hersey's ''Hiroshima.''

''It's a great theme: mankind on his own destruction,'' he said. ''As a writer,
I was interested in taking on something of this scale and seeing what I could do
with it. After all the research material in the National Archives, and documents
I obtained under the Freedom of Information Act, sometimes I felt that it was
like trying to build the Sistine Chapel in mosaic, a bit at a time.''

During a talk in New York before returning to Kansas City, Mr. Rhodes was
wearing a green shirt, matching green pocket handkerchief and blue tie - with a
brass tie tack that read ''Nagasaki,'' given out by the town's Mayor as a
souvenir. That small touch spelled the passage of nuclear time.

A Secret Instruction Manual

Researching the world of the atomic bomb opened up new areas of thought for him,
he said. One of the documents he happened to be carrying with him was ''The Los
Alamos Primer,'' a then-secret bomb manual that had been put together in 1943 by
Robert Serber, a physicist at Los Alamos, to instruct experts in various
disciplines.

''The Reagan Administration is somewhat paranoid about disclosing secrets,'' he
said. ''It was denied to me but I was able to get a copy from a physics
professor who teaches from the declassified manual quite openly. It's a
historical document - and anyway you can't build a bomb with it.''

A grant enabled him to get the feel of many of the locales and sites where the
physicists and other workers on the project, many of them Jewish refugees from
Hitler's Germany and Austria and Mussolini's Italy, had once lived and worked.
Several of these refugees provided the theoretical basis for the development of
the bomb. Besides Hiroshima and Nagasaki, he visited Berlin, Copenhagen, the
Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge, England, Oak Ridge, Tenn., and Los Alamos,
N.M.

Mr. Rhodes said that he had explored a small Swedish village where two Austrian
Jewish physicists, Lisa Meitner and Otto Frisch, had been on vacation in 1938.
There, they had first come to the realization that an atomic bomb could be
devised from uranium. ''Across the river I saw a 14th-century fortress
brooding,'' he said. ''It was a martial image that turned the quiet village into
a symbolic warlike site.''

After having journeyed in his 886-page book into the very core of the doomsday
weapon, Mr. Rhodes maintained a surprising air of optimism. ''Science handed the
major countries a poisoned apple, they ate it, and it soured the whole
situation,'' he said. ''The United States and the Soviet Union are now
absolutely dependent upon each other. Both are afraid of accidents. It has
changed the notion of sovereignty - both sides now engage in overflights of each
other's territory. As we learned in Vietnam, the U. S. would rather lose a war
than let the genie out of the bottle.

''The nation-states are slowly being forced to give up war. The bomb has
permanently altered the world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard Rhodes (NYT/Lori Grinker)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 14, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
A Necessary War

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 631 words



THE KOREAN WAR. By Max Hastings. 389 pages. Simon & Schuster. $22.95.

''If the Korean War was a frustrating, profoundly unsatisfactory experience,
more than 35 years later it still seems a struggle that the West was utterly
right to fight.''

So Max Hastings concludes his admirable history of that war. Coming after
''Overlord,'' his brilliant account of D-Day and the Normandy campaign, this
book establishes him as one of the leading British military historians.

Into it has gone a great deal of research, including hundreds of interviews with
survivors, military and civilian, of that war. It contains, too, a brisk and
informative summary of the history of Korea that does much to explain the
emergence to power of Kim Il Sung in the North and Dr. Syngman Rhee in the
South, each a tyrant under his system. The author depicts with care and
appreciation the plight of the tens of thousands of South Koreans made homeless
by the fighting and striving desperately to reach the safety of the allied
lines.

Mr. Hastings, in my opinion rightly, is very tough on the performance of the
American Army in the early phase of the war. The original force was ferried over
from Japan after the North Koreans struck in June 1950. The effectiveness of the
troops had been sapped by years of easy occupation duty. They were unable to
offer effective resistance to the fanatic North Korean units pouring across the
frontier.

The author makes the point that similar conclusions were reached by American
officers, including John (Iron Mike) Michaelis, one of the best combat
commanders the conflict produced.

The treatment of Gen. Douglas MacArthur is balanced. There is very little new in
the account of the triumph at Inchon, his subsequent reverses or his final
removal by President Truman. But there is a penetrating analysis of the general.

''MacArthur's role in the Korean War can be viewed as a tragedy,'' Mr. Hastings
writes, ''or as a case history of the overmighty subject in a democratic
society, or as an example of unchallenged military authority leading to
megalomania. But it is not enough merely to paint a portrait of an aging general
ruling a Byzantine court in postwar Tokyo and to argue that his nature and
behavior made all that followed inevitable. There was a greatness about
MacArthur which all his own efforts from the autumn of 1950 until his death have
been unable to destroy.''

Some may criticize Mr. Hastings for devoting considerable space to the exploits
of the Commonwealth Division, particularly its long, vain, brave fight on the
Imjin River. But he is British and Americans can be justly charged with paying
scant attention to the British role in Korea or, in fact, to the part Britain
played in World War II.

High and deserved tribute is paid to the transformation in allied morale and
effectiveness that followed the replacement of MacArthur by Gen. Matthew B.
Ridgway. As an American officer said at the time, ''MacArthur was interested in
MacArthur and history; Ridgway was interested in stopping the Commies.''

Slowly the line was stabilized. The Chinese, after their initial advances,
encountered the devastating effect of American artillery fire. A quarter of a
century later, senior officers who had been junior lieutenants in Korea
remembered how that fire had paralyzed movement and broken up attack after
attack. From that point all roads led to the peace table at Panmunjom.

The book explains much. For example, it explains why the Army entered the
Vietnam War supremely confident of its ability to defeat a handful of ill-armed
''gooks'' with superior firepower and modern technology. It explains, too, why,
despite all the cruelties Syngman Rhee's regime inflicted on the South Korean
people, the war was one that had to be fought.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Max Hastings (Ken Mason)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

In Afghan King, a Soft Voice for a Soviet Pullout

BYLINE: By ROBERTO SURO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 841 words

DATELINE: ROME, Nov. 14


After 14 years of quiet exile, the king of Afghanistan, Mohammad Zahir Shah, has
emerged as a key figure in efforts to negotiate a Soviet withdrawal from his
country.

In Moscow, at the United Nations and in the refugee camps in Pakistan, the
73-year-old King is being promoted as the possible leader of a government to
oversee an end to Soviet occupation and a transition to independence.

Living in near-seclusion on the outskirts of Rome, King Mohammad Zahir is a
soft-spoken man who finds himself walking a diplomatic tightrope.

With his re-emergence have come competing claims from tribal leaders,
superpowers and would-be mediators. In response, Mohammad Zahir has established
discreet contacts with virtually all parties to the conflict and has remained
silent except for a few statements on basic issues.

In an interview, the King asserted that a political solution in Afghanistan
could only be achieved through direct talks between the Soviet Union and the
guerrilla groups who have been fighting Soviet troops for almost eight years.

Opposes Any Soviet Gains

As for his own role, he was self-effacing. ''It is up to the Afghan nation to
assign me the role I will have to accomplish in the future,'' he said.

While avoiding comments on specific diplomatic intiatives, he made it clear that
he would not be party to an agreement that offered the Soviet Union political
gains for its intervention in his country in December 1979.

Some American officials are suggesting that concessions to Afghan Communists may
be necessary to speed a Soviet withdrawal. But the King insists that the
pro-Moscow government in Kabul is not a legitimate representative of the Afghan
people and should not be allowed to share power after the Russians leave.

The King's balancing act is most clear when he speaks of the superpowers. An
independent Afghanistan, he said, would ''pursue our traditional policy of
neutrality and nonalignment, having good neighborly relations with all countries
in the region, including the Soviet Union.''

The United States, he says, assisted Afghans in fighting for ''freedom and human
dignity'' after the Soviet intervention, and it has ''a major and influential
role'' to play in helping insure a Soviet withdrawal. But, on these points, as
on all policy issues, he says he is offering only his impressions because final
decisions will reflect the consensus of Afghan nationalist forces.

Mohammad Zahir took the throne in 1933 at the age of 19 after his father was
assassinated. He ruled Afghanistan for 40 years and became known as able
mediator who instituted a constitutional monarchy. In July 1973, while in Italy
for medical treatment, he was deposed by his brother-in-law and cousin, Gen.
Mohammad Daud. President Daud was killed in a coup in April 1978 that led to the
establishment of a pro-Soviet Government.

The King remained in Italy, exercising little influence over a homeland that has
grown increasingly violent.

He lives in a villa in the suburban countryside, where he entertains himself
reading and playing chess, jousting with a computer game when no human
competitors are available.

From the villa gardens, the Apennine Mountains are visible on a clear day. ''The
view recalls Afghanistan,'' said the King's son-in-law, Abdul Walli. ''This has
been a nice place to live.'' Despite the King's long sojourn here, he admits he
has learned little Italian and does not know his way around the city. His
associates say he is shy and reserved, and he primarily spend his time with his
family.

Gone Too Long to Have Enemies

''Ironically,'' said a European diplomat who keeps tabs on the monarch's
activities, ''the King's great appeal is that he has been out of the picture for
so many years that he does not have many enemies. Under several scenarios now
being discussed the King is portrayed as someone who belongs neither to the
resistance movement nor to the Communists but who could be acceptable to both.''

The Soviet Union has publicly stated its willingness to withdraw its 115,000
troops from Afghanistan, but the makeup of an interim government remains a
hurdle.

''Moscow wants to avoid any appearance that it is leaving Afghanistan the way
the U.S. left Vietnam,'' said the European diplomat, ''meaning there has to be
an orderly transition and that initially, at least, some power is given to the
P.D.P.A.'' The initials refer to the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan,
the pro-Soviet party that dominates the Government in Kabul.

Even though the King has repeatedly rejected power-sharing, party leaders and
Soviet diplomats continue to mention him as a possible chief of a transitional
government. Soundings among guerrilla leaders and in the refugee camps in
Pakistan show that the King enjoys broad support. He has increased his contacts
with various Afghan parties over the past year.

The King's priority is to promote greater unity among resistance forces, and he
energetically supports proposals to form a ''grand council'' of all the
non-Communist groups.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mohammad Zahir Shah, the King of Afghanistan. (Agenzia
Contrasto/Roberto Koch)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
A Battle Report Direct From the Lower Depths

BYLINE: By JOEL ROSE; Joel Rose is co-editor of Between C & D, a Lower East Side
fiction magazine; his first novel, ''Kill the Poor,'' is to be published next
year by Atlantic Monthly Press.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1568 words


ALTHOUGH LAURIE POVOD HAS not undergone amniocentesis, she and her husband, the
young playwright Reinaldo Povod, already know the child she is carrying is a
boy. They know this because Rei's ''buelita,'' his grandmother, follows the ways
of santaria, a folk practice that combines yoruba - a mixture of African tribal
religions - and Christianity, to which many Caribbean island people subscribe.

The 70-year-old Senora Povod placed a knife and spoon under the cushions of the
couch in the living room of her apartment, and then spread a bed sheet over
them. Laurie, a radiant young woman, was then asked to choose a seat, and when
she sat almost directly on the knife it was prophesized the child carried in her
womb would be a boy.

Mr. Povod says they'll name the child after Joseph Papp's father. ''How do you
say it, Laurie?'' he asks her.

''Shmu-el,'' she answers in a perfect Jewish accent, although she's half Puerto
Rican, half Italian. ''Samuel.''

Joseph Papp, producer of the New York Shakespeare Festival, is a very important
personage to Reinaldo Povod, whose new play, ''La Puta Vida Trilogy - This Bitch
of a Life,'' is currently in preview and opens Nov. 24 at Mr. Papp's Public
Theater. Mr. Povod says that Mr. Papp is the most important force in American
theater. Mr. Papp took Mr. Povod in. ''Rei has his own father,'' Mr. Papp says,
''but I feel very paternal to him.''

Last year, after seven years of work, Mr. Povod made his debut with his first
full-length play, ''Cuba and His Teddy Bear,'' with Robert DeNiro, Ralph Macchio
and Burt Young. The play premiered at the Public and moved on to the Longacre
Theater on Broadway. The work - an agonizing drama about a drug-dealing father
and his son - won Mr. Povod the George Oppenheimer Award as the best new
playwright of 1986, and recently a $25,000 Whiting Award. But this time, with
his new play, Mr. Povod is going it alone without the benefit of big-name
actors.

Mr. Povod expects that his current work, ''La Puta Vida,'' three one-act plays
along with an epilogue and a prologue, is going to be even more disturbing than
''Cuba,'' if possible, for unsuspecting audiences. The first play in the
trilogy, ''South of Tomorrow,'' is about a one-eyed Hispanic Vietnam veteran
caught in a drug-shooting gallery with a madman who insists on giving him one of
his own eyes to replace the one lost in the war. The second play, ''Nijinksy
Choked His Chicken,'' is about a child molester, made disarmingly sympathetic,
and the third, ''Poppa Dio!,'' is a harrowing account of a mother-son
relationship that begins and ends with murder.

''La Puta Vida'' features John Turturro, the star of the new Michael Cimino film
''The Sicilian,'' and the soon-to-be-released ''Five Corners,'' and Michael
Carmine, who also performed in ''Cuba.''

The trilogy was written in early 1985 while Mr. Povod was waiting for Bill Hart,
the Public's literary manager, to read and comment on one of his numerous
rewrites of ''Cuba.'' There was serious thought given to staging the trilogy
first but Gail Merrifield, who is in charge of literary development at the
Public, objected to producing ''La Puta Vida'' before ''Cuba.'' ''If you lead
off with three plays,'' she said, ''you are either perceived as a 'promising
young writer' or structurally weak.''

''I wrote the three plays during a seven-day period,'' Mr. Povod says, ''from
Monday to Sunday, in 18-hour stretches. I couldn't stop. If I stopped it became
too abstract.''

Mr. Povod was discovered by the Public Theater in 1979 when he was 17 years old.
Mr. Hart was scouting for new talent when he heard about a play called ''Cries
and Shouts'' being staged at Miguel Algarin's Nuyorican Poets' Cafe on East
Third Street.

Mr. Hart went down to check it out. ''I was bowled over,'' he remembers. ''It
was a small play,'' he said of the work that Mr. Povod calls a ''foetus.'' ''But
it was like listening to a gutter Garcia Lorca. It blew up right in my face.''
Mr. Hart asked who the playwright was; could he meet him? He was astonished to
be introduced to one of the actors in the play, a boy. ''This is unreal. This is
a child.'' The next week Mr. Hart insisted that Miss Merrifield accompany him
back to see the play. ''The minute I saw it,'' she says, ''I thought this is the
strongest voice I've ever heard.''

Mr. Povod resisted his would-be benefactors, however. ''He just didn't trust
anything you said to him,'' Miss Merrifield says. Mr. Papp remembers Mr. Povod
as being nervous and suspicious during the next nine years, but with a
spirituality that bordered on clairvoyance. ''He was lucky to have Bill Hart,''
Mr. Papp says. ''Bill was like a staff at his side through those years. He
encouraged the saneness in Rei, and treated his talent and his desire to
write.''

But even though Mr. Povod got good reviews for ''Cuba,'' some critics and the
press seemed to assume that this ''kid,'' this 26-year-old street-punk
playwright, caught a lucky break and was reaping the heady rewards of big-time
actors and a sold-out Broadway production, undeserved. One critic suggested that
Mr. Povod get down on his knees and thank Joseph Papp.

Mr. Povod would not disagree. He's very grateful to Mr. Papp, Miss Merrifield
and Mr. Hart, the director of ''Cuba'' and ''La Puta Vida,'' for sticking with
him. He knows he can be difficult, but he also believes in what his mentor,
Miguel Pinero, the award-winning Puerto Rican playwright, told him: ''In order
to be great, you have to think great.'' It was Mr. Povod's idea to send the
script of ''Cuba'' to Mr. DeNiro. Mr. Papp made a call to the actor, who read
the script over the weekend and called the Public Theater Monday morning to say
he'd take the role.

For Mr. Povod, Mr. Pinero has been a mentor and an inspiration. He says of their
relationship: ''Mikey's influence is very great. I don't know if Mikey was born
for me or I was born for Mikey. Here's a man from the ghetto who's committed
every known sin and writes so brilliantly.''

As for Mr. DeNiro's involvement, Mr. Papp says: ''It was a mixed blessing having
Bobby star in that play. I knew it would be. The play was much better than it
was received. There's no question Bobby overshadowed it. Rei gained something
and he lost something.''

The play portrayed the relationship between a small-time drug-dealing father,
Cuba, and his impressionable, loving son, Teddy Bear. ''The father loved his son
so much he was capable of killing him,'' Mr. Papp says, ''and the son loved his
father so much he was capable of killing him. Savagery, murder, passion running
so high.''

''This is my personal experience,'' Mr. Povod says. ''I see myself only as a
voice of the people I've touched shoulders with, the people I've broken bread
with. The trilogy is an accumulation of three years of soul searching. I was
heavily involved with drugs. I was looking for a sign of God's grace for me. I
was looking to O.D. Fortunately or unfortunately, that never happened. I went
back to writing.''

Recently, that writing has extended to movies. Mr. Povod is working on the
screen adaptation for ''No Place to Be Somebody,'' Charles Gordone's
Pulitzer-Prize-winning 1969 drama, and a screenplay for ''Salsa,'' a film about
the spiritual rebirth of a Puerto Rican convict, directed by Tim Hunter
(''River's Edge'').

Mr. Povod claims to have been a really ugly baby. That's hard to believe,
because he's a handsome man, with long straight chestnut hair that trails down
past his shoulders. He almost always wears a curious ship-captain's cap pulled
low over his eyes. When he was born, he had a hydrocephaletic head and a tiny,
scrawny, pathetic little body. He says that his Puerto Rican mother, a sometime
stripper, embroiled in a tempestuous relationship with the young Povod's
street-man father, left when he was an infant. His father was in no position to
take him, although he loved his son dearly. An elegant tough guy, the elder
Povod has survived being shot six times, being stabbed, and nearly losing his
life in a lethal prison fire.

If Reinaldo Povod didn't follow a similar route, it's thanks to his grandmother,
who took him in and raised him. Lilia Esther Povod is Cuban. As a young woman
living in Havana, she met a Russian merchant seaman and fell in love. He jumped
ship and they fled to the United States, first moving to Florida and then
emigrating to New York, where they settled on East 13th Street on the Lower East
Side, a strongly Eastern European neighborhood. But eventually Mr. Povod's
grandfather disappeared, presumably returning to Russia.

''Rei is very lucky to have had his grandmother,'' Mr. Papp says. ''All her
superstitions and everything else gave him an outlet, a way of looking at
things. There's nothing like a grandmother!''

''He's a natural playwright,'' Mr. Papp continues. ''They don't come along
everyday. It's a talent that is ingrown. Writing a play is very precious. It's
like music. You must preserve these things.''

''What do the people out there know about Hispanics?'' asks Mr. Povod ''This is
my responsibility. They think we wear pointy shoes called 'Puerto Rican roach
killers,' we carry knives, we shove on the subway. What they're unfamiliar with
is our origins, our principles, our language. In the trilogy I hope to bridge
that gap. Hear the voice! Recognize that there is a baby howling in the woods
and the baby is Hispanic!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Reinaldo Povod ; John Leguizamo, Rafael Baez and Michael
Guess in ''La Puta Vida Trilogy'' (Martha Swope)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
In Tough Campaigns, the Tough Start Early

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H.


AT this point in the 1960 campaign, not one candidate had formally announced
that he was running for President of the United States. John F. Kennedy waited
until Jan. 2, 1960, to make formal his intentions. Lyndon B. Johnson, the Senate
majority leader, runner-up to the Senator from Massachusetts at the Democratic
convention and ultimately his Vice President, did not announce until July 5,
1960, right before the delegates gathered.

By today's standards, Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Johnson were latecomers. Last week,
Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, became the last of the 12 known
candidates to make his formal announcement. The first, former Gov. Pete du Pont
of Delaware, announced on Sept. 16, 1986, more than two years before Election
Day. The rest at least waited until this year, with Representative Richard A.
Gephardt, a Democrat from Missouri, starting off in February.

Why does campaigning for President now require that things get going so early?
It's not the law. In fact, a formal declaration has little legal meaning, since
most candidates begin doing what candidates do long before announcement day.
Indeed, at both the Federal Elections Commission and the Federal Communications
Commission, spokesmen said that none of their rules depend on whether a
candidate has formally announced.

Mr. Dole's regular appearances on television in his role as Senate minority
leader were not affected one way or the other. Some candidates, notably Pat
Robertson, a Republican who announced last month, delay formalizing a candidacy
to put off a full reporting of campaign funds. Mr. Dole has been raising, and
fully reporting, millions of dollars all year.

The point, rather, is politics, combined with the proliferation of primaries and
caucuses. Campaigning now requires so much effort, so early, that candidates
would look foolish if they were coy enough to wait until election year to
announce they were running.

To understand how different 1988 is from 1960, one need only look at the
political calendar. In 1960, the first primaries, in New Hampshire, with Senator
Kennedy and Vice President Richard M. Nixon virtually unopposed, took place on
March 8, a full month later than this year's Iowa caucuses. In all of 1960,
there were only two such contests of real consequence - Wisconsin on April 5 and
West Virginia on May 10. By winning them both, Senator Kennedy established to
the party leaders who controlled the convention that his Catholicism did not
mean that he would inevitably lose.

In 1988, it will be one primary after another. More than one-third of the
pledged Democratic delegates and nearly one-half of the Republican delegates
will have already been chosen by March 8, when 20 states, including all of the
South, go to the polls. Primary turnout will certainly surpass the 1984
two-party total of 24.6 million, since this time both parties will have
contests.

The trend toward very early announcements was started by George McGovern, who
launched his 1972 campaign on Jan. 19, 1971, as a very dark horse who wanted to
establish himself as the single candidate of those forces inside the Democratic
Party opposed to the Vietnam War. In the 1976 election, an unknown Georgia
Governor named Jimmy Carter had markedly different political views, but the same
sense of how to run an insurgent campaign. He announced on Dec. 12, 1974.

For the lesser-known, early announcement remains part of the recipe for winning
recognition. It is not surprising that the last three would-be Presidents to
declare, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Vice President Bush and Mr. Dole, are the
best-known.

Mr. Dole had intended to announce last month. But campaign aides said said that
would have got thes announcement tangled up in Senate business. The earliest
convenient date was last week, and it had an additional advantage, they added:

Mr. Dole is a disabled war veteran, and his multistate announcement swing
corresponded with Veterans' Day celebrations. One lesson of this year is that
announcing this way, in several states, is worth a good deal in the public
opinion polls. Generally, the television networks give candidates a ''free
shot,'' running stories that focus on the message the candidates themselves want
to put forward.

That attention has helped some contenders, such as Representative Jack Kemp of
upstate New York and former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., jump
several points in the surveys. As a better-known candidate, Mr. Dole might not
get such a polling ''blip,'' though he could use it, since Vice President Bush
appears to have lengthened his lead, a fact that may have contributed to the
Dole campaign shake-up late last week.

As for the Democrats, their contest seems to have been going on forever. In many
ways, it has: Except for Jesse Jackson, all the Democrats were formally in the
lists by June.

One result is that the campaign is beginning to take clear shape. In the eyes of
many politicians, it has come down to two contests. One is between Mr. Gephardt
and Senator Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee to be the standard-bearer of the
party's ''moderate'' wing. The other is between Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of
Massachusetts and Senator Paul Simon of Illinois, for leader of the
''liberals.''

The taxonomy is imperfect, in part because the real differences among the
Democrats on issues are small. Moreover, it is possible that both Mr. Dukakis
and Mr. Simon will survive the early tests.

But the two-contest theory overlooks two candidates. Former Bruce Babbitt of
Arizona trails the others, but he is rated as having solid organizations both in
New Hampshire and in Iowa; aides to his rivals are in surprising agreement in
insisting that he should not be written off. Mr. Jackson has a seemingly
unassailable base among black voters and is counted on to carry his campaign to
the convention. If there is one candidate for whom such formalities as
announcements, fund-raising or television production makes little difference, it
is surely he.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Headliners;
Surprise Ending

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 128 words


Larry Heinemann was not looking for much more than a free meal, some
conversation and perhaps a cocktail or two. Instead, Mr. Heinemann, a Chicagoan,
emerged from the Grand Ballroom of the Pierre Hotel last week as the surprise
winner of the National Book Award for fiction.

The New York literary crowd had figured that the $10,000 award would almost
certainly go to Toni Morrison for ''Beloved'' or to Philip Roth for ''The
Counterlife.'' In fact, there was a brief silence when the winner was announced
as ''Paco's Story,'' Mr. Heinemann's tale of a wounded Vietnam veteran's
readjustment to civilian life.

Mr. Heinemann, a 43-year-old Vietnam veteran, was among the surprised. ''I
didn't come here expecting to win,'' he said. ''I came here for the party.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Larry Heinemann

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Recognizing Gaddis

BYLINE: By Louis Auchincloss; Louis Auchincloss's latest collection of short
stories is ''Skinny Island.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 36, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3715 words


I FIRST CAME TO KNOW WILLIAM Gaddis at a writers' conference in the Soviet Union
in 1985. I had heard that he was shy and averse to publicity, but I found that
this reputation was based only on his belief that a writer's life and
personality should be as little as possible associated with his work. As a
conferee, he was both eloquent and precise.

Perhaps the most amusing contrast in our group was between him and Allen
Ginsberg. Allen, shaggy and bearded, chanted his verse in loud, emotional tones
as he pounded a species of accordion that he always carried with him. Will, on
the other hand, reserved and quiet, impeccably clad, with the patient composure
of a man of the world and the piercing eye of a wit, spoke in measured tones of
the small sales that the serious novelist might expect.

If Danielle Steele counted her sales in the millions while he had to make do
with a few thousands, he said, it was because she wrote books and he wrote
''literature.'' Asked for pointers as to future conferences, he glanced
obliquely down the table at Allen and suggested that the novelists and poets be
separated, so that the accordion would be heard only ''down a long corridor,
through a closed door.''

Gaddis, who is considered by some critics to be the nearest thing to Herman
Melville that our century has produced, who is almost a cult figure among
students of English, is nonetheless not well-known to the wider reading public.
His first two novels, ''The Recognitions'' and ''JR,'' published 20 years apart,
in 1955 and 1975, frightened off many readers by their length, erudition and
supposed ''difficulty.'' But this difficulty is much exaggerated by symbol and
ambiguity hunters (''What can I do if people insist I'm cleverer than I think I
am?'' Gaddis asks with a shrug), and length and erudition become virtues when
the stories are as interesting as his.

Gaddis has more to say to American readers today than any other novelist I can
think of. Take just three fields in which his knowledge is significant:
theology, painting and corporate finance. Then consider the space devoted by the
press in the 1980's to religious strife and revivalism, to art sales and art
frauds, to stock-market chicanery and insider trading. Some critics have
credited me as a novelist with a degree of familiarity in the last-named field,
but I have treated it only in broad outlines and with a minimum of legal
details. Gaddis could almost qualify as an expert witness in the trial of a
malefactor.

FOR ALL HIS ''RELE-vance'' (to use, with due apology, the sacred term of the
1960's) to our time, Gaddis is something of an antimodernist. His novels contain
much merciless satire of the pretentious double talk of literary cocktail
parties and the inane pursuit of new art forms at any cost. Originality? Was
that not what Eve was guilty of when she bit the apple?

Wyatt Gwyon, the painter protagonist of ''The Recognitions,'' quotes his old
German teacher as saying:

That romantic disease, originality, all around we see originality of incompetent
idiots, they could draw nothing, paint nothing, just so the mess they make is
original . . . Even 200 years ago who wanted to be original, to be original was
to admit that you could not do a thing the right way, so you could only do it
your own way.

When you paint you do not try to be original, only you think about your work. *
And Stanley, the musician in the same novel, gives vent to a similar train of
thought:

How could Bach have accomplished all that he did? and Palestrina? the Gabrielis?
. . . And how? with music written for the Church. Not written with obsessions of
copyright foremost; not written to be played by men in worn dinner jackets, sung
by girls in sequins, involved in wage disputes and radio rights, recording
rights, union rights . . . not written to be punctuated by recommendations for
headache remedies, stomach appeasers, detergents, hair oil . . . O God! *

* - COPYRIGHT c 1955 BY WILLIAM GADDIS. REPRINTED BY PERMISSION OF CANDIDA
DONADIO ASSOCIATES

Yet Gaddis, for all the conservatism uttered by characters with whom he is in
obvious sympathy, is one of the great innovative novelists of our age. ''He
comes very close to liberating his fiction (and one might even claim all
fiction) from the nemesis of narrative, the Western mania for order and
control,'' wrote Joel Dana Black in ''In Recognition of William Gaddis,'' a
volume of appreciative essays published in 1984.

The new reader of a Gaddis novel may initially suppose that he is being
introduced to a chaos in which the parts have have little relation to one
another or to the whole. But this is not the case. Each character and event is
an integral part of a complex but interrelated whole. Does the whole compose an
order that makes sense? The same question might be asked of our universe. The
world that is subject to our senses, like a Gaddis novel, may be like a huge
picture puzzle with no picture, in which a seemingly infinite number of pieces
may be fitted together to form a glaze of white - or black.

GADDIS'S PARENTS were divorced when William, their only child, born in 1922, was
3 years old. From then on, the boy lived with his mother. She supported them by
initially working as secretary to the president of the New York Steam
Corporation; in time, she became an executive of the company. Because her work
was demanding, Gaddis was sent from age 5 to 13 to a boarding school in Berlin,
Conn. After that, he returned to the family home in Massapequa, L.I., where he
attended high school until he entered Harvard College as a freshman in 1941.

Gaddis remained at Harvard for the four years of World War II, being exempted
from military service because of a kidney disorder. He became president of the
Lampoon, a humorous and satirical undergraduate magazine, contributing a large
number of stories, poems, essays, playlets, theater and film reviews.

In his senior year, Gaddis and a drinking companion were asked to resign from
the college following a fracas with the Cambridge police, an event perhaps
anticipated by one of his Lampoon poems, in the style of Tennyson's ''Locksley
Hall'':

I'll escape the alma mater,
Rise above the madding throng;
Join a band of vulgar gypsies
And make my sordid song.

The next two years were spent in New York's Greenwich Village while he worked as
a checker on The New Yorker magazine. His mother subsequently rented out the
house in Massapequa, giving him $100 a month from the proceeds. With that, plus
income from temporary jobs, Gaddis was able to travel for the next five years.

He first went to Mexico, in the spring of 1947, and arrived in Panama City later
that year, hoping for a job on the newspaper Panama-American. When this failed
to materialize, he worked as a machinist's assistant on the overhaul of the
Miraflores locks of the Panama Canal. In the evenings, clad in his white suit,
he enjoyed the more elegant society of the Union Club. But there was adventure,
too.

In 1948, Gaddis went up to Costa Rica during its two-week civil war, when Jose
Figueres - a socialist landowner who was subsequently elected President -
challenged the refusal of the ruling families to abide by the results of a
popular election. Gaddis joined the insurgents and helped to keep open an air
strip for the delivery of supplies from Guatemala.

In the fall of that year, he went to Spain, where he remained for two years,
traveling and studying art and church history, gathering material for and
working on his first novel, ''The Recognitions.'' He arrived in Paris in 1950.
It was a city that never dazzled him quite as it did so many of his fellow
Americans (''Age cannot wither, nor custom stale her infinite vulgarity'').

A year later, he made a short trip to North Africa before returning to New York
to continue work on ''The Recognitions.'' An advance from Harcourt Brace &
Company, plus fees from occasional writing assignments, enabled him to work
through 1952 and 1953 to complete his big book. Its nearly 1,000 pages were
published in 1955. Gaddis was 32.  The reviews were not favorable, and the sales
were small. There might have been some feeling in the literary establishment
that Gaddis showed remarkable hubris in writing so long and difficult a work. In
The New York Times Book Review, Granville Hicks complained that Gaddis ''has so
ostentatiously aimed at writing a masterpiece.''

Most damning of all was Sterling North's review in The New York World-Telegram:
''If I were so naive as to believe in the devil I would say that young Mr.
Gaddis had willingly sold his soul to achieve this Faustian first novel. What
this sprawling, squalling, overwritten book needs above all is to have its mouth
washed out with lye soap. It reeks of decay and filth and perversion and
half-digested learning.''

Poor Gaddis was almost crushed. Five years of work for that! In an interview
with Zoltan Abadi-Nagy in the forthcoming issue of The Paris Review, he says of
that time of his life: ''I almost think that if I'd got the Nobel Prize when
'The Recognitions' was published, I wouldn't have been terribly surprised. I
mean that's the grand intoxication of youth or what's a heaven for. And so the
book's reception was a sobering experience, quite a humbling one, real life.''

WYATT GWYON, the protagonist of ''The Recognitions,'' is the son of a Calvinist
minister in New England who loses his mind in the intensity of his researches
into pagan theologies. Wyatt escapes his ministerial calling and goes to Paris
to paint. He marries Esther, a would-be writer, and returns to America, where he
settles in Greenwich Village and becomes involved with a number of poets,
playwrights, painters and musicians, all drinking and drugging their way through
a wasteland of compulsive modernism.

Wyatt turns for his inspiration to the great masters of the past, particularly
the Flemish: Roger van der Weyden, Jan van Eyck and Hugo van der Goes. Studying
these painters with some of his father's intensity, he achieves a sense of
identity with them that takes him ultimately down the road to forgery.

But Wyatt is no vulgar forger. In ''recognizing'' the genius of his
predecessors, he brings himself into a relation with the past that gives a
degree of form to the meaninglessness of the present. The novel is filled with
these recognitions, flashes of intuition by which different characters become
aware of archetypes in the past of their own personal experiences.

But if T. S. Eliot finds only ''inexplicable glory'' in the past which he
delights in contrasting with the tackiness of the present, Gaddis finds idiocy
throughout the ages. Only in art, he seems to suggest, can man find redemption.

Wyatt's recognitions of his predecessors, then, go deeper than copying details.
He studies van der Goes until he virtually becomes van der Goes. Like an ancient
alchemist, he seeks to create gold out of baser metal, though he must have some
gold to start with. He paints the pictures that the old masters ought to have
painted. But when he falls into the hands of villains -Recktall Brown, the
dealer, and Basil Valentine, the Jesuitical esthete - and appends a false
signature to a picture, he is hopelessly contaminated.

Wyatt goes mad at the end of the novel and sets about to destroy, under pretense
of cleaning and restoring, the works of art in the monastery to which he has
retreated. Does this cast doubt on the power of art to atone for the falsities
of the world? Perhaps not altogether.

RIGHT AFTER THE publication of ''The Recognitions,'' Gaddis married Pat Black, a
young woman from North Carolina who had come to New York with the idea of a
stage career. Their two children, Sarah and Matthew, were born in the next three
years. But the poor reception of the novel, plus severe financial problems,
exacerbated by the repeated vandalizations of the converted barn in Massapequa
where he had done much of his writing, darkened what would have been a happy
period of his life.

As literature would not provide a living for him and his family, Gaddis turned
to commerce. From 1957 to 1961, he worked in public relations for Pfizer
International, the pharmaceutical company, a job he despised.

His next job was more interesting. He worked for the United States Army,
preparing documentary films for training and public relations. In 1964, however,
with America's involvement in Vietnam intensified, Gaddis severed his Army
connection. He did freelance writing for industrial films and speechwriting for
Eastman Kodak.

Reading one of these - a smooth, expertly prepared address on the utility and
utilization of video aids in parochial school - and contrasting it with the
savage satire on the same subject in ''JR,'' his second novel, one marvels at
the different functions to which Gaddis could adapt his skills.

THE CRITICAL RE-ception of ''JR'' in 1975 was gratifyingly different from the
one that had greeted its predecessor. There was perhaps a note of contrition
that the literary establishment had not recognized Gaddis's earlier book as a
literary work of the first importance.

Even those critics who still found him on the lengthy side conceded his stature.
He was described as a novelist ''of Swiftian fury,'' ''wildly satiric,''
''dazzling.'' The following spring, ''JR'' was given the National Book Award.

''JR'' is indeed worthy of Swift. The sixth grade of a Long Island grammar
school goes on a field trip to Wall Street, where the children are to be given
the sensation of ''investing in America'' by being allowed to purchase one share
of stock. JR, a scruffy 11-year-old, demonstrates his financial acumen by
cheating his classmates out of the share and using it to win a stockholder's
suit.

With lease-backs and write-offs and tax deductions, he puts together a crazy but
formidable corporate empire of junk merchandise and used-up properties that is a
paradigm of the jumbled chaos of American financial life.

Irving Thalberg, the genius of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, was said to have sat alone
in a darkened room while he trained his mind to become that of a 13-year-old -
the mental age he deemed closest to that of the average American adult. Gaddis
puts the level even lower.

In The Paris Review, he says of JR: ''The reason he is 11 is because he is in
this prepubescent age where he is amoral, with a clear conscience, dealing with
people who are immoral, unscrupulous, which implies that they realize what
scruples are but push them aside, whereas his good cheer and greed he considers
perfectly normal. He thinks this is what you're supposed to do, and he is not
going to wait around. . . .''

But how, even in a satire, could an 11-year-old put together so gigantic a
fortune? If it were all magic and fantasy, it would soon become a bore,
particularly in a 726-page book. This is where Gaddis's knowledge of business
affairs (unrivaled among American novelists except by Michael Thomas) stands him
in such good stead. In turning the American dream inside out, he wanted to have
his facts right.

JR, he explains in The Paris Review, ''buys defaulted bond issues simply because
they're cheap - it says $1,000 up in the corner, but selling at 7 cents on the
dollar, so he's getting them for $70 apiece. So it's simple, cheerful greed.
Then, when finally the corporation is thrown into bankruptcy, and he emerges as
the largest bondholder, and they wipe out all of the stock, all the equities, he
becomes, then, the largest holder of preferred stock and takes control pretty
much by default.''

And so it goes, through a dozen or more fantastic but basically credible deals.
The capitalist system, which is so often oblivious to sensitive morality,
operates with the enthusiasm of a child. Gaddis would preserve it. He believes
that free enterprise is the least-dangerous economic system yet devised by man,
but he would regulate it. He might make an excellent member of the Securities
and Exchange Commission.

That he knows the voice of the investment counselor is shown in this dialogue
between Edward Bast and his financial adviser about the portfolio of the
former's maiden aunts who simply want a little income to live on: - See where we
sold their telephone company (Continued on Page 58) right here yes, and this
Nobili you people have been buying into, got them a block here at 31, averaged
down with another block here when it dropped to 23 and got them out at 16, gives
them a nice little tax loss. - Oh. - Yes and here, another nice tax loss in
Ampex haven't we, averaged down at 20 yes and again at 14, the rate management
was handing out false figures to the analysts there was enough to make your hair
curl, able to get them out at 6 though before it hit bottom. -Oh what was,
bottom . . . - Selling at around 5 yes and it may be one of the better bargains
right now if you think your aunts would . . . - No but, but what's this one, FAS
. . . - Famous Artists yes, correspondence courses in the arts photography that
sort of thing, thought they might find it a bit more congenial than these
humdrum industrials. - Oh, is it a tax loss too? - No matter of fact they may
enjoy a complete write-off with this one. * Surrounding JR is a huge cast of
adult characters, who are lured to his corporate empire by the hope that there
may be something in it for them. It is not always just money that they seek. It
is understanding, appreciation, acceptance. But the society in which they live
has few rewards to offer them but money, and not very much of that - just
enough, often, to corrupt them.

JR himself, wistful, likable, essentially well-meaning, is the only one not
contaminated by the avarice of the corporate operations, but that is because he
is totally insensitive. When one of his teachers, Amy Joubert, who comes as
close as any of the adult characters to being a person of good will, tries to
make him see something other than profit in the world around him she fails. -
Just stop for a minute! she caught an arm round his shoulders - just stop and
look . . .! - What? at what . . . - At the evening, the sky, the wind, don't you
ever just stop sometimes and look? . . . Is there a millionaire for that? *

* - COPYRIGHT c 1975 BY WILLIAM GADDIS. REPRINTED BY PERMISSION OF ALFRED A.
KNOPF INC.

As is said in David Madden's anthology ''Rediscoveries,'' the most frightening
implication of this massive comedy is that JR is the sanest character of the
novel. Perhaps that is because he is the simplest - one might actually hope to
make something better of him. It is admittedly a frail hope to put in the
rushing path of the entropy of our civilization.

Gaddis's techniques to express his terrifying conception of this entropy - the
tendency of a system to disorder - is to create his novel almost entirely by
conversations in which the speakers are not immediately identified. The reader
must make do without the usual exposition of facial expressions or mental
reactions. He has no way of verifying whether a character is speaking falsely or
sincerely or sarcastically, except by what the character actually says.

However, this makes it sound much more difficult than it is. One soon picks up
the style, certainly the cliches, of the individual speaker, and after a bit one
reads the dialogue almost as easily as if it were accompanied by the ''he said''
or ''she said'' of conventional fiction.

What then, it will be asked, does Gaddis gain by putting his reader through this
exercise? He gains the eerie effect of identifying our civilization with all of
its jargons.

Reading ''JR,'' I feel at times as if I were lying alone on a desolate plain
under a dark cloudy sky from which come the mumbles and throbs of human speech
in every sort of dialect and slang, replete with self-pity, smugness,
officiousness, swagger - in short, every banality the brain of man can devise to
evade thought.

IN ''CARPENTER'S Gothic'' (1985), the third and last, to date, of Gaddis's
novels, he has limited himself to a mere 262 pages and has set himself the task
of observing the dramatic unities of time and place. The action occurs within
the span of a few days in a Victorian house on the Hudson, rented by Paul and
Elizabeth Booth. She is an heiress, but her fortune is tied up in endless
litigation, much to the disgust of her glib, hucksterish husband, a
public-relations agent who is helping his only client, Reverend Ude, a
tele-vision preacher, to develop an evangelical movement in Africa.

The plot embraces much of the madness of the modern world: exploited African
mines and natives, corrupt politicians, popular religion, unscrupulous
intelligence agents, a murderous search for concealed geological surveys and,
finally, Armageddon. It is the grimmest of Gaddis's novels, being concerned,
though always comically, with the tragedy of human stupidity.

Gaddis shatters the silence and isolation of the old house on the river with the
sounds of telephone, radio and television, so that it seems at times more like a
bunker at the front than a secluded villa. The violent death that comes in the
end to the heroine is a horrific comment on the illusion of immunity that she
had desperately sought.

GADDIS'S FIRST marriage ended in divorce, in 1967, as did his second, to Judith
Thompson, a decade later. He blames these failures on the terrible pressures of
trying to earn a living while writing two monumental novels, and on the
frustration of his small sales, which continued even after all the awards and
plaudits. It made him, he frankly admits, a difficult person to live with. If
this was so, there is little sign of it today.

His children, to whom he has remained very close, are successfully occupied:
Matthew works in motion pictures in New York, and Sarah, who lives in Paris, is
completing a novel for Alfred A. Knopf. Based in New York and Long Island,
Gaddis and his charming and brilliant companion, Muriel Oxenberg Murphy, seem to
enjoy immensely each other and a life of work and wide traveling. Ms. Murphy
worked with the curator Robert Beverly Hale in founding the department of
American painting and sculpture at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

Gaddis's work in progress (God help us lawyers!) is a novel about the explosion
of litigation in the world today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William Gaddis (Marion Ettlinger)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 15, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 899 words




$

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     2    GARDEN OF SHADOWS, by V. C. Andrews.
            (Pocket, $4.95.) The beginnings of the evil that
            beset the Dollanganger family in four previously
            published novels.

 2     1    WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
            (Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
            woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.

 3     3    WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Avon, $5.95.)
            Iran during the month following the Shah's
            departure.

 4     6    THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $4.95.)
            Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New
            York family begun in ''Evergreen.''

 5     5    FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen
            Coonts. (Pocket, $4.95.) Navy aviators in the
            Vietnam War.

 6     7    A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Warner,
            $4.95.) Comdr. Adam Dalgliesh investigates a
            brutal double murder.

 7     1    THE PRINCESS, by Jude Devereaux. (Pocket,
            $3.95.) A European princess's passionate affair
            with a United States naval officer.

 8     13   IT, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)
            Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman
            who grew up in a small Maine town.

 9     6    FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov.
            (Del Rey/Ballantine, $4.95.) The hero of the
            ''Foundation'' series searches for Earth.

10     18   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley,
            $4.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
            World War III.

11     4    PAPER MONEY, by Ken Follett. (Signet/NAL,
            $3.95.) Crime, high finance and journalism form
            the threads of this newly reissued 1977 thriller.

12     3    KENTUCKY! by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam,
            $4.50.) The latest in the ''Wagons West'' series tells
            of a plot to assassinate President Grant.

13     79   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom
            Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
            brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

14     7    VALE OF THE VOLE, by Piers Anthony. (Avon,
            $3.95.) Esk, the son of an ogre and a nymph,
            defends the inhabitants of a paradise.

15     1    ALL THAT GLITTERS, by Thomas Tryon. (Dell,
            $4.95.) Five Hollywood sex goddesses and the
            agent who helped their careers.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction

 1     6    ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
            Wambaugh. (Bantam, $4.95.) A case involving the
            1979 murder of a high school teacher.

 2     1    DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland
            with Greg Lawrence. (Jove, $4.50.) The ballerina
            recalls her checkered career.

 3    212   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
            (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
            spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 4     38   NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.
            (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
            author says, and we must confront them to grow.

 5     54   WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.
            (North Point, $12.50.) A woman's adventures
            flying in Africa and across the Atlantic in the 30's.

 6     29   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Berkley, $6.95.)
            Anecdotes and ruminations by the television star.

 7     1    SNAKE, by Ken Stabler and Berry Stainback.
            (Charter, $3.95.) The memoirs of the Oakland
            Raiders' roguish quarterback.

 8 *   2    PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon
            Eisenhower. (Zebra, $4.50.) The biography of the
            former First Lady, written by her daughter.

 9 *   4    ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John
            Madden with Dave Anderson. (Jove, $3.95.)
            Observations on football.

10     2    WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney.
            (Berkley, $3.95.) Essays on contemporary life by
            the journalist and television commentator.

11 *   11   KAFFIR BOY, by Mark Mathabane. (Plume/
            NAL, $8.95.) Coming-of-age in South Africa.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1     3    THE FAR SIDE OBSERVER, by Gary Larson.
            (Andrews & McMeel, $5.95.) A new collection of
            cartoons.

 2     12   BILLY AND THE BOINGERS BOOTLEG, by
            Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $7.95.) More
            ''Bloom County'' cartoon strips.

 3     29   CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson.
            (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $6.95.) Cartoons
            about a boy, his toy tiger and his parents.

 4     2    GARFIELD SWALLOWS HIS PRIDE, by Jim
            Davis. (Ballantine, $5.95.) The 14th collection of
            cartoons about a fat cat.

 5 *   75   WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin
            Norwood. (Pocket, $4.95.) How to avoid or end
            addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Wintering On Florida's Panhandle

BYLINE: By VIRGINIA VAN der VEER HAMILTON; VIRGINIA VAN der VEER HAMILTON is the
author most recently of ''Lister Hill: Statesman From the South,'' being
published this month by the University of North Carolina Press.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 9, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2340 words


RACHEL JACKSON, accompanying Andrew when he took control of Pensacola in 1821,
prayed to be delivered from the ''vast, howling wilderness'' of the Florida
panhandle. Shortly after the Civil War, residents of Florida's peninsula
seriously considered ridding their state of a nuisance by ceding its entire
western arm to Alabama for a million dollars. But even that largely landlocked
state rejected what many Alabamians scornfully described as ''a sand bank and
gopher region.''

Until the latter half of the 20th century, such harsh descriptions of the
panhandle did not seem entirely undeserved. However, developments in recent
years along its sand bank - a 100-mile line of beaches fronting the Gulf of
Mexico - would prove that Alabamians, to their lasting regret, had passed up one
of history's great bargains.

Although still playing second fiddle to the peninsula, the panhandle has its
devotees. Generations of exuberant Southerners have claimed this stretch of
beachfront from Pensacola to Panama City as their summer playground, swarming
here in such droves as to fasten upon this region yet another pejorative label:
Redneck Riviera. (In an attempt to counteract this image, recent developers are
pushing the name Emerald Coast.) From mid-March, when college students celebrate
the rites of spring, through Labor Day, thousands come to frolic on these
powdery beaches. Because much of the panhandle is relatively far from
sediment-reaching river systems, its sands retain their pristine whiteness and
the Gulf in this region is almost as lucid as the Caribbean.

As their fortunes have risen during the Sun Belt era, these summer vacationers
have escalated their tastes in accommodations. Weathered shacks on pilings have
given way to luxurious high-rise condominiums. Yesterday's swamp is today's
fairway. But when schools open, the Southerners load their children, dogs,
fishing rods and golf bags into vans and 'vettes (whose bumper stickers
advertise such proclivities as ''I'm a War Eagle Mom,'' ''Trinity Bible Class''
and ''God, Guns and Guts: Let's Keep All Three Alive'') and head home for
Jackson, Montgomery, Shreveport and other inland sanctuaries.

During the fall, although temperatures hover in the 80's and skies are at their
bluest (unless a hurricane is brewing), panhandle beaches, condos and golf
courses are mostly empty except on weekends. Around the first of November,
staid, post-middle-age couples in four-door Oldsmobiles and Buicks make their
appearances along these beaches, their flat, crisp accents contrasting sharply
with the drawls of locals who operate gas stations and grocery stores, their
sentiments also on public display (''Ottawa Athletic Club,'' ''Sexy Senior
Citizen,'' ''Minnesota Gophers,'' ''We're Spending Our Children's
Inheritance'').

Most hail from the upper Midwest and Canada; a lesser number, sporting tweed
jackets and aggressively wheeling Cadillacs and Mercedeses into parking spaces,
betray an Eastern orientation. Unlike those 19th-century Alabamians who passed
up a chance to buy the panhandle, these modern snowbirds are quick to grab a
bargain.

Bargain hunters ourselves, we discovered last December that, by simply
telephoning an 800 number, we could rent a condo with spacious living room,
dining room, kitchen, three bedrooms, two baths and a stunning, 10-mile Gulf
view (even from the tub) at a monthly rate that came to $33 a day, about
one-fourth the price of comparable accommodations on, for example, Sanibel or
Captiva islands. (Rental for an oceanfront condominium of this size in the
winter of 1988 is $1,100 a month, or almost $37 a day.) Had we been willing to
settle for two bedrooms or do without golf on the premises, we could have had a
beachfront condo for around $500 to $600 a month. Undoubtedly we would have been
warmer and surrounded by more diversions farther south, but an advance trip to
look over our accommodations, plus the lure of bargain rates for tennis and
golf, settled matters in the Panhandle's favor.

Owned by an oil pipeline company in Louisiana, our condo had all the
accouterments now deemed essential to beachside existence: dishwasher, laundry,
cable television, and a bonus never available during the height of the summer
season: privacy. Judging by the sparsity of lighted windows, passengers on
elevators and cars in the parking lot, we shared this 15-story building with
about 10 other tenants during most of December. On my early morning excursions
to commune with gulls, pelicans and sandpipers, observe an occasional fishing
boat or school of dolphins and search for an unbroken shell or two, I often put
the day's first footprints on the beach.

We had chosen a large resort complex, Sandestin near Destin, that offers 36
holes of golf (at our monthly rate, the cost averaged $2 a day, about one-tenth
of the average greens fee on the peninsula); 16 tennis courts (including two
grass courts), flat roadways for bicycling, and a splendid stretch of beach, its
sands as white as powdered sugar.

Had we the stomach or the inclination for deep-sea fishing, we could have taken
the snowbird special: an all-day trip to Destin's rich fishing banks, complete
with rod, reel and instructions, for $5 a person. But we preferred to obtain our
fish from local markets, at prices well below those farther inland, supplied
with a plentitude of amberjack, flounder, red snapper, grouper, yellowfin tuna,
shrimp, oysters and crabmeat.

A fishing village that attained city status in 1984, Destin is the condo capital
of the panhandle, highly (some say overly) developed during the oil boom by
Texans, Louisianians, Germans, Dutch, French and even a few Saudis. Around
10,000 vacation units shelter its approximately 50,000 summer visitors. After
the oil bust, condo construction came to a halt save for a few optimists who
regard the sands of Destin as ''white oil'' -not subject to errant currents of
supply and demand.

From November through March, about 5,000 snowbirds, having heard through word of
mouth about the panhandle's low winter rates, uncrowded grocery stores, easy
traffic flow, hospitable local citizens and relative absence of crime, settle
into some of the 3,000 to 4,000 winter rental units at Destin. Many choose
Destin because of its wide range of luxury accommodations and its busy Snowbird
Club, offering a constant round of dinner dances, bridge, bingo, bowling and
golf tournaments, potluck suppers, sing-alongs, holiday get-togethers and trips
to the dog races.

LARGER numbers flock to the 18-mile stretch of beach near Panama City - heart of
the Redneck Riviera - where some 15,000 vacation units line the shore. Others
prefer to locate near Pensacola.

For those who choose Destin, as we did, what is there to do on rainy days in a
city of 8,000 full-time residents, one small library, one movie theater, a dozen
or so restaurants (most of them simple, inexpensive, and heavy on seafood), and
where the largest department store is a K-Mart? There are well-stocked
newsstands, a bookstore in town sells remainders for $4 or less, and a
bookmobile appeared at our nearby shopping center one day a week. Otherwise,
restless winter vacationists could venture forth on day trips to explore the
Panhandle.

Nearby Fort Walton Beach, a metropolitan area of 75,000, offers an archeological
display indicating that humans have inhabited this coast for around 10,000
years. The Indian Temple Mound Museum is named for its neighboring earth
structure, constructed of some 500,000 basketloads of dirt hauled to this site
by these early inhabitants.

Tourists with more contemporary interests may explore artifacts of 20th-century
warfare in the nearby Air Force Armament Museum, ranging from a 1903 Springfield
rifle through the aircraft, bombs and missiles of World War II, Korea and
Vietnam, to a display of one of the Air Force's newest projects - the advanced
medium range air-to-air missile. That weapon is being developed as a lighter,
more lethal missile for the Air Force F-15 and F-16 fighters that we saw almost
every day, streaking over the Gulf like giant arrowheads. From January through
March, Eglin Air Force Base, linchpin of Fort Walton Beach's economy, offers
free tours during which visitors may glimpse its security dogs, climatic
laboratory and flight line.

Fifty miles west of Fort Walton Beach, the Navy displays more than 100 models of
fighter planes at its Naval Aviation Museum, which is part of a self-guided tour
of the Pensacola Naval Air Station. Other sites on this tour include a Spanish
battery, pre-Civil War Fort Barrancas and the old Pensacola Lighthouse. At
nearby Gulf Islands National Seashore, rangers conduct tours of Fort Pickens, a
pre-Civil War fortress in which the Apache leader, Geronimo, was once confined.

PENSACOLA itself offers walking and self-guided tours of its Seville Square and
North Hill historic districts, featuring museums, restored homes, restaurants
and shops. Spanish explorers stepped ashore in the vicinity of modern-day
Pensacola in 1559; over the ensuing centuries, Pensacola changed hands 17 times
as Spanish, French, Confederate and United States forces sought control of this
natural port. Early Pensacola was a favorite haunt of pirates, prostitutes and
Creek Indians in search of whisky, but the modern city boasts an art museum,
symphony orchestra, civic center and zoo.

East of Destin - except for Panama City Beach, heart of the Redneck Riviera -
adventurous day trippers will discover, if not exactly a howling wilderness, at
least some semblance of the old panhandle. At isolated Point Washington, Florida
has preserved Eden, the imposing home of a 19th-century sawmill owner,
surrounded by gardens and moss-hung live oak trees and fronting Choctawhatchee
Bay. Eden is especially popular on Christmas Eve, when the old house and its
gardens are lighted by candles.

At nearby Santa Rosa Beach, a local basketmaker, Angie Larnce, weaves her
country baskets from the pine needles, seagrass and grapevines she finds near
her home. In Blackwater River State park, 35 miles inland, visitors can observe
that river's tannin-stained waters and glimpse the abundant wildlife, including
turtles, white-tailed deer, armadillos and wild pigs.

Grayton Beach, a jumble of old frame houses and new beachside cottages, retains
the aura of a casual community of 1920's vintage where Ernest Hemingway would
have felt at ease. Seagrove Beach, on a high bluff overlooking the Gulf, has
experienced little change since the 1940's except for its unusual new neighbor,
the community of Seaside, a collection of pastel replicas of small Victorian
beach cottages, many available for winter rental.

At the far eastern end of this coastline, Apalachicola fishermen harvest the
panhandle's most delectable oysters, known at oyster bars nationwide as
Apalache. Its aficionados claim that an Apalache oyster attains its tasty flavor
by growing in just the right blend of brackish and salt waters.

Visitors in search of solitude will revel in the offshore barrier islands. St.
Vincent, a state park, is approachable only by small craft. St. George,
connected to the mainland by a toll bridge, has a few condominiums and
restaurants. Dog Island, about 45 minutes by boat from Carrabelle (another
Hemingway-type town), has a permanent population of around 15 and is serviced
twice daily by a mail boat. About two-thirds of Dog Island is a nature
conservancy.

Those who have never walked barefoot on the panhandle's soft sands or marveled
at the clarity and ever-changing hues of the turquoise Gulf may still look down
their noses at northwest Florida. Which is fine with us and the snowbirds: We
like having a winter beach to ourselves.

A VISITOR'S GUIDE TO THE COASTAL AREA

Getting There

Major airlines serve the area through Pensacola, Fort Walton Beach and Panama
City. The most direct driving route from the upper Midwest is I-65 to
Montgomery, then U.S. 331 to the beaches. From the East Coast, follow I-10 to
the Panama City, Destin, Fort Walton Beach or Pensacola exits.

Where to Stay

For a short visit, the Hilton Hotel and the Holiday Inn at Destin are centrally
located bases for exploring the area. For information on winter accommodations,
write or telephone the Destin Chamber of Commerce (Post Office Box 8, Destin,
Fla. 32541; 904-837-6241) or the Visitor Information Center (1401 East Gregory
Street, Penascola, Fla. 32407; 904-234-8224) or the Panama City Beach visitor's
center (Panama City Beach, Fla. 32407; 904-234-8224).

Major beach resorts in the Destin area are Sandestin, with golf and tennis
(Highway 98 East, Destin, Fla. 32541; 800-874-3950); Tops'l, tennis (5550
Highway 98 East, Destin, 32541; 800-874-0464); Seascape, golf and tennis (4725
Highway 98 East, Destin, Fla. 32541; 800-874-9141), and Hidden Dunes, tennis
(Highway 98 East, Destin, Fla. 32541; 800-824-6335).

Eating Out

At Destin, try breakfast overlooking the Gulf (including grits) at June's Dunes;
lunch and dinner (West Indies salad, King Neptune salad, fresh fish, Key lime
pie) at Captain Jewel Melvin's or Harbor Docks, or a steamed bucket of seafood
at Bayou Bill's east of Destin.

Golf

Indian Bayou Golf and Country Club at Destin is open to the public daily and
offers short-term memberships. Bluewater Bay, a resort and retirement community
at Niceville near Fort Walton Beach, has a challenging course. Other courses
open to the public include Rocky Bayou near Niceville and Lake Lorraine in
Shalimar.

Weather

During a month's stay last December, I counted 14 fully or partly sunny days, 4
totally rainy days, 9 overcast days with some rain and 4 days of mixed weather.
Temperatures ranged from the mid-50's to the high 60's, averaging about 6 to 10
degrees lower than those in the Tampa Bay area. Because the panhandle is prey to
fronts that sweep from west to east, a day that begins with sun may end in rain
or a dark morning may precede a glorious sunset.    V. V. d. V. H.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of the resort town of Destin, Fla. (Jim Bryant & Len Kaufman);
map of Destin, Fla.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam

SECTION: Section 10; Page 37, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 164 words


To the Editor: Having left Vietnam in 1975, my heart is still poignant with
memories from Dalat, the city briefly mentioned in ''Vietnam for Visitors''
(Travel, Sept. 13).

The best time to see Dalat is between November and January, when the eternal
spring weather (65 to 75 degrees) exposes the beauty of this highland city. The
air becomes more pristine, the sky turns divinely blue, and the hills are full
of cherries and wild flowers blossoming. I used to pick raspberries and passion
fruit in the Forest of Love in the misty morning, then return to my favorite
hotel, Dalat Palace, enjoying a simple French lunch, while gazing at Xuan Huong
Lake through the large windows. The best moment came when the red sun began to
set behind the big mountain. With a soft breeze coming through, an entire area
full of pine trees would rustle, creating a wonderful song of nature. Time
seemed to fall into oblivion and life seemed to just begin.

HAO-NHU DO
  Saratoga, Calif.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 26, Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1075 words


'BUTTERFLY' PREMIERE

The new musical called ''Butterfly'' having its world premiere through Dec. 6 at
the Norma Terris Theater in Chester sounds familiar. It takes place in Japan and
tells the love story of an American man and a Japanese woman. While it bears an
acknowledged resemblance to Giacomo Puccini's opera ''Madame Butterfly,'' which
was taken from a play by David Belasco, it takes place in present-day Kyoto. The
male lead is an American rock star named Pink, rather than Pinkerton, the United
States Naval lieutenant in the earlier versions. The Japanese woman is still
called Butterfly, and the cultural clashes between East and West and Old Japan
and New Japan are re-examined.

An impressive production company has been assembled, including the director,
Jack Hofsiss, who won a Tony Award for ''The Elephant Man'' on Broadway, and
Craig Safan, the composer who wrote the theme for the television show ''Cheers''
among other songs.

Terris theater productions are referred to as in-progress by the parent company,
the Goodspeed Opera House, but this show is staged in a set, it is fully
costumed and it is choreographed and accompanied by an orchestra of synthesizers
in the pit. Performances are scheduled at 8 P.M. Tuesdays through Fridays; 5 and
9 P.M. Saturdays; 5 P.M. Sundays, and 2:30 P.M. matinees on Wednesdays. For
tickets, which cost $14.50 and $16.50, call 873-8668.

FEDERAL FURNITURE

The simplicity and delicacy of American Federal furniture, produced from 1780 to
1820, will be the subject of a lecture by Patricia Kane at 10 A.M. on Monday at
the Bruce Museum in Greenwich. Ms. Kane is a curator of American decorative arts
at the Yale University Art Gallery and is on the advisory committee for Historic
Deerfield Inc. Her talk will focus on the neo-classical designers and architects
of the Napoleonic period, among them George Hepplewhite, Thomas Sheraton, Robert
Adam and Pierre Fontaine, and their influence on the evolution of an American
Federal style, which was manifest in the work of Duncan Phyfe, Thomas Seymour
and others. Admission is $5 and reservations should be made by calling 869-0376.


A CELEBRATED COLLECTION

A collection of art and artifacts acquired from around the world by Samuel Colt,
the Hartford weapons manufacturer, and his wife, Elizabeth, will be the subject
of a lecture at 11:30 A.M. on Tuesday in Hartford at the Avery Theater in the
Wadsworth Atheneum. The Wadsworth Atheneum received a major portion of Mrs.
Colt's collection when she died in 1905, according to William N. Hosley Jr., the
curator, who will discuss the Colts and their treasures.

In 1862, after only six years of marriage and fathering four children, three of
whom died, Mr. Colt died. His wife lived for more than 40 years, spending much
of her husband's enormous fortune on objets d'art during her continuous sojourns
to Europe and the Far East. The collection was displayed at Armsmear, the
couple's Wethersfield Avenue mansion.

''She was a conspicuous consumer of Oriental art and of what was then considered
Victorian elegance, but for a long time afterward was viewed as crass,'' Mr.
Hosley said. ''Today it is all coming back into favor.''

Mr. Hosley will show numerous slides of paintings, books, weapons and decorative
pieces, and tell many stories about the celebrated couple, whose extravagant
home is now a residence for the widows of Episcopal clergymen.

Tickets cost $4 at the door, and members of the audience are invited to bring
lunch. For more information or reservations call, 278-2670.

OF LOVE AND LOVERS

One of the most memorable accomplishments of the film world was the 1936
production of ''Mayerling,'' which will be shown at 10:15 A.M. and 8 P.M. on
Friday at the Ferguson Library on Broad Street in Stamford. Starring Charles
Boyer and Danielle Darrieux, it is the story, in French with English subtitles,
of Crown Prince Rudolph of Austria, heir to the Hapsburg throne, and his love
affair with a commoner in Vienna of the 1880's. Mayerling was the name of the
royal hunting lodge where the lovers carried out a tragic pact. What makes the
film all the more compelling is its basis in historical fact.

RECALLING THE 60's

Beehive hairdos and other signs of the 60's will be brought back to life in a
show called ''Beehive,'' during a performance at 8 P.M. Thursday in the
Jorgensen Auditorium of the University of Connecticut at Storrs. Bell-bottoms,
miniskirts, flower children, Camelot, Janis Joplin and the opposition to the
Vietnam War will be recalled in musical numbers that feature its 40 songs
performed by an all-female cast. The show opened in 1985 and has played at the
Village Gate in New York City. Tickets cost $5, $6 and $8. Call 486-4226 or
Ticketron.

SEXUALITY AND RIGHTS

''Sexuality and Civil Rights: Relationships and Family Choices'' is the title of
the second annual panel discussion organized by the New Haven Regional Chapter
of the Coalition for Lesbian and Gay Civil Rights. It will be moderated by Prof.
Harlon L. Dalton of the Yale University Law School at 7 P.M. on Wednesday in the
Yale University Art Gallery lecture hall on Chapel Street.

Among the panel members are to be the Rev. Jim Burns, pastor of the Metropolitan
Community Church; Pamela Hershinson, a lawyer and a board member of the
Connecticut Civil Liberties Union; Nancy Buckwalter, a founding member of the
coalition, and Arlene Walsh, a psychotherapist.

Among a wide variety of topics under discussion will be legal rights, parenting,
extended families, AIDS, marriage, custody alternatives and bonding. Admission
is free. For more information, call 453-1241 or 776-9628.

SHADOW PORTRAITS

One of about 35 silhouette artists working around the country, Deborah O'Connor
will cut out two likenesses of each visitor for $10, each one taking about five
minutes, from noon to 5 P.M. today at the Connecticut Historical Society, 1
Elizabeth Street in Hartford.. Mats and frames will be available.

At 3 P.M., there will be a workshop on silhouette cutting, conducted by
Christine Ermenc and Sarah Winter, art educators. A short slide presentation
will introduce the audience to the mechanics of silhouetting, after which
participants may cut a few of their own. Timed reservations for portrait
sittings with Ms. O'Connor are necessary. Admission is $2 for adults, $1 for
children. For more information, call 236-5621. $90ELEANOR CHARLES

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NURSE WHO DIED IN VIETNAM REMEMBERED

BYLINE: By States News Service

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 15, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 817 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


MATCHING Fieldcrest towels, sweaters and a wedding gown filled Capt. Eleanor
Alexander's hope chest. The 27-year-old Army nurse from River Vale had put off
marriage until she returned from her six-month stint in Vietnam.

Captain Alexander never unfolded the towels or wore the dress. She is one of
eight women whose names appear among the more than 58,000 on the Vietnam War
Memorial here.

A hint of her brief history comes to light in a memento left by the Veterans
Club of Bergen Community College: a swatch of Kelly-green material with a
black-and-white picture of Captain Alexander in full military dress. Four stars
- red, white and blue and a small gold one in the center - adorn the cloth.
Above them is written:

''Veterans Club of Bergen Community College, Paramus, N.J., salutes our fallen
comrades, 176 men and 1 woman.''

The swatch is one of thousands of objects that National Park Service rangers
have collected since the memorial was dedicated on Veterans Day in 1982.

More than 6,000 objects, including teddy bears, C-rations, a pack of cigarettes,
flags with personal messages written on the stripes, Army boots, dog tags and
military ribbons, fill 18 cabinets and countless rolling trays at the Park
Service's Museum Archeological Regional Storage (MARS) facility in Lanham, Md.

Although only reporters and researchers may visit MARS to view the objects, the
Park Service hopes one day to establish a museum for the public. There is even
talk of taking down an oral history as veterans go through the proposed museum,
looking at offerings they and others have placed at ''The Wall.''

A group from Haddonfield left a plaque reminding people that 63 New Jersey
residents were still among the missing. Someone left a wooden cane, the kind
soldiers get at a military hospital; someone else left an Indian medicine bag
and still another a poem about how a young soldier went mad and bit out the
tongue of a dead Vietnamese woman.

Then there is a photo montage that depicts a young man's gradual descent into
despair. Pictures of the sunny Southeast Asian countryside and smiling soldiers
slowly give way to graphic shots of exploded bodies. More pictures surround a
photograph of someone's high school sweetheart.

Kim Robinson, one of five people who looks after the objects, believes the
central placing of the sweetheart is a takeoff on a motif ''used formally in
religious icons denoting a passage from innocence to experience.''

But it is hard to say what most of the memorabilia means. Often, those who leave
things want the message to be a silent one intended solely for a specific name
carved in the black granite.

''The Wall'' has become a shrine of sorts to roughly 15 million visitors in the
last five years.

Frank Alexander, Captain Alexander's younger brother, first visited it when it
was dedicated. It was a blustery November day, and the ceremony was running
late.

Rather than risk missing the return bus ride to New Jersey, he and his mother,
Gladys, laid a wreath at Frederick Hart's statue of three soldiers returning
from battle.

In a recent telephone interview, Mr. Alexander said he had been back here only
once.

''I don't think I can get close to that wall again without reliving some very
strong feelings,'' he said. ''If my sister's name had not been there, I might
never have gone to it. Were it not for Eleanor, I might be embarrassed about
that.''

He cannot recall the number or the block on ''The Wall'' where his sister's name
can be found, Mr. Alexander said, ''but I can walk to it very easily.''

Mr. Alexander lives with his wife, Susanne, in South Orange. Susanne Alexander
remembers cruising around town in Captain Alexander's car, gorging on napoleons
before Sunday family dinner.

''When we were having our napoleon sneaks, she told me she was going to go over
there and do this before she had any obligations,'' Mrs. Alexander recalled.
''She insisted on going over there for six months. She had to do this.''

Captain Alexander became a surgical technician and was assigned to a 250-bed
field hospital on the outskirts of Qui Nhon, in the central highlands.

Five months into her tour, fierce fighting erupted at Dak To, 60 miles north of
the hospital. Captain Alexander and other medical personnel were flown to the
scene, where they put in 14- and 15-hour days.

On Nov. 30, 1967, a C-47 carrying Captain Alexander and 39 others crashed while
landing at Qui Nhon. There were no survivors. ''We heard about it on the radio
-the day we moved into our house,'' Mrs. Alexander said. ''There was this plane
crash, and I just knew.

''It was five days before they found the bodies - five days of agony.''

On Dec. 18, 1967, Captain Alexander was buried in River Vale next to her father,
Frank Alexander Sr., and her sister, Marguerite, who had died of tuberculosis at
15.

Her hope chest sits unused in the attic of her brother's house.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

NEW JERSEY GUIDE

BYLINE: By Frank Emblen

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 23, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1392 words


VIOLIN SOLOIST

Daniel Heifetz, a fine violinist (and no relation to the legendary Jascha
Heifetz) will appear next Sunday afternoon at the Count Basie Theatre in Red
Bank, performing Beethoven's Violin Concertowith the Monmouth Symphony
Orchestra. Also on the program will be Barber's ''School for Scandal'' Overture
and Shostakovich's Symphony No. 5.

Tickets to the concert, which begins at 3 o'clock in the theater at 99 Monmouth
Street, are $8 (children accompanied by an adult free).

Information: (201) 531-2838.

NICARAGUA-VIETNAM TALK

Jeremiah A. Denton Jr., a former United States Senator and retired admiral and
aviator, will speak Wednesday evening at Seton Hall University in South Orange
on ''Nicaragua: Another Vietnam?''

Mr. Denton was captured by the North Vietnamese in 1965 when his bomber was shot
down near Thanh Hoa. In 1966, he defied and hoodwinked his captors when, in a
television interview, he blinked the word ''torture'' in Morse code into the
camera's lens.

Mr. Denton remained a prisoner for seven years, recounting that period in his
book, ''A Personal Story of Survival as a P.O.W. in North Vietnam.'' In 1979, it
was made into an NBC-TV movie, ''When Hell Was in Session,'' starring Hal
Holbrook.

In 1980, Mr. Denton was elected to the Senate from Alabama, the first Roman
Catholic in Alabama history to win a statewide election and the first Republican
to win the seat by popular vote.

His talk will begin at 8 o'clock in the main lounge of the Bishop Dougherty
Student Center. Admission is $3.

Information: (914) 359-1089.

IRISH CONCERTINA PLAYER

Noel Hill, billed as ''Ireland's greatest concertina player,'' will perform two
shows next Sunday at the Turning Point in Piermont, N.Y.

Mr. Hill, from County Clare, has toured extensively in the United States but
continues to live, teach and make recordings in Ireland.

Opening for Mr. Hill will be the fiddle duo of Joe and Willie Kelly, brothers
from Dumont, who learned their art in the Bronx from Martin Mulvihill, formerly
of County Limerick.

The shows are at 5:30 and 8 P.M. at the club, 468 Piermont Avenue. Tickets are
$7 and reservations are recommended.

Information: (914) 359-1089.

SKI JAMBOREE IN WAYNE

On Friday, the New Jersey Ski Council will hold its annual Ski Jamboree in
Wayne, featuring more than 50 exhibitors.

Ski areas in the Northeast, Canada and the Rockies, as well as ski shops,
airlines and tour operators, will be represented.

Many of the ski clubs in the council will have exhibits and members will be
available to discuss the full range of activities offered year-round: downhill,
cross-country and water skiing, white-water rafting, bicycling and social
events.

There will be a ski fashion show and seminars, door prizes (including ski
trips), movies and dancing.

The jamboree is from 7:30 P.M. to 1:30 A.M. at the Wayne Manor, Route 23.
Admission is $6 at the door or $5 in advance.

Information: (914) 351-4273.

PRINCETON WALKING TOURS

Guides from the Historical Society of Princeton will escort visitors on walking
tours of historic Princeton each Sunday through Nov. 29.

The events and buildings that shape the Princeton of today will be highlighted
on the tour, encompassing Nassau, Mercer, Edgehill and Stockton Streets.

Each tour begins at 2 P.M. at Bainbridge House, 158 Nassau Street, and lasts
about two hours. The cost is $3 a person, and proceeds support the society's
educational programs. Reservations are not required. Information: (609)
921-6748.

HOBOKEN THEATER GALA

Hoboken, which once bustled with 40 theaters, 30 cabarets and pioneering movie
studies, will open a yearlong exhibition celebrating that heritage with a gala
on Friday.

Troupers from the city's theatrical past will provide continuous live
entertainment from 4:30 to 9:30 P.M. as the exhibition, ''The History of
Theater, Vaudeville and Motion Pictures in Hoboken,'' opens at the Hoboken
Historical Museum in City Hall.

Rare film footage of Hoboken dating to the turn of the century and scenes from
later motion pictures filmed in, or referring to, the city will be shown
continuously.

The theatrical memorabilia and photographs chronicling this history will be
displayed for a year at the museum, which was established in 1986.

The history includes vaudeville headliners such as Weber & Fields and stage
plays at the Rialto directed by Christopher Morley - magnets strong enough to
draw theatergoers from New York City.

After the stock market crashed in 1929, Hoboken's entertainment lights dimmed,
and in the 60's the last theater, a 3,500-seat house, was closed.

The museum is on the third floor of City Hall at Washington and First Streets.
Admission is free and refreshments will be served at the gala.

Information: (201) 653-7392 or 792-0474.

PRINCETON TEACH-IN

A ''Teach-In on Homelessness,'' sponsored by the Student Volunteers Council to
raise awareness of the plight of the homeless, will take place Thursday and
Friday on the Princeton University campus.

Thursday's program, which starts at 8 P.M. at the Terrace Club (62 Washington
Road), will include music and poetry readings by homeless people from New York
City.

On Friday, a panel discussion on ''Homelessness: A Local Pattern of the National
Crisis'' will be led by three former homeless people: Marty Johnson, director of
a nonprofit housing development in Trenton; Chris Mazaukas, director of job
training at the National Housing Institute in Orange, and Larry Hatton of the
state's Department of Human Services.

The discussion starts at 7:30 P.M. in Dodds Auditorium at the Woodrow Wilson
School of Public and International Affairs. The event is free.

Information: Neal Bistro at (609) 734-7430 or (609) 452-5557.

SLASHING VICTIM TO SPEAK

Marla Hanson, the model attacked on a New York City street by two men who
repeatedly slashed her face with a razor blade, will speak Wednesday evening in
Teaneck. Her subject is ''From Victim to Victor.''

''Everyone has scars,'' Miss Hanson has said. ''Mine show.''

Miss Hanson will speak at 8 o'clock in the Student Union Building on the
Fairleigh Dickinson University campus. There is no admission fee.

Information: (201) 692-2435.

POLITICAL ANALYSIS

''The Political State of New Jersey,'' a discussion of the remaining years of
the Kean administration and on coming key elections, will be held Tuesday
evening at Montclair State College.

Participants will include Assemblymen Robert D. Franks, Republican of New
Providence, and Joseph V. Doria Jr., Democrat of Bayonne, the chairmen of,
respectively, the Assembly's Republican and Democratic caucuses.

Other speakers will be Thomas O'Neill, executive director of Partnership New
Jersey and former editor of New Jersey Reporter magazine, and Dr. William Berlin
of the college's political science department.

The program will begin at 7:30 in Room 413 of the college's Student Center.

Information: (201) 893-7195.

A LOOK AT THE SUMMIT

Douglas J. Roche, the Canadian Ambassador to the United Nations for disarmament
and a former member of the Canadian Parliament, will discuss the pending summit
between President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, Thursday
morning at St. Peter's College in Jersey City.

Mr. Roche's free lecture, ''Beyond the Summit,'' is co-sponsored by the
college's Peace and Justice Committee and its Office of Special Programs. It
starts at 11 o'clock in the college's Dinneen Theater.

Information: (201) 893-4307.

MARIANNE MOORE DIALOGUE

A celebration of Marianne Moore, a major American poet and essayist who would
have been 100 years old today, will take place at Seton Hall University tomorrow
evening.

She will be the subject of a dialogue between Kenneth Burke, the 89-year-old
critic from Andover, and Denis Donoghue, who holds the Henry James Chair of
Letters at New York University.

Miss Moore, who died in 1972, lived mainly in New York City, except for two
years (1916-18) in Chatham when her brother, John, became pastor of the Ogden
Memorial Church. Her poetry is marked by an unconventional use of metrics and an
angular, cerebral, ironic attitude.

The program begins at 8 o'clock in the McLaughlin Library on the Seton Hall
campus, 400 South Orange Avenue. Admission is $8.

Information: (201) 678-1680 or 761-9388.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A report in the New Jersey Guide column of the New Jersey Weekly on Sunday about
a ''Teach-In on Homelessness'' sponsored by the Student Volunteers Council in
Princeton misstated the dates. The two-day program starts today, not tomorrow.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Marla Hanson

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AGENT ORANGE PANEL AIMING TO FINISH IN '90

BYLINE: By BETSY PERCOSKI

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 34, Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 648 words


FOURTEEN years after American troops withdrew from Vietnam, a state commission
continues to struggle with one of the most controversial results of the war. The
Vietnam Herbicides Information Commission was established by legislation in 1982
for what was to have been a five-year program. Last July, the commission was
reappointed under new legislation for three years to finish its work.

The commission focused on medical care and produced a 53-page manual,
''Connecticut Health Professionals Guide to Agent Orange,'' containing
information on the herbicide.

A co-author, Dr. Robert McLellan, said the guide described the
''psycho-toxicity'' of the herbicide, as well as clinical data. Physicians, Dr.
McLellan said, need to consider the severe emotional and psychological problems
of exposure to Agent Orange.

The commission was also charged with finding veterans. The commission, with the
help of the Vietnam Veterans Agent Orange Victims Inc. in Stamford, has
identified 6,522 Vietnam veterans in the state.

''Nothing has really been decided at the Federal level, and nothing has changed
as far as the need to do outreach with vets,'' said Giacomo Mordente 3d,
chairman of the Commission from 1983 to last June.

The commission's work centers on Agent Orange, the defoliant contaminated with
dioxin that the United States sprayed in Vietnam from 1962 to 1971 to uncover
the enemy.

Military personnel were exposed to it as they walked through sprayed areas,
applied it, consumed contaminated water or food, or were stationed near a
spraying area. Dioxin causes cancer and birth defects in laboratory animals and
is listed by the Environmental Protection Agency as a possible human carcinogen.

The Congressional Office of Technology Assessment said last month that most
ground troops did not incur heavy exposure. The Federal Centers for Disease
Control in Atlanta issued a similar opinion in August.

''A lot of people are saying that the protocol for selecting vets is flawed,''
Dr. McLellan said of the Centers for Disease Control study.

Dr. McLellan, and the new commission chairman, William Chiodo, said all data on
exposure must be closely examined because much of the information has to be
reported by people who were exposed to it.

The president of Vietnam Veterans Agent Orange Victims, Frank McCarthy, said
that a survey of medical questionnaires by his office showed that of 2,457
Vietnam veterans, 124 had cancer, 475 said they were involved with birth defects
and 823 with miscarriages, and 423 reported unexplained illnesses and 229
nonmalignant tumors.

''We could have died in Vietnam from any number of things,'' Mr. McCarthy said.
''If you asked a dying veteran now what he wants most, he'd say to take care of
the children.''

Mr. McCarthy, who served two tours of duty in Vietnam, said his organization
would be working with the herbicides commission at the new Department of
Veterans Affairs.

Mr. Chiodo served 11 months and 28 days in Vietnam. His concern for his children
helped him focus on the Agent Orange issue. ''I have three girls just entering
child-bearing age now,'' he said.

However, he added, ''We are trying to do our work on the commission so it can't
be scientifically questioned.''

Drs. McLellan and John Morris wrote the new guide with a research team from the
Yale University School of Public Health and guidance from the Department of
Health Services. The guide cites 61 references and lists five pages of resources
for veterans and physicians. The Department of Health Services is distributing
7,000 copies to physicians and veterans' organizations.

The Network for Continuing Medical Education has adapted the guide for a
videotape for medical libraries, Dr. McLellan said.

The commission has nine volunteer members, including veterans, epidemiologists,
and toxicologists. The Health Services Department pays for the panel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
How We Got Here

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 761 words


Members of Congress and representatives of the White House are negotiating a
modest deficit reduction that may be necessary to restore ''the confidence of
the market'' - assuming anything can do that. But even a strong attack on the
deficit would not approach the underlying problems of the U.S. economy.

In the fall 1987 issue of New Perspectives Quarterly, a publication of the
Institute for National Strategy in California, the economists Masahiro Sakamoto
and Walter Russell Mead identify some of those long-term problems, of which the
budget and trade deficits are only symptoms.

Mr. Sakamoto is chief economist of the International Trade Institute of the
Foreign Trade Council of Japan, so his analysis is all the more interesting for
that. He argues that post-World War II military competition with the Soviet
Union has led the U.S. to assume a disproportionate share of the West's defense
burden, while U.S. contributions to rebuilding war-shattered European and
Japanese economies have resulted in damaging economic competition from the very
allies protected by U.S. military expenditures.

In 1983, Mr. Sakamoto notes, the U.S. produced 40.4 percent of the combined
gross national product of itself, Japan, West Germany, France and Great Britain.
That same year, however, it provided 56.7 percent of the five nations' combined
defense spending.

By comparison, Japan's share of advanced-nation G.N.P. was 14 percent and its
defense share 3.3. The shares of the other three were: West Germany, 8.7 percent
of G.N.P., 8.3 percent of defense; France, 7.1 and 8.3 percent; Britain, 6.4 and
7.7.

Mr. Sakamoto traces the beginnings of the huge U.S. military burden, as well as
its balance of payments problem, to the Korean War, which caused military
spending to rise from 5 percent of G.N.P. in 1949 to 13.3 percent in 1953.
Though this was paid for by tax increases and cuts in non-military spending, the
war left an ominous legacy - a military commitment, inspired by fear of the
Russians, ''in the range of 8-10 percent of G.N.P. . . . permanently
incorporated in the American economy.''

A decade later, when the Johnson Administration tried to fight the costly war in
Vietnam without raising taxes or cutting non-military spending, problems
multiplied: total spending that increased sharply (by 5 percent of G.N.P.)
between 1965 and 1970; rising inflation; wage and price increases; higher public
and private-sector consumption; declining U.S. competitiveness; a deteriorating
balance of payments.

Richard Nixon did attempt to reduce the share of Western defense costs borne by
the U.S. His ''strategy of detente with the U.S.S.R.'' cut U.S. military
spending from 7.4 percent of G.N.P. in 1970 to 4.6 percent in 1979. The relief
was short-lived; renewed fear of a Soviet military buildup and the advent of the
Reagan Administration in 1981 caused U.S. military spending again to increase
rapidly.

Mr. Sakamoto also points out that Washington's expansionary policies helped the
Western allies survive the OPEC oil shocks in the 1970's, but drastically
increased the U.S. payments deficit.

Mr. Mead focuses on the rise of third world competition after World War II.
Population growth and mechanized agriculture produced an ''enormous potential
work force'' in less advanced nations, while developments in ''communications,
transportation and management'' encouraged Western industries to relocate abroad
to take advantage of these low-wage workers.

Third world industrial development thus proceeded rapidly - but social
institutions, as well as wages, failed to keep up.

The result, worldwide, was overproduction but soft demand, as the world forgot
the lesson of Henry Ford's $5-a-day wage: mass production can be supported only
by mass consumption. But mass consumption can't result from millions of workers
whose hourly ''compensation costs'' (including benefits) in 1984 were typically
$1.38 in Korea and $1.27 in Brazil, compared with $13.09 in the United States.
Western exports, particularly those of the U.S., were bound to suffer.

The result in this country has been diminished economic growth, declining wages
(from a weekly average of $201 in 1973 to $167 in May 1987, in constant 1977
dollars), loss of purchasing power, less job security and reduced public
services - in sum, a declining standard of living.

The remedy, Mr. Mead argues, is difficult but not unattainable: a concerted
effort to increase worldwide demand by raising wages and benefits and improving
social conditions for the working-class masses in the third world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Critic's Notebook;
Did 'PACO'S STORY' DESERVE ITS AWARD?

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1450 words


WHAT happened? That was the question everyone was asking last week, following
the news that ''Paco's Story'' by Larry Heinemann had won the 1987 National Book
Award for fiction. Members of the literary community had widely regarded Toni
Morrison's novel ''Beloved'' as a virtual shoo-in for the prize (with ''The
Counterlife'' by Philip Roth also a strong contender) and the announcement last
Monday evening that Mr. Heinemann's novel had walked away with the prize was
greeted with expressions of surprise and astonishment.

Amid fruitless efforts to dissect the three-member jury's decision-making
process (did they split their vote, make a compromise decision, etc.) several
theories emerged. 1. The jury did not want to be swayed by critical and popular
opinion and so tried (maybe even went out of its way) to give the less
talked-about nominees a chance. ''Beloved'' and ''The Counterlife,'' after all,
are by prominent authors with substantial bodies of work and numerous honors to
their credit, while the other nominees, ''Paco's Story'' and Alice McDermott's
''That Night'' are second novels, and ''The Northern Lights'' is Howard Norman's
first.

In its earliest incarnation, the National Book Award often helped establish new
writers as major voices in American fiction (in 1960, the award went to Mr. Roth
for ''Goodbye, Columbus,'' his first collection of short stories; in 1962, it
went to Walker Percy for his first novel ''The Moviegoer''), and its judges were
also criticized for their tendency to select obscure works.

When the National Book Awards was replaced in 1980 by the American Book Awards,
procedures were changed to insure more democratic results (the number of
categories was increased to 17 from 7, and balloting was opened to booksellers,
librarians and publishers took the place of a jury system) -changes that
resulted in considerable protest. ''The T.A.B.A. program is designed to make
sure that no more shockingly noncommercial choices are made in the future,''
read a letter signed by 44 former winners and judges of the award. Efforts to
deal with this criticism led, in turn, to several more changes of format, as
well as the reinstatement this year of the original name, the National Book
Awards.

In this light, say observers, the choice of ''Paco's Story'' might well reflect
a willful desire on the part of the fiction jury to focus on a lesser-known
work. While Ms. Morrison and Mr. Roth are hardly commercial authors, while they
both have impeccable literary credentials, this view argues that their
popularity ( ''The Counterlife'' spent weeks on the New York Times best-seller
list; ''Beloved'' is currently in its ninth week there) actually worked against
their receiving an award. 2. The jury's choice of ''Paco's Story'' is another
manifestation, like ''Platoon's'' winning so many Academy Awards, of a growing
interest in the Vietnam War - signalling, on one hand, a healthy attempt to come
to terms with America's involvement in that conflict, and on the other, a trendy
and possibly short-lived embracing of what the author Philip Caputo calls ''
Vietnam chic.'' Indeed Mr. Heinemann - along with Mr. Caputo, Robert Olen Butler
and Tim O'Brien, who won the National Book Award in 1979 for his novel ''Going
After Cacciato,'' participated last August in a panel discussion about that very
subject.

In addition, observers point out that the recipient of this year's nonfiction
award, Richard Rhodes's ''The Making of the Atomic Bomb,'' also dealt with the
memory of a recent war, that both Mr. Rhodes and Mr. Heinemann alluded to the
dangers of war in their acceptance speeches. 3. The jury simply thought that of
the five nominees, ''Paco's Story'' was most deserving of the award.

How Good Is It?

How good is ''Paco's Story''? Is it truly the finest work of fiction published
in America this year? Such assessments, like the jury's decision itself, are
obviously subjective, though it might be interesting to compare it, say, with
''Beloved.'' Both novels deal with a huge, tragic fact of American history -
Vietnam in one case, slavery in the other. Both reveal, through discontinuous
narratives, the terrible consequences of those events - the ways in which they
prevent ordinary people from living ordinary lives. And both are ghost stories
of sorts, invoking the spirits of the dead to lend their narratives a
heightened, even surreal dimension: ''Paco's Story'' is narrated by the hero's
comrades in arms, who died during a devastating firefight; and the heroine of
''Beloved'' is confronted by the spirit of her baby daughter, whom she murdered
under shocking circumstances many years before.

In the case of ''Paco's Story'' -which relates the efforts of a severely wounded
Vietnam veteran to find a job and make peace with his memories of the war -
these narrative strategies provide Mr. Heinemann with ways of getting around
some of the problems posed by this anomalous war. By juxtaposing time present
and time past, he's able to avoid the grim parade of violent events that leave
readers of so many Vietnam novels emotionally numb (much the way they felt,
watching the war, night after night, on the television news) - seeing the
nightmare images of the war juxtaposed with Paco's attempts to wash dishes or
get a bus ride actually heightens their horror. By using the collective voice of
Paco's dead buddies as his narrator, he's able to avoid having to delineate a
whole cast of supporting characters - something that's often a weakness of
Vietnam novels, given the military's short rotating tours of duty there, which
tended to preclude the old-fashioned novel of male camaraderie. And by making
that voice a hip, cynical one, he's able to avoid dealing with many of the
troubling political and moral ambiguites raised by the war.

In this reader's opinion, however, the use of Paco's dead buddies never becomes
more than a shrewd narrative device. Though it's a well-crafted, often admirable
novel, it never succeeds - as did Tim O'Brien's ''Going After Cacciato'' - in
enveloping the reader in the halluciantory atmosphere of the war, or in forcing
us to examine the complicated ways in which the war relates to everyday human
frailties and needs. Instead, ''Paco's Story'' settles for bluntly telegraphing
the sort of messages that have become familiar to us from dozens of newspaper
and television reports - that Vietnam vets were often met with scorn, rather
than honors, upon their return home; that Paco, like many others, has been so
scarred by his experiences that he now simply seeks to survive or cope; that he
wonders why he, rather than someone else, managed to survive.

In these respects, Paco is not so different from the heroes of many other novels
about Vietnam - all of which invert the classic scenario of a boy going off to
war and returning home a man. In such novels as Rob Rigan's ''Free Fire Zone,''
Ward Just's ''Stringer'' and Stephen Wright's ''Meditations in Green,'' the hero
also returns emotionally damaged -alienated from his contemporaries and unable
to adjust to the routines of daily life. In fact, one of the larger flaws of
this novel is that Paco never emerges as a distinct individual: he comes across
as much a vague representative soldier as the generic voice that tells us his
story. At the same time, Mr. Heinemann's writing is insufficiently powerful, his
vision too myopic, to effectively turn him into the sort of mythic Lazarus-like
figure that might otherwise engage our passions.

''Beloved,'' on the other hand, remains a work of mature imagination - a
magisterial and deeply moving meditation not only on the cruelties of a single
institition, but on family, history and love. Instead of reconfirming our
feelings about tragedies in our nation's past (war is hell, slavery is evil),
the novel shakes up all our preconceptions, makes us grapple with the moral
chiaroscuro that shades each of the characters' decisions. It does not merely
give us a portrait of one individual's loss of innocence, but also reveals the
myriad ways in which families and strangers can hurt and redeem one another.

'Not a Horse Race'

It's unfair perhaps to compare a young author's second novel with one written by
a highly experienced novelist, but then that's exactly what the judges on the
fiction panel for the National Book Award did. The decision, said Hilma
Wolitzer, chairman of the panel, came after ''an agonizing down-to-the-wire
deliberation.''

Which reminds one of the speech that E. L. Doctorow made last year when he
accepted the fiction award for ''World's Fair.''

''I have ambivalent feelings about awards,'' he said, ''because literature is
not a horse race.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Larry Heinemann (NYT/Lori Grinker)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Exhibition Shows Toscanini as Musician and Anti-Fascist

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words


Arturo Toscanini's influence on 20th-century orchestral works is assured; now,
with the opening today of the exhibition ''Arturo Toscanini, 1915-1946: Art in
the Shadow of Politics,'' the outspoken record of his anti-Fascism is fully
documented.

The exhibition, at the New York Public Library at Lincoln Center, includes
original material that has been assembled for the first time in the United
States. The great conductor's musical life and political life strike a strong
common chord.

Among the astonishing material on display is a transcript derived from a wiretap
on his hotel room in Milan that was made by Fascist political police. There are
letters from President Roosevelt, Mussolini, Hitler and a number of contemporary
composers and conductors; libretti and posters of legendary performances in the
great opera houses.

A rare photograph shows the exterior of La Scala, taken right after Mussolini's
fall but while the German Wehrmacht still patrolled the streets of Milan in
occupied Italy, plastered with furtive signs saying: ''Eviva Toscanini,''
''Ritorni Toscanini'' (''Long live Toscanini,'' ''Come back Toscanini'').

Open Resistance to Fascism

While the exhibition includes Toscanini's whole musical career, the highlights
cover his open resistance to Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany. Not only did he
refuse to raise his baton and play their tune, but he publicly defied both
dictators as well.

In 1931, Toscanini was slapped across the face for refusing to perform the
Fascist party hymn before a concert in Bologna. He vowed not to return to Italy
until the fall of Fascism and the monarchy. He remained in exile until 1946,
when he returned to reinaugurate the newly restored La Scala.

One document, passed along by an anonymous informer in 1931, included a note
appended to it in Mussolini's hand saying to send it to his Foreign Minister,
Dino Grandi. The informer reported that after Toscanini declined to go to a
reception organized in his honor, the conductor said that he was not attending
''because he was an anti-Fascist, because he held Mussolini to be a tyrant and
oppressor of Italy, and that rather than break these convictions he was prepared
never to return to Italy.''

The wiretapped transcript of a conversation held in 1938 by Toscanini with a
woman friend was found among the papers in Mussolini's file. Part of it
expressed Toscanini's disgust at the anti-Jewish laws: ''Jewish children can't
go to school. This is medieval stuff!'' Legible at the top of the first page is
an annotation made by Mussolini's police chief: ''Which proves what we already
knew, that Toscanini is indomitable.''

Protested German Policies

The bottom of the transcript bears the words: ''By order of the Duce take away
Toscanini's passport.''

In the exhibition is a letter from Berlin, signed by Adolf Hitler in 1933, sent
to the ''Highly Honored Maestro'' in New York, saying that he, as Chancellor of
the German Reich, looked forward to ''the hour when I shall personally be able,
in Bayreuth, to thank you, the great representative of art and of a people
friendly to Germany, for your participation in the great Maestro's work.''

''With sincere admiration,'' it closed, ''your most devoted A. Hitler.''

Two days before this letter was written, Toscanini had headed a list of
illustrious musicians in the United States who had signed a statement cabled to
the German Government protesting German racial policies in general and the
ostracism of Jewish musicians in particular. The Bayreuth Festival hung in the
balance; but Toscanini refused to conduct there, despite Hitler's flattery.

This decision caused Serge Koussevitsky, the Russian-Jewish conductor of the
Boston Symphony Orchestra, to send a moving letter to Toscanini that is on
display. Part of the letter goes: ''You have acted not only as a great artist
but also as a great man. I have rarely been able to experience so fine and proud
a feeling: today I am proud to be an artist! May God bless you.''

'I Hate Compromise'

Toscanini also refused to go to Salzburg in 1938 because of the links between
the German and Austrian Governments. A cable from Bruno Walter from Vienna tried
to persuade Toscanini to play there and not make up his mind until Walter
explained the ''true'' political situation in a letter.

Toscanini's cable to Walter about why he refused to play at the Salzburg
Festival is personal and forceful: ''Futile to await your letter my decision is
final stop I have only one way of thinking and acting. I hate compromise. I walk
and I shall always walk on the straight path that I have traced for myself in
life. Cordial greetings.''

A letter from President Roosevelt to Toscanini in 1934, when he was conductor of
the New York Philharmonic, greets him on his 65th birthday.

Other photographs in the exhibition show Toscanini in Palestine, in 1936 and
1938, when he conducted the Palestine Orchestra, and his triumphant return to La
Scala.

Worldwide Sources

A combination of forces and even coincidences led to the Toscanini exhibition
coming to New York first, from Parma, Italy, before traveling to Europe, Asia,
Australia and Israel. Harvey Sachs organized the documentary exhibition. Mr.
Sachs left the United States to protest the Vietnam war in 1967 and became a
Canadian citizen. He now lives in a small village near Parma, is a music critic,
and is author of two books coming out early next year, a biography of Toscanini
and a history of music in Fascist Italy.

Mr. Sachs said he tracked down items from sources all over the world. Some are
from the New York Public Library at Lincoln Center's own ''Toscanini Legacy.''
The exhibition comes under unusual auspices: the Symphony Orchestra of the
regional government of Emilia-Romagna. It is part of the ''Italy on Stage''
series in New York.

The exhibition continues in the galleries of the library at Lincoln Center
through Jan. 30 during library hours: Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays from 10
A.M. to 8 P.M., Wednesdays and Fridays from noon to 6 P.M., and Saturdays from
10 A.M. to 6 P.M. Admission is free.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JUSTICES ALLOW SCRUITINY OF AGENT ORANGE DATA

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16


Over the protest of seven chemical manufacturers, the Supreme Court today let
stand an appeals court order that the companies allow Vietnam veterans who sued
them see research documents on the herbicide Agent Orange.

The chemical defoliant, which was sprayed from the air in Vietnam to denude
enemy jungle areas, is suspected by groups representing thousands of veterans as
the cause of cancer and other ailments, although Federal medical studies have
not established this. The defoliant compound contains traces of the toxic
chemical dioxin.

In May 1984, hours before the veterans' lawsuit against the seven companies was
to go to trial before Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in
Brooklyn, the plaintiffs and the companies reached a settlement. It established
a $180 million fund for the claimants and their survivors, a group that may
total 120,000 people.

Papers Locked Away

The settlement also called for the return to the companies of documents
detailing company findings on the toxicity of Agent Orange. The papers, many of
them granted court protection against public disclosure on the ground that they
contained patent and other ''proprietary information,'' were locked in the
Brooklyn courthouse or were in lawyers' offices.

But the veterans' groups then sought to study the documents for evidence that
the companies might have had early knowledge of harmful effects from exposure to
Agent Orange. The companies resisted but Judge Weinstein granted the request.
Last June, the Federal Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit upheld his
ruling.

The companies appealed the ruling to the Supreme Court, arguing that it would
encourage ''frivolous suits for the sole purpose'' of access to private
corporate documents.

Today, the Court refused to consider the appeal in the case, Dow v. Ryan, No.
87-224.

The result appeared to weaken a traditional claim of corporations, that they may
keep sensitive internal papers, including reports on their own laboratory
studies of hazardous products, secret.

The corporations involved are the Dow Chemical Company, the Diamond Shamrock
Chemicals Company, Hercules Inc., the Monsanto Company, T H Agriculture and
Nutrition Company, the Thompson Chemicals Corporation and Uniroyal Inc. Their
lead counsel is Leonard L. Rivkin of Uniondale, L.I., whose secretary said today
that she could not reach him to seek comment.

Mike Leaveck, a spokesman for the Vietnam Veterans of America, one of the
original applicants for access to the companies' data, said that a team of
medical and legal experts would be assembled to study the company documents,
which he said might provide new evidence of Government responsibility for
veterans' injuries.

The group has supported other lawsuits seeking to force the Veterans
Administration to compensate veterans who contend that illness and death
resulted from exposure to Agent Orange.

Ruling on Pretrial Statements

WASHINGTON, Nov. 16 (AP) - The Court let stand a ruling that the public has no
right to hear or see pretrial statements in criminal cases that were given under
oath but not in a courtroom.

The Court, without comment, refused to hear arguments by Florida newspapers that
reporters have a right either to attend sessions at which depositions are given
or to obtain copies of them.

The cases are Palm Beach Newspapers v. Burk, 87-507; Miami Herald v. Burk,
87-508; Palm Beach Newspapers v. Hagler, 87-509, and Miami Herald v. Hagler,
87-510. The Court also let stand a ruling that a criminal defense lawyer may be
forced to give the prosecution notes from the pretrial questioning of
prosecution witnesses.

The justices, citing the lack of a ''substantial Federal question'' in Boclair
v. Illinois, 87-10, rejected an appeal by a Chicago lawyer cited for contempt of
court for refusing to turn over such notes in a murder case.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Citizens Want to Know

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 772 words

DATELINE: RALEIGH, N.C.


Whitty Cuninggim started by explaining what had first moved her. ''I was a bride
in 1939. My playhouse was disrupted and I didn't know why. When my husband was
sent off to war, my mother-in-law said: 'Don't worry. God will send him back.' I
wasn't satisfied. He came back, but I decided by cracky, I may not be able to do
anything about it but from now on I'm going to know why.''

As head of the Fall Forum of the North Carolina Council of Women's
Organizations, she then called on the others at a preliminary dinner to say a
few words. The forum, last weekend, was sponsored by the Council and the
Triangle Universities' Security Seminar to broaden the debate on national
security policies, aimed particularly at involving women who could stimulate
discussion in their own communities. But there were also quite a lot of men
present.

As one of the women leaders said, ''It's not that we think women have better or
different ideas, but they're just too large and important a part of the
population to stand aside or be left out of these big issues.''

To some, recollections of ''the war'' meant World War II, to others Korea or
Vietnam, but they were all thinking about the future. Their brief and personal
remarks gave an unusual insight into a segment of American opinion, its origins
and preoccupations. This is Senator Jesse Helms's state, and it was clear that
these are not the people who support him and his hawkish views. But it was also
clear they represent a substantial and active part of the electorate, and
they're not content to be preached at and cozened; they want to know.

Dr. Eugenia Zallen, president of the council, introduced herself after Mrs.
Cuninggim and said, ''My father was gassed and wounded in World War I. He taught
us that we have to know what's going on in the world, we have to watch out.''

Brig. Gen. E. Patricia Foote, a North Carolinian who is one of few senior women
in the U.S. Army, said the nation's military leaders were paying attention to
women who raised their voices in the security debate, and urged them to speak
out.

Sheila Tobias, who has written two books and who lectures on defense spending
and weapons policies, remembered that when she was 5 years old, her father told
her Hitler had taken France. She asked him, ''Where did he put it?'' She still
goes about asking provocative questions, but with a purpose. A survey showed,
she said, that only 30 percent of people knew that the S in SALT stands for
strategic, and 70 percent didn't know during the ratification debate in 1979
that the two signatories to the treaty were the U.S. and the Soviet Union.

''Many people are deeply committed to the idea of arms control,'' she said she
had found, ''but they can't argue against the hard-line opponents for a lack of
technical knowledge.'' Henry Brown of the North Carolina Power and Light
Company, which supported the forum, echoed General Foote's comments about the
need for more people to involve themselves in the political process. He had
worked in Washington as a lobbyist, he said, and he knew the difference it can
make.

Prof. Robert Rupen, who teaches political science at the University of North
Carolina, said he spent four years fighting in the Pacific and ''I wondered why
I was there. I've been finding out ever since.'' These Americans spoke of their
concern with the grave issues of war and peace that underlie the exalted
rhetoric about superweapons, superiority, when to use force. They weren't
against defense. They didn't say nasty things about generals.

They didn't want America to withdraw from world affairs or imagine that it
possibly could.

But they did want to be included in the fateful decisions that are being made,
to know enough of the details not to be bullied or frightened by people who put
them off with ''just trust me, I know what's best.'' And they want their fellow
citizens to participate by learning enough to argue their own views effectively.

This is going to matter enormously in the period ahead. The U.S. and the Soviet
Union are about to sign a treaty on destruction of intermediate-range nuclear
weapons. Already there are signs that the ratification argument will be fierce
and emotional. Whether it leads to further, more significant steps to reduce
vast arsenals, conventional as well as military, to redirect the use of
America's wealth from the arms race, will depend on the coming national debate
and who takes part. These North Carolinians feel strongly that citizens need to
make the effort to know for themselves what the ''experts'' are talking about.
They are on the right track. It can make the difference.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET HINTS MOVE ON AFGHAN ACCORD

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


A recent flurry of diplomatic activity has raised new speculation that the
Soviet Union may be ready to compromise on a timetable for the withdrawal of the
115,000 troops it has stationed in Afghanistan.

Although Moscow has made no formal offer for a withdrawal period shorter than 16
months after military support for the Afghan guerrillas is ended, the Soviet
Foreign Ministry spokesman, Gennadi I. Gerasimov, said at a news conference in
Munich on Monday that a pullout could take place in 7 to 12 months if a formula
for ''national reconciliation'' could be worked out. This means an agreement on
the composition of an interim government in Kabul.

Such a timetable would be closer to what is envisioned by the Reagan
Administration, which has expressed concern that Soviet forces could use a long
period - after a cutoff in American aid to the Islamic guerrillas - to stage
devastating attacks on guerrilla units. Pakistan, where most of the Afghan
guerrillas have their bases, has proposed a withdrawal period of no more than
eight months.

Diego Cordovez, the United Nations Under Secretary General for Political
Affairs, said today that he would not convene another round of the indirect
Afghan-Pakistani talks he has been mediating ''unless I'm convinced that an an
agreement on a timetable can be reached.''

Summit Meeting Cited

But Mr. Cordovez is also understood to be planning a trip to the region in
mid-December, reportedly to begin discussions on who would take part in a
transitional Afghan government.

In Geneva, an American official involved in pre-summit meetings with a Soviet
delegation said there were signs that Moscow might put forward a new timetable
before or during the summit meeting between President Reagan and Mikhail S.
Gorbachev in Washington next month.

But a Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman in Moscow today denounced as a
''distortion'' speculation in the West European press that the Soviet leader
would use the summit meeting to announce a new timetable for withdrawal. At a
briefing, the spokesman described the Soviet position as unchanged in its
emphasis on the need for guarantees against continued foreign support for the
guerrillas. The United States, Saudi Arabia and Iran are among those providing
funds and arms to the guerrillas.

Parallels With Vietnam

According to the American in Geneva, the Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Yuli M.
Vorontsov, has seemed haunted by the parallels between the Soviet predicament in
Afghanistan and the American experience in Vietnam. He keeps making statements
like, ''We're not going to have a solution that leaves us with our last people
leaving Kabul on the struts of helicopters,'' the American said.

This reflects a Soviet preoccupation with the creation of an interim Afghan
government that can prevent what the Russians fear would otherwise be a
bloodbath by guerrillas against Afghan officials who have served in the
Soviet-backed regime, headed by Najibullah.

Consequently, the Russians have urged that the Afghan Communists form the core
of a transitional government, holding the key cabinet posts. The Afghan
guerrillas have refused to consider sharing power with people they consider
collaborators.

U.S. Might Press Guerrillas

Diplomats close to the situation are said to have told the Russians that once
Moscow sets an acceptable withdrawal schedule, the United States and Pakistan
may be prepared to press the guerrillas on an interim government.

Some American officials have said that with a timetable in hand, the United
States would probably begin discussions with guerrilla leaders about a
compromise. A Pakistani official said that because of growing public resentment
in Pakistan to attacks by Afghanistan on Afghan guerrillas on Pakistani
territory, the Islamabad Government would probably feel considerable pressure to
push the guerrillas to agree on a political compromise to get the Soviet troops
out.

On the other hand, Moscow has insisted privately that an agreement on an interim
government must precede the setting of a timetable. And one diplomat said he
thought the Russians would agree to a shorter timetable if it became clear than
a suitable interim government could be formed.

''I don't think the Russians are going to start with a timetable,'' a diplomat
said, ''unless they see movement toward an interim government that will make
sure that a massacre doesn't happen.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Charleston, W.Va., Mayor Admits Cocaine Guilt

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, W.Va., Nov. 17


Mayor James E. (Mike) Roark, on the morning his drug trial was to begin, pleaded
guilty today to six misdemeanor counts of cocaine possession and agreed to
resign.

For months Mr. Roark, a 42-year-old former county prosecutor who was once
nicknamed ''Mad Dog'' for his zeal in fighting drug abuse, had denied 30 Federal
charges of cocaine possession, distribution and tampering with a Federal grand
jury after his indictment July 31.

After his guilty plea, a drained-looking Mr. Roark said he was deeply sorry for
his ''personal indiscretion.'' He said his action was ''in the best interests of
the city and my best interests.''

Expressions of Sadness

Mr. Roark, who will be sentenced in about a month, faces a maximum of one year
in prison, or a $5,000 fine for each count. Before agreeing to the plea bargain
agreement, Mr. Roark had faced a maximum of 182 years in prison and $525,000
fine. He was released today on personal recognizance.

His guilty plea drew expressions of sadness and support from many in this
close-knit capital city who saw him as an effective Mayor and prosecutor. ''He
has always conducted himself in an outstanding and upstanding way,'' said Edward
Armbrecht, a Republican member of the City Council. ''My disappointment is that
the city is losing one of the outstanding Mayors that it has had at a critical
time in its history.''

Some here said they were disappointed by Mr. Roark's admission that he had lied
in previous statements in which he said that he never used cocaine. Others said
they believed Federal prosecutors were out to get Mr. Roark for small-time
offenses.

United States Attorney Michael Carey said Mr. Roark's guilty plea validated a
wide-ranging drug investigation that has produced more than 30 convictions.

A moderate Republican who was elected to a second four-year term in April by a
large margin, Mr. Roark had been mentioned as a possible future candidate for
Governor.

Council to Choose Successor

He will resign by Nov. 24, and the City Council will then choose a new Mayor.
Mr. Roark will be able to continue to practice law.

Mr. Roark and his attorneys reached a plea agreement with Federal prosecutors
this morning, shortly before jury selection was to begin. On Monday, Federal
District Judge Walter Hoffman had again denied a defense request that Mr. Roark,
a trial lawyer, be allowed to address the jury and question witnesses.

Slumped in his seat, Mr. Roark listened this morning as an an agent of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation summarized grand jury testimony that led to the
indictment. The charges included possession of cocaine at his home, at the
parking lot of a high school and during a rafting trip.

The dates of possession range from December 1982, while Mr. Roark was still
Kanawha County Prosecutor, to October 1984.

Asked by Judge Hoffman for his plea, Mr. Roark, with his head bowed slightly,
responded, ''guilty your honor.'' He said he last used cocaine 2 1/2 to 3 years
ago.

A native of Nitro, a small city near Charleston, Mr. Roark attended the
University of Virginia and West Virginia's University College of Law.
Interrupting his law school term, Roark served in the Marines in Vietnam. He
served as Assistant United States Attorney in Pittsburgh before returning to
Charleston to run for county prosecutor.

The rumors of drug use had dogged Mr. Roark for years. Few around him had
personal knowledge of such activity. But the twice-divorced Mayor often
socialized in Charleston nightclubs, and prosecutors were to present former
female companions as witnesses against him.

''Roark was never like the rest of us,'' said William Forbes, a Charleston
lawyer who had been an assistant prosecutor under Mr. Roark. ''He could go out
and party until four in the morning, get up and run five miles, then go out and
try a case better than the rest of us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Washington Talk: Briefing;
Ortega Snowed In

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 170 words


Last week's snowstorm here may have killed an audacious notion of the Nicaraguan
President, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, to visit the Vietnam War memorial on Veterans
Day last week.

Mr. Ortega and his aides, who were on a trip to Washington, debated the idea,
which they saw as a way to impress on Americans the risks of becoming directly
involved in his country's civil war.

Although this idea was abandoned amid Wednesday's heavy snow, Mr. Ortega
subsequently told a dinner gathering Friday he had managed to slip away for a
brief visit to the memorial on his own, apparently without catching the notice
of photographers.

After the dinner, Mr. Ortega spotted Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the former United
Nations Ambassador. He rushed over to her and said she should have stopped to
see him on her recent visit to Nicaragua.

Dr. Kirkpatrick, one of the Nicaraguan leader's most vigorous critics, appeared
nonplussed at first but later told a reporter that she had indeed sought a
meeting with him but had been refused.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Weinberger Departs To the Cannon's Roar

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 642 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


Amid the roll of drums, the boom of cannon and with banners fluttering in a cool
breeze, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger marched out of office today after
nearly seven years as steward of the nation's largest military buildup in
peacetime.

In a ceremony on the Pentagon's parade field, Mr. Weinberger was visibly moved
by the pageantry and by the praise from President Reagan.

The President saluted Mr. Weinberger as a colleague, an ally, an adviser and a
friend. ''How many times, my friend,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''have I looked to you
to find the safe harbor of principle in the stormy events of world affairs?''

Mr. Weinberger, who is 70 years old and is one of the President's original
Cabinet members, has said he is retiring because of the ill health of his wife,
Jane. He will remain as Defense Secretary until his successor, Frank C. Calucci,
is confirmed by the Senate and sworn in, which is expected in the next few days.


'A Very Special Breed'

After trooping the line of soldiers, sailors, marines, airmen and
coastguardsmen, the departing Pentagon leader thanked associates among the 2,000
military and political leaders gathered at the parade field.

In particular, Mr. Weinberger lauded the men and women in the armed forces.
''They're a very special breed of young people,'' he said, ''and they are led by
an exceptional cadre of officers and noncommissioned officers, and we are
fortunate beyond all expression to have them.''

But Mr. Weinberger, ever the political warrior, did not leave without firing
some parting shots at Mr. Reagan's three immediate predecessors, Presidents
Nixon, Ford and Carter, and at Congress, saying they permitted American military
power to be weakened in the 1970's.

''That decade of neglect was fed, really, by a most insidious idea, that somehow
American power was immoral,'' Mr. Weinberger asserted, ''We began by doubting
the war in Vietnam, and we ended by doubting ourselves.''

Missile Defense Plan Praised

Mr. Weinberger saved perhaps his most stinging words for opponents of the
Strategic Defense Initiative, the President's program for a defense against
nuclear missiles. To trade away that defense, Mr. Weinberger said, ''is one of
the most dangerous ideas ever to infect our political discourse.''

In the same vein, Mr. Reagan seemed to reaffirm his policy of not making the
missile defense program an item for negotiation with the Soviet Union. The
Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who has demanded that the program be
negotiable, is scheduled to arrive here in three weeks to discuss arms control
and sign a treaty banning medium and shorter-range missiles.

''I am determined that we will not repeat the mistakes of the last decade,'' Mr.
Reagan said. ''We will not unilaterally disarm in this one area or any area -
S.D.I. holds out hope of a world free from the fear of ballistic missiles.''

Beyond those remarks, the ceremony was laced with plaudits for Mr. Weinberger.
Adm. William J. Crowe Jr, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said
goodbye with a traditional Navy wish: ''May you always have fair winds and
following seas.''

A Surprise Award

The Army, Navy and Air Force each presented Mr. Weinberger their highest
decoration for civilian service. And Mr. Reagan appeared to catch Mr. Weinberger
by surprise by awarding him the Presidential Medal of Freedom with Distinction.

As the troops passed in review, with battle streamers flowing from each
service's banner, Army helicopters, Navy F-14 fighters, Marine Corps F-4
fighter-bombers and Air Force F-15 fighters streaked overhead.

Bringing up the rear was the Air Force's B-1 bomber, which, perhaps better than
any other weapon, symbolized the arms buildup carried out by Mr. Weinberger. The
program to acquire the bomber was canceled by Mr. Carter, then revived by Mr.
Reagan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo from Pentagon farewell for Caspar W. Weinberger (NYT/Jose R.
Lopez)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CURRENTS;
DESIGN TO HONOR SPACE PIONEERS

BYLINE: By Joseph Giovannini

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 3; Home Desk

LENGTH: 153 words


IN 1980, the National Capital Commission in Washington staged a competition for
the design of a Vietnam War monument. Maya Lin, then a student at Yale
University, won with a simple V-shaped form with the names of American
casualties inscribed on its marble walls. It was a controversial design, but
today, as thousands visit the monument every week, few doubt its success.

In that tradition and spirit, the Astronauts Memorial Foundation recently
announced a competition for a monument in Florida to the astronauts who have
lost their lives in the space program. The call for entries stresses that the
memorial, which will commemorate 14 astronauts who have died in space flight or
in training, should also ''focus on their dreams of opening up the space
frontier.''

The monument will be placed at the Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Fla.
The winner will be announced on Jan. 27. First prize is $25,000.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Publishing: 'Paco' Author Plans a Nonfiction Work

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 598 words


Larry Heinemann, whose ''Paco's Story'' won the National Book Award for fiction
last week, is working on a nonfiction book and has plans for another novel. The
nonfiction book will be about post-traumatic stress disorder among Vietnam
veterans, a subject of great concern to the author, himself a Vietnam veteran.
And while the novel is still only in the formative stages, Pat Strachan, Mr.
Heinemann's editor at Farrar, Straus & Giroux, said what the author has in mind
would probably be ''quite different'' from his previous two novels. Unlike them,
it is not likely to be about the Vietnam War.

The Swiftest Auctioneer

It probably is not surprising that when Shere Hite went looking for a literary
agent recently, she found a superagent, Irving Lazar. Not only is he circulating
Ms. Hite's proposed novel, but now that Sterling Lord resigned as her agent on
another book - after learning of Mr. Lazar's involvement with the novel - he
also plans to auction the paperback rights to her controversial ''Women and
Love.''

While no longer as dominant as he was 25 years ago, the 81-year-old agent is
still a dynamo, wheeling and dealing from offices in New York and Beverly Hills.
''I don't have a single associate,'' he said recently. ''I do it all myself,
including my own foreign sales.''

Within the next two years, Mr. Lazar said, his clients will publish some 20 new
books. They include Yoko Ono, David Brinkley, Gloria Vanderbilt, Richard Nixon,
Jesse Jackson, Ali McGraw, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, David Eisenhower, Angie
Dickinson and Joan Collins.

Miss Collins is writing what Mr. Lazar described as a ''somewhat biographical''
novel. ''I sold it for $1 million to Simon & Schuster before a line was
written,'' he said, ''and sold it in England for another $750,000, plus a split
of serial rights that will bring in another $250,000, at least.''

By insisting he did not know of Mr. Lord's involvement with Ms. Hite, Mr. Lazar
more or less distanced himself from any suggestion that his representation
amounted to literary claim-jumping. But even publishers and agents who said
privately that Mr. Lazar should have known, tempered their criticism with
admiration that he retains the drive of a man half his age.

''They don't call him Swifty for nothing,'' said one publisher, referring to the
widely-used nickname pinned on Mr. Lazar by an admiring Humphrey Bogart.

T.A.B. Takes a Chance

T.A.B. Books has published only one novel during its 23 years, ''Good Friday''
by Robert Holt. But after a two-day auction last week, New American Library
agreed to pay $300,000 for paperback rights to the book. Lawrence Jackel, the
president of T.A.B., which is in Blue Ridge Summit, Pa., said the company
published about 200 books a year, primarily about computers and electronics. A
couple of years ago Mr. Jackel bought Aero Publishers in California, which had
published Mr. Holt's previous novel, ''Sweetwater Gunslinger.''

Perceiving that Mr. Holt's new novel, about the Saudi oil fields, the Soviets
and the United States, was in the same category as military thrillers by Tom
Clancy and Stephen Coonts - both of whose best-selling first novels were
published by the Naval Institute Press - T.A.B. decided to take a chance. It
printed 30,000 copies of ''Good Friday'' last month and backed the book with a
strong publicity campaign. When it held the auction, four paperback houses bid
for the book.

''It's the first auction we've ever done,'' Mr. Jackel said. ''To prepare for
it, we took a quickie course by talking to our friends in the publishing
business.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE IRAN-CONTRA REPORT;
Key Sections of Document: The Making of a Political Crisis

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 9704 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 18


Following are key sections of the majority report, issued today, of the
Congressional committees investigating the Iran-contra affair:

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

Nicaragua

By December 1981, the United States had begun supporting the Nicaraguan contras,
armed opponents of the Sandinista regime.

The Central Intelligence Agency (C.I.A.) was the U.S. Government agency that
assisted the contras. In accordance with Presidential decisions, known as
findings, and with funds appropriated by Congress, the C.I.A. armed, clothed,
fed and supervised the contras. Despite this assistance, the contras failed to
win widespread popular support of military victories within Nicaragua.

Although the President continued to favor support of the contras, opinion polls
indicated that a majority of the public was not supportive. Opponents of the
Administration's policy feared that U.S. involvement with the contras would
embroil the United States in another Vietnam. Supporters of the policy feared
that, without U.S. support for the contras, the Soviets would gain a dangerous
toehold in Central America.

Congress prohibited contra aid for the purpose of overthrowing the Sandinista
Government in fiscal year 1983, and limited all aid to the contras in fiscal
year 1984 to $24 million. Following disclosure in March and April 1984 that the
C.I.A. had a role in connection with the mining of the Nicaraguan harbors
without adequate notification to Congress, public criticism mounted and the
Administration's contra policy lost much of its support within Congress. After
further vigorous debate, Congress exercised its constitutional power over
appropriations and cut off all funds for the contras' military and paramilitary
operations. The statutory provision cutting off funds, known as the Boland
Amendment, was part of a fiscal year 1985 omnibus appropriations bill, and was
signed into law by the President on October 12, 1984.

Still, the President felt strongly about the contras, and he ordered his staff,
in the words of his national security adviser, to find a way to keep the contras
''body and soul together.'' Thus began the story of how the staff of a White
House advisory body, the N.S.C., became an operational entity that secretly ran
the contra assistance effort, and later the Iran initiative. The action officer
placed in charge of both operations was Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North.

Denied finding by Congress, the President turned to third countries and private
sources. Between June 1984 and the beginning of 1986, the President, his
national security adviser, and the N.S.C. staff secretly raised $34 million for
the contras from other countries. An additional $2.7 million was provided for
the contras during 1985 and 1986 from private contributors, who were addressed
by North and occasionally granted photo opportunities with the President. In the
middle of this period, Assistant Secretary of State A. Langhorne Motley - from
whom these contributions were concealed - gave his assurance to Congress that
the Administration was not ''soliciting and/ or encouraging third countries'' to
give funds to the contras because, as he conceded, the Boland Amendment
prohibited such solicitation.

The first contributions were sent by the donors to bank accounts controlled and
used by the contras. However, in July 1985, North took control of the funds and
- with the support of two national security advisers (Robert McFarlane and John
Poindexter) and, according to North, Director Casey - used those funds to run
the covert operation to support the contras.

At the suggestion of Director Casey, North recruited Richard V. Secord, a
retired Air Force major general with experience in special operations. Secord
set up Swiss bank accounts, and North steered future donations into these
accounts. Using these funds, and funds later generated by the Iran arms sales,
Secord and his associate, Albert Hakim, created what they called ''the
Enterprise,'' a private organization designed to engage in covert activities on
behalf of the United States.

The Enterprise, functioning largely at North's direction, had its own airplanes,
pilots, airfield, operatives, ship, secure communications devices, and secret
Swiss bank accounts. For 16 months, it served as the secret arm of the N.S.C.
staff, carrying out with private and non-appropriated money, and without the
accountability or restrictions imposed by law on t C C.I.,., c covt t corara aid
program that Congress thought it had prohibited.

Although the C.I.A. and other agencies involved in intelligence activities knew
that the Boland Amendment barred their involvement in covert support for the
contras, North's contra support operation received logistical and tactical
support from various personnel in the C.I.A. and other agencies. Certain C.I.A.
personnel in Central America gave their assistance. The U.S. Ambassador in Costa
Rica, Lewis Tambs, provided his active assistance. North also enlisted the aid
of Defense Department personnel in Central America, and obtained secure
communications equipment from the National Security Agency. The Assistant
Secretary of State with responsibility for the region, Elliott Abrams, professed
ignorance of this support. He later stated that he had been ''careful not to ask
North lots of questions.''

By Executive Order and National Security Decision Directive issued by President
Reagan, all covert operations must be approved by the President personally and
in writing. By statute, Congress must be notified about each covert action. The
funds used for such actions, like all Government funds, must be strictly
accounted for.

The covert action directed by North, however, was not approved by the President
in writing. Congress was not notified about it. And the funds to support it were
never accounted for. In short, the operation functioned without any of the
accountability required of Government activities. It was an evasion of the
Constitution's most basic check on executive action - the power of the Congress
to grant or deny funding for Government programs.

Moreover, the covert action to support the contras was concealed from Congress
and the public. When the press reported in the summer of 1985 that the N.S.C.
staff was engaged in raising money and furnishing military support to the
contras, the President assured the public that the law was being followed. His
national security adviser, Robert C. McFarlane, assured committees of Congress,
both in person and in writing, that the N.S.C. staff was obeying both the spirit
and the letter of the law, and was neither soliciting money nor co-ordinating
military support for the contras.

A year later, McFarlane's successor, Vice Admiral John M. Poindexter, repeated
these assurances to Congressional committees. Then, with Poindexter's blessing,
North told the House Intelligence Committee he was involved neither in
fund-raising for, nor in providing military advice to, the contras.

When one of Secord's planes was shot down over Nicaragua on October 5, 1986, the
President and several Administration spokesmen assured the public that the U.S.
Government had no connection with the flight or the captured American crew
member, Eugene Hasenfus. Several senior Government officials, including Elliott
Abrams, gave similar assurances to Congress.

Two months later, McFarlane told Congressional committees that he had no
knowledge of contributions made by a foreign country, Country 2, to the contras
when in fact McFarlane and the President had discussed and welcomed $32 million
in contributions from that country. In addition, Abrams initially concealed from
Congress $32 million in contributions from that country. In addition, Abrams
initially concealed from Congress -in testimony given to several committees
-that he had successfully solicited a contribution of $10 million from Brunei.

North conceded at the committees' public hearings that he had participated in
making statements to Congress that were ''false,'' ''misleading,'' ''evasive and
wrong.'' During the period when the Administration was denying to Congress that
it was involved in supporting the contras' war effort, it was engaged in a
campaign to alter public opinion and change the vote in Congress on contra aid.
Public funds were used to conduct public relations activities; and certain
N.S.C. staff members, using the prestige of the White House and the promise of
meetings with the President, helped raise private donations both for media
campaigns and for weapons to be used by the contras.

Pursuant to a Presidential directive in 1983 the Administration adopted a
''public diplomacy'' program to promote the President's Central American policy.
The program was conducted by an office in the State Department known as the
Office for Public Diplomacy for Latin America and the Caribbean (S/LPD). S/LPD's
activities were co-ordinated not within the State Department, but by an
inter-agency working group established by the N.S.C. The principal N.S.C. staff
officer was a former senior C.I.A. official, with experience in covert
operations, who had been detailed to the N.S.C. staff for a year with Casey's
approval, and who upon retirement from the C.I.A. became a special assistant to
the President with responsibility for public diplomacy matters.

S/LPD produced and widely disseminated a variety of pro-contra publications and
arranged speeches and press conferences. It also disseminated what one official
termed ''white propaganda'': pro-contra newspaper articles by paid consultants
who did not disclose their connection to the Administration. Moreover, under a
series of sole-source contracts in 1985 and 1986, S/LPD paid more than $400,000
for pro-contra public relations work to International Business Communications
(IBC), a company owned by Richard Miller, whose organization was described by
one White House representative as a ''White House outside the White House.''

The Administration, like members of Congress, may appeal directly to the people
for support of its positions; and Government agencies may legitimately
disseminate information and educational materials to the public. However, by
law, appropriated funds may not be used to generate propaganda ''designed to
influence a member of Congress''; and by law, as interpreted by the Office of
the Comptroller General, appropriated funds may not be used by the State
Department for ''covert'' propaganda activities. A G.A.O. report concluded that
S/LPD's white propaganda activities violated the ban on arranging ''covert
propaganda.''

Private funds were also used. North and Miller helped Carl R. (Spitz) Channell
raise $10 million, most of which went to Channell's tax-exempt organization, the
National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty (N.E.P.L.). They arranged
numerous ''briefings'' at the White House complex on Central America by
Administration officials for groups of potential contributors. Following these
briefings, Channell reconvened the groups at the Hay-Adams Hotel, and made a
pitch for tax-deductible contributions to N.E.P.L.'s Central America ''public
education'' program or, in some individual cases, for weapons. Channell's major
contributors were given private briefings by North, and were afforded private
visits and photo sessions with the President. On one occasion, President Reagan
participated in a briefing.

Using the donated money, Channell ran a series of television advertisements in
1985 and 1986, some of which were directed at television markets covering the
home districts of Congressmen considered to be ''swing'' votes on contra aid.
One series of advertisements was used to attack Congressman Mike Barnes, a
principal opponent of contra aid, and one of the Congressmen to whom
Administration officials had denied violating the Boland Amendment in September
of 1985. Channell later boasted to North that he had ''participated in a
campaign to ensure Congressman Barnes's defeat.''

Of the $10 million raised by North, Channell and Miller, more than $1 million
was used for pro-contra publicity. Approximately $2.7 million was sent through
I.B.C. and offshore accounts of another Miller-controlled company to Secord's
Swiss accounts, or to Calero's account in Miami. Most of the remainder was spent
on salaries and expenses for Channell, Miller and their business associates.

N.E.P.L.'s charter did not contemplate raising funds for a covert war in
Nicaragua, and the Internal Revenue Service never approved such activity when
N.E.P.L. was granted exempt status. As a consequence, Channell and Miller have
each pleaded guilty to the crime of conspiring to defraud the United States
Treasury of revenues ''by subverting and corrupting the lawful purposes of
N.E.P.L.'' Channell named North as a co-conspirator.

In private fund-raising, as in the ''white propaganda'' campaign, the goal of
supporting the contras was allowed to override sensitivity to law and to
accepted norms of behavior.

Iran

The N.S.C. staff was already engaged in covert operations through Secord when,
in the summer of 1985, the Government of Israel proposed that missiles be sold
to Iran in return for the release of seven American hostages held in Lebanon and
the prospect of improved relations with Iran. The Secretaries of State and
Defense repeatedly opposed such sales to a Government designated by the United
States as a supporter of international terrorism. They called it a straight
arms-for-hostages deal that was contrary to U.S. public policy. They also argued
that these sales would violate the Arms Export Control Act, as well as the U.S.
arms embargo against Iran. The embargo had been imposed after the taking of
hostages at the U.S. Embassy in Teheran on November 4, 1979, and was continued
because of the Iran-Iraq war.

Nevertheless, in the summer of 1985 the President authorized Israel to proceed
with the sales. The N.S.C. staff conducting the contra covert action also took
operational control of implementing the President's decision on arms sales to
Iran. The President did not sign a finding for this covert operation, nor did he
notify the Congress.

Israel shipped 504 TOW anti-tank missiles to Iran in August and September 1985.
Although the Iranians had promised to release most of the American hostages in
return, only one, Reverend Benjamin Weir, was freed. The President persisted. In
November, he authorized Israel to ship 80 Hawk anti-aircraft missiles in return
for all the hostages, with a promise of prompt replenishment by the United
States, and 40 more Hawks to be sent directly by the United States to Iran.
Eighteen Hawk missiles were actually shipped from Israel in November 1985, but
no hostages were released.

In early December 1985, the President signed a retroactive finding purporting to
authorize the November Hawk transaction. That finding contained no reference to
improved relations with Iran. It was a straight arms-for-hostages finding.
National security adviser Poindexter destroyed this finding a year later
because, he testified, its disclosure would have been politically embarrassing
to the President.

The November Hawk transaction had additional significance. The Enterprise
received a $1 million advance from the Israelis. North and Secord testified this
was for transportation expenses in connection with the 120 Hawk missiles. Since
only 18 missiles were shipped, the Enterprise was left with more than $800,000
in spare cash. North directed the Enterprise to retain the money and spend it
for the contras. The ''diversion'' had begun.

North realized that the sale of missiles to Iran could be used to support the
contras. He told Israeli Defense Ministry officials on December 6, 1985, one day
after the President signed the finding, that he planned to generate profits on
future arms sales for activities in Nicaragua.

On December 7, 1985, the President and his top advisers met again to discuss the
arms sales. Secretaries Shultz and Weinberger objected vigorously once more, and
Weinberger argued that the sales would be illegal. After a meeting in London
with the Iranian interlocutor and the Israelis, McFarlane recommended that the
sales be halted. Admiral John Poindexter (the new national security adviser),
and Director Casey were of the opposite opinion.

The President decided to go forward with the arms sales to get the hostages
back. He signed a finding on January 6, 1986, authorizing more shipments of
missiles for the hostages. When the C.I.A.'s General Counsel pointed out that
authorizing Israel to sell its U.S.-manufactured weapons to Iran might violate
the Arms Export Control Act, the President, on the legal advice of the Attorney
General, decided to authorize direct shipments of the missiles to Iran by the
United States and signed a new finding on January 17, 1986. To carry out the
sales, the N.S.C. staff turned once again to the Enterprise.

Although North had become skeptical that the sales would lead to the release of
all the hostages or a new relationship with Iran, he believed that the prospect
of generating funds for the contras was ''an attractive incentive'' for
continuing the arms sales. No matter how many promises the Iranians failed to
keep throughout this secret initiative, the arms sales continued to generate
funds for the Enterprise, and North and his superior, Poindexter, were
consistent advocates for their continuation. What North and Poindexter asserted
in their testimony that they did not know, however, was that most of these arms
sales profits would remain with the Enterprise and never reach the contras.

In February 1986, the United States, acting through the Enterprise, sold 1,000
TOW's to the Iranians. The U.S. also provided the Iranians with military
intelligence about Iraq. All of the remaining American hostages were supposed to
be released upon Iran's receipt of the first 500 TOW's. None was. But the
transaction was productive in one respect. The difference between what the
Enterprise paid the United States for the missiles and what it received from
Iran was more than $6 million. North directed part of this profit for the
contras and for other covert operations. Poindexter testified that he authorized
this ''diversion.''

The diversion, for the contras and other covert activities, was not an isolated
act by the N.S.C. staff. Poindexter saw it was ''implementing'' the President's
secret policy that had been in effect since 1984 of using nonappropriated funds
following passage of the Boland Amendment.

According to North, C.I.A. Director Casey saw the ''diversion'' as part of a
more grandiose plan to use the Enterprise as a ''stand-alone,''
''off-the-shelf,'' covert capacity that would act throughout the world while
evading Congressional review. To Casey, Poindexter, and North, the diversion was
an integral pat of selling arms to Iran and just one of the indended uses of the
proceeds.

In May 1986, the President again tried to sell weapons to get the hostages back.
This time, the President agreed to ship parts for Hawk missiles but only on
condition that all the American hostages in Lebanon be released first. A mission
headed by Robert McFarlane, the former national security adviser, traveled to
Teheran with the first installment of the Hawk parts. When the mission arrived,
McFarlane learned that the Iranians claimed they had never promised to do
anything more than try to obtain the hostages' release. The trip ended amid
misunderstanding and failure, although the first installment of Hawk parts was
delivered.

The Enterprise was paid, however, for all of the Hawk parts, and realized more
than an $8 million profit, part of which was applied, at North's direction, to
the contras. Another portion of the profit was used by North for other covert
operations, including the operation of a ship for a secret mission. The idea of
an off-the-shelf, stand-alone covert capacity had become operational.

On July 26, 1986, another American hostage, Father Lawrence Jenco, was released.
Despite all the arms sales, he was only the second hostage freed, and the first
since September 1985. Even though McFarlane had vowed at the Teheran meeting not
to deliver the remainder of the Hawk parts until all the hostages were released,
the Administration capitulated again. The balance of the Hawk parts was shipped
when Father Jenco was released.

In September and October 1986, the N.S.C. staff began negotiating with a new
group of Iranians, the ''second channel,'' that Albert Hakim had opened, in
part, through promises of bribes. Although these Iranians allegedly had better
contacts with Iranian officials, they, in fact, represented the same principals
as did the first channel and had the same arrangement in mind: missiles for
hostages. Once again, the Administration insisted on release of all the hostages
but settled for less.

In October, after a meeting in London, North left Hakim to negotiate with the
Iranians. Hakim made no secret of his desire to make large profits for himself
and General Secord in the $15 billion-a-year Iranian market if relations with
the United States could be restored. Thus, he had every incentive to make an
agreement, whatever concessions might be required.

As an unofficial ''ambassador'' selected by North and Secord, Hakim produced a
remarkable nine-point plan, subsequently approve by North and Poindexter, under
which the United States would receive ''one and one half'' hostages (later
reduced to one). Under the plan, the United States agreed not only to sell the
Iranians 500 more TOW's, but Secord and Hakim promised to develop a plan to
induce the Kuwaiti Government to release the Daawa prisoners. (Seventeen Kuwaiti
prisoners, connected to Al Dawa, an Iranian revolutionary group, had been
convicted and imprisoned for their part in the December 12, 1983, attacks in
Kuwait on the U.S. Embassy, a U.S. civilian compound, the French Embassy, and
several Kuwaiti Government facilities.) The plan to obtain the release of the
Daawa prisoners did not succeed, but the TOW missiles were sold for use by the
Iranian Revolutionary Guard. Following the transfer of these TOW's, a third
hostage, David Jacobsen, was released on November 2, 1986, and more profit was
generated for the Enterprise.

Poindexter testified that the President approved the nine-point plan. But other
testimony raises questions about this assertion. Regardless of what Poindexter
may have told the President, Secretary Shultz testified that when he informed
the President on December 14, 1986, that the nine-point plan included a promise
about the release of the Dawa prisoners in Kuwait, the President reacted with
shock, ''like he had been kicked in the belly.''

During the negotiations with the second channel, North and Secord told the
Iranians that the President agreed with their position that Iraq's President,
Saddam Hussein, had to be removed and further agreed that the United States
would defend Iran against Soviet aggression. They did not clear this with the
President and their representations were flatly contrary to U.S. policy.

                               .    .    .

By permitting private parties to conduct the arms sales, the Administration
risked losing control of an important foreign policy initiative. Private
citizens - whose motivations of personal gain could conflict with the interests
of this conuntry - handled sensitive diplomatic negotiations, and purported to
commit the United States to positions that were anathema to the President's
public policy and wholly unknown to the Secretary of State.

The Coverup

The sale of arms to Iran was a ''significant anticipated intelligence
activity.'' By law, such an activity must be reported to Congress ''in a timely
fashion'' pursuant to Section 501 of the National Security Act. If the proposal
to sell arms to Iran had been reported, the Senate and House Intelligence
Committees would likely have joined Secretaries Shultz and Weinberger in
objecting to this initiative. But Poindexter recommended -and the President
decided - not to report the Iran initiative to Congress.

                               .    .    .

According to North, a ''fall guy'' plan was proposed by Casey in which North
and, if necessary, Poindexter, would take the responsibility for the covert
contra support operation and the diversion. On Saturday November 22, 1986, in
the midst of these efforts to conceal what had happened, Poindexter had a two
and one half hour lunch with Casey. Yet Poindexter could not recall anything
that was discussed.

North testified that he assured Poindexter that he had destroyed all documents
relating to the diversion. The diversion nevertheless was discovered on November
22, 1986, when a Justice Department official, assisting the Attorney General's
fact-finding inquiry, found a ''diversion memorandum'' that had escaped the
shredder.

Prior to the discovery of the diversion memorandum, each interview by the
Attorney General's fact finding team had been conducted in the presence of two
witnesses, and careful notes were taken in accordance with standard professional
practices. After discovery of the diversion memorandum -which itself gave rise
to and inference of serious wrongdoing - the Attorney General departed from
these standard practices. A series of important interviews - Poindexter,
McFarlane, Casey, Regan and Bush - was conducted by the Attorney General alone,
and no notes were made.

The Attorney General then announced at his November 25 press conference that the
diversion had occurred and that the President did not know of it. But he made
several incorrect statements about his own investigation. He stated that the
President had not known of the Israeli pre-finding shipments, and he stated that
the proceeds of the arms sales had been sent directly from the Israelis to the
contras. These statements were both mistaken and inconsistent with information
that had been received during the Attorney General's fact-finding inquiry.

Poindexter testified to these committees that the President did not know of the
diversion. North testified that while he assumed the President had authorized
each diversion, Poindexter told him on November 21, 1986, that the President had
never been told of the diversion.

In light of the destruction of material evidence by Poindexter and North and the
death of Casey, all of the facts may never be known. The committees connot even
be sure whether they heard the whole truth or whether Casey's ''fall guy'' plan
was carried out at the public hearings. But enough is clear to demonstrate
beyond doubt that fundamental processes of governance were disregarded and the
rule of law was subverted.

FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

                               .    .    .

Dishonesty and Secrecy

The Iran-Contra affair was characterized by pervasive dishonesty and inordinate
secrecy.

North admitted that he and other officials lied repeatedly to Congress and to
the American people about the contra covert action and Iran arms sales, and that
he altered and destroyed official documents. North's testimony demonstrates that
he also lied to members of the executive branch, including the Attorney General,
and officials of the State Department, C.I.A. and N.S.C.

Secrecy became an obsession. Congress was never informed of the Iran or the
contra covert actions, notwithstanding the requirement in the law that Congress
be notified of all covert actions in a ''timely fashion.''

Poindexter said that Donald Regan, the President's chief of staff, was not told
of the N.S.C. staff's fundraising activities because he might reveal it to the
press. Secretary Shultz objected to third-country solicitation in 1984 shortly
before the Boland Amendment was adopted; accordingly, he was not told that, in
the same time period, the national security adviser had accepted an $8 million
contribution from Country 2 even though the State Department had prime
responsibility for dealings with that country. Nor was the Secretary of State
told by the President in February 1985 that the same country had pledged another
$24 million - even though the President briefed the Secretary of State on his
meeting with the head of state at which the pledge was made. Poindexter asked
North to keep secrets from Casey; Casey, North and Poindexter agreed to keep
secrets from Shultz.

Poindexter and North cited fear of leaks as a justification for these practices.
But the need to prevent public disclosure cannot justify the deception practiced
upon members of Congress and executive branch officials by those who knew of the
arms sales to Iran and of the contra support network. The State and Defense
Departments deal each day with the most sensitive matters affecting millions of
lives here and abroad. The Congressional Intelligence Committees receive the
most highly classified information, including information on covert activities.
Yet, according to North and Poindexter, even the senior officials of these
bodies could not be entrusted with the N.S.C. staff's secrets because they might
leak.

                               .    .    .

Poindexter told the Secretary of State in May 1986 that the Iran initiative was
over, at the very time the McFarlane mission to Teheran was being launched.
Poindexter also concealed from Cabinet officials the remarkable nine-point
agreement negotiated by Hakim with the second channel. North assured the F.B.I.
liaison to the N.S.C. as late as November 1986 that the United States was not
bargaining for the release of hostages but seizing terrorists to exchange for
hostages -a complete fabrication. The lies, omissions, shredding, attempts to
rewrite history - all continued, even after the President authorized the
Attorney General to find out the facts.

It was not operational security that motivated such conduct - not when our own
Government was the victim. Rather, the N.S.C. staff feared, correctly, that any
disclosure to Congress or the Cabinet of the arms-for-hostages and
arms-for-profit activities would produce a storm of outrage.

As with Iran, Congress was misled about the N.S.C. staff's support for the
contras during the period of the Boland Amendment, although the roles of the
N.S.C. staff was no secret to others. North testified that his operation was
well-known to the press in the Soviet Union, Cuba and Nicaragua. It was not a
secret from Nicaragua's neighbors, with whom the N.S.C. staff communicated
throughout the period. It was not a secret from the third countries - including
a totalitarian state -from whom the N.S.C. staff sought arms or funds. It was
not a secret from the private resupply network which North recruited and
supervised. According to North, even Ghorbanifar knew.

The Administration never sought to hide its desire to assist the contras so long
as such aid was authorized by statute. On the contrary, it wanted the
Sandinistas to know that the United States supported the contras. After
enactment of the Boland Amendment, the Administration repeatedly and publicly
called upon Congress to resume U.S. assistance. Only the N.S.C. staff's contra
support activities were kept under wraps. The committees believe these actions
were concealed in order to prevent Congress from learning that the Boland
Amendment was being circumvented.

It was stated on several occasions that the confusion, secrecy and deception
surrounding the aid program for the Nicaraguan freedom fighters was produced in
part by Congress's shifting positions on contra aid.

But Congress's inconsistency mirrored the chameleon-like nature of the rationale
offered for granting assistance in the first instance. Initially, Congress was
told that our purpose was simply to interdict the flow of weapons from Nicaragua
into El Salvador. Then Congress was told that our purpose was to harass the
Sandinistas to prevent them from consolidating their power and exporting their
revolution. Eventually, Congress was told that our purpose was to eliminate all
foreign forces from Nicaragua, to reduce the size of the Sandinista armed
forces, and to restore the democratic reforms pledged by the Sandinistas during
the overthrow of the Somoza regime.

Congress had cast a skeptical eye upon each rationale proffered by the
Administration. It suspected that the Administration's true purpose was
identical to that of the Contras - the overthrow of the Sandinista regime
itself. Ultimately Congress yielded to domestic political pressure to
discontinue assistance to the contras, but Congress was unwilling to bear
responsibility for the loss of Central America to communist military and
political forces. So Congress compromised, providing in 1985 humanitarian aid to
the contras; and the N.S.C. staff provided what Congress prohibited: lethal
support for the contras.

Compromise is no excuse for violation of law and deceiving Congress. A law is no
less a law because it is passed by a slender majority, or because Congress is
open-minded about its reconsideration in the future.

Privatization

The N.S.C. staff turned to private parties and third countries to do the
Government's business. Funds denied by Congress were obtained by the
Administration from third countries and private citizens. Activities normally
conducted by the professional intelligence services - which are accountable to
Congress - were turned over to Secord and Hakim.

The solicitation of foreign funds by an Administration to pursue foreign policy
goals rejected by Congress is dangerous and improper. Such solicitations, when
done secretly and without Congressional authorization, create a risk that the
foreign country will expect and demand something in return. McFarlane testified
that ''any responsible official has an obligation to acknowledge that every
country in the world will see benefit to itself by ingratiating itself to the
United States.'' North, in fact, proposed rewarding a Central American country
with foreign assistance funds for facilitating arms shipments to the contras.
And Secord, who had once been in charge of the U.S. Air Force's foreign military
sales, said ''where there is a quid, there is a quo.''

                               .    .    .

Disdain for Law

In the Iran-contra affair, officials viewed the law not as setting boundaries
for their actions, but raising impediments to their goals. When the goals and
the law collided, the law gave way:

*  The covert program of support for the contras evaded the Constitution's most
significant check on executive power: The President can spend funds on a program
only if he can convince Congress to appropriate the money.

When Congress enacted the Boland Amendment, cutting off funds for the war in
Nicaragua, Administration officials raised funds for the contras from other
sources -foreign governments, the Iran arms sales and private individuals; and
the N.S.C. staff controlled the expenditures of these funds through power over
the Enterprise. Conducting the covert program in Nicaragua with funding from the
sale of U.S. Government property and contributions raised by Government
officials was a flagrant violation of the appropriations clause of the
Constitution.

*  In addition, the covert program of support for the contras was an evasion of
the letter and spirit of the Boland Amendment. The President made it clear that
while he opposed restrictions on military or paramilitary assistance to the
contras, he recognized that compliance with the law was not optional. ''[W]hat I
might personally wish or what our Government might wish still would not justify
us violating the law of the land,'' he said in 1983.

A year later, members of the N.S.C. staff were devising ways to continue support
and direction of contra activities during the period of the Boland Amendment.
What was previously done by the C.I.A. - and now prohibited by the Boland
Amendment - would be done instead by the N.S.C. staff.

The President set the stage by welcoming a huge donation for the contras from a
foreign government - a contribution clearly intended to keep the contras in the
field while U.S. aid was barred. The N.S.C. staff thereafter solicited other
foreign governments for military aid, facilitated the efforts of U.S.
fund-raisers to provide lethal assistance to the contras and ultimately
developed and directed a private network that conducted, in North's words, a
''full-service covert operation'' in support of the contras.

This could not have been more contrary to the intent of the Boland legislation.

Numerous other laws were disregarded:

*  North's full-service covert operation was a ''significant anticipated
intelligence activity'' required to be disclosed to the intelligence committees
of Congress under Section 501 of the National Security Act. No such disclosure
was made.

*  By executive order, a covert operation requires a personal determination by
the President before it can be conducted by an agency other than the C.I.A. It
requires a written finding before any agency can carry it out. In the case of
North's full-service covert operation in support of the contras, there was no
such personal determination and no such finding. In fact, the President
disclaims any knowledge of this covert action.

*  False statements to Congress are felonies if made with knowledge and intent.
Several Administration officials gave statements denying N.S.C. staff activities
in support of the contras which North later described in his testimony as
''false'' and ''misleading, evasive and wrong.''

*  The application of proceeds from U.S. arms sales for the benefit of the
contra war effort violated the Boland Amendment's ban on U.S. military aid to
the contras, and constituted a misappropriation of Government funds derived from
the transfer of U.S. property.

*  The U.S. Government's approval of the pre-finding 1985 sales by Israel of
arms to the Government of Iran was inconsistent with the Government's
obligations under the Arms Export Control Act.

*  The testimony to Congress in November 1986 that the U.S. Government had no
contemporaneous knowledge of the Israeli shipments, and the shredding of
documents relating to the shipments while a Congressional inquiry into those
shipments was pending, obstructed Congressional investigations.

*  The Administration did not make, and clearly intended never to make,
disclosure to the intelligence committees of the finding -later destroyed -
approving the November 1985 Hawk shipment, nor did it disclose the covert action
to which the finding related.

The committees make no determination as to whether any particular individual
involved in the Iran-contra affair acted with criminal intent or was guilty of
any crime. That is a matter for the independent counsel and the courts. But the
committees reject any notion that worthy ends justify violations of law by
Government officials; and the committees condemn without reservation the making
of false statements to Congress and the withholding, shredding and alteration of
documents relevant to a pending inquiry.

Administration officials have, if anything, an even greater responsibility than
private citizens to comply with the law. There is no place in Government for
lawbreakers.

                               .    .    .

Who Was Responsible

Who was responsible for the Iran-contra affair? Part of our mandate was to
answer that question, not in a legal sense (which is the responsibility of the
independent counsel), but in order to reaffirm that those who serve the
Government are accountable for their actions. Based on our investigation, we
reach the following conclusions.

At the operational level, the central figure in the Iran-contra affair was
Lieutenant Colonel North, who coordinated all of the activities and was involved
in all aspects of the secret operations. North, however, did not act alone.

North's conduct had the express approval of Admiral John Poindexter, first as
deputy national security adviser, and then as national security adviser. North
also had at least the tacit support of Robert McFarlane, who served as national
security adviser until December 1985.

In addition, for reasons cited earlier, we believe that the late Director of
Central Intelligence, William Casey, encouraged North, gave him direction and
promoted the concept of an extralegal covert organization. Casey, for the most
part, insulated C.I.A. career employees from knowledge of what he and N.S.C.
staff were doing. Casey's passion for covert operations - dating back to his
World War II intelligence days - was well known. His close relationship with
North was attested to by several witnesses. Further, it was Casey who brought
Richard Secord into the secret operation, and it was Secord who, with Albert
Hakim, organized the Enterprise. These facts provide strong reasons to believe
that Casey was involved both with the diversion and with the plans for an
''off-the-shelf'' covert capacity.

The committees are mindful, however, of the fact that the evidence concerning
Casey's role comes almost solely from North; that this evidence, albeit under
oath, was used by North to exculpate himself; and that Casey could not respond.
Although North told the committees that Casey knew of the diversion from the
start, he told a different story to the Attorney General in November 1986, as
did Casey himself. Only one other witness, Lieut. Col. Robert Earl, testified
that he had been told by North during Casey's lifetime that Casey knew of the
diversion.

The Attorney General recognized on November 21, 1986, the need for an inquiry.
His staff was responsible for finding the diversion memorandum, which the
Attorney Gerneral promptly made public. But as described earlier, his
fact-finding inquiry departed from standard investigative techniques. The
Attorney General saw Director Casey hours after the Attorney General learned of
the diversion memorandum, yet he testified that he never asked Casey about the
diversion. He waited two days to speak to Poindexter, North's superior, and then
did not ask him what the President knew. He waited too long to seal North's
offices. These lapses placed a cloud over the Attorney General's investigation.

There is no evidence that the Vice President was aware of the diversion. The
Vice President attended several meetings on the Iran initiative, but none of the
participants could recall his views.

The Vice President said he did not know of the contra resupply operation. His
national security adviser, Donald Gregg, was told in early August 1987 by a
former colleague that North was running the contra resupply operation, and that
ex-associates of Edwin Wilson - a well-known ex-C.I.A. official convicted of
selling arms to Libya and plotting the murder of his prosecutors - were involved
in the operation. Gregg testified that he did not consider these facts worthy of
the Vice President's attention and did not report them to him, even after the
Hasenfus airplane was shot down and the Administration had denied any connection
with it.

The central remaining question is the role of the President in the Iran-contra
affair. On this critical point, the shredding of documents by Poindexter, North
and others, and the death of Casey, leave the record incomplete.

As it stands, the President has publicly stated that he did not know of the
diversion. Poindexter testified that he shielded the President from knowledge of
the diversion. North said that he never told the President, but assumed that the
President knew. Poindexter told North on November 21, 1986, that he had not
informed the President of the diversion. Secord testified that North told him he
had talked with the President about the diversion, but North testified that he
had fabricated this story to bolster Secord's morale.

Nevertheless, the ultimate responsibility for the events in the Iran-contra
affair must rest with the President. If the President did not know what his
national security advisers were doing, he should have. It is his responsibility
to communicate unambiguously to his subordinates that they must keep him advised
of important actions they take for the Administration. The Constitution requires
the President to ''take care that the laws be faithfully executed.'' This charge
encompasses a responsibility to leave the members of his Administration in no
doubt that the rule of law governs.

Members of the N.S.C. staff appeared to believe that their actions were
consistent with the President's desires. It was the President's policy - not an
isolated decision by North or Poindexter - to sell arms secretly to Iran and to
maintain the contras ''body and soul,'' the Boland Amendment notwithstanding. To
the N.S.C. staff, implementation of these policies became the overriding
concern.

Several of the President's advisers pursued a covert action to support the
contras in disregard of the Boland Amendment and of several statutes and
executive orders requiring Congressional notification. Several of these same
advisers lied, shredded documents and covered up their actions. These facts have
been on the public record for months. The actions of those individuals do not
comport with the notion of a country guided by the rule of law. But the
President has yet to condemn their conduct.

The President himself told the public that the U.S. Government had no connection
to the Hasenfus airplane. He told the public that early reports of arms sales
for hostages had ''no foundation.'' He told the public that the United States
had not traded arms for hostages. He told the public that the United States had
not condoned the arms sales by Israel to Iran, when in fact he had approved them
and signed a finding, later destroyed by Poindexter, recording his approval. All
of these statements by the President were wrong. Thus, the question whether the
President knew of the diversion is not conclusive on the issue of his
responsibility. The President created or at least tolerated an environment where
those who did know of the diversion believed with certainty that they were
carrying out the President's policies.

This same environment enabled a secretary who shredded, smuggled and altered
documents to tell the committees that ''sometimes you have to go above the
written law''; and it enabled Admiral Poindexter to testify that ''frankly, we
were willing to take some risks with the law.'' It was in such an environment
that former officials of the N.S.C. staff and their private agents could lecture
the committees that a ''rightful cause'' justifies any means, that lying to
Congress and other officials in the executive branch itself is acceptable when
the ends are just, and that Congress is to blame for passing laws that run
counter to Administration policy. What may aptly be called the ''cabal of the
zealots'' was in charge.

In a constitutional democracy, it is not true, as one official maintained, that
''When you take the king's shilling, you do the king's bidding.'' The idea of
monarchy was rejected here 200 years ago and since then, the law -not any
official or ideology - has been paramount. For not instilling this precept in
his stff, for failing to take care that the law reigned supreme, the President
bears the responsibility.

Fifty years ago Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis observed: ''Our Government
is the potent, the omnipresent teacher. For good or for ill, it teaches the
whole people by its example. Crime is contagious. If the Government becomes a
lawbreaker, it breeds contempt for law, it invites every man to become a law
unto himself, it invites anarchy.''

The Iran-contra affair resulted from a failure to heed this message.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Findings: Timely Notice

The committees recommend that Section 501 of the National Security Act be
amended to require that Congress be notified prior to the commencement of a
covert action except in certain rare instances and in no event later than 48
hours after a finding is approved. This recommendation is designed to assure
timely notification to Congress of covert operations.

                               .    .    .

Written Findings

The committees recommend legislation requiring that all covert-action findings
be in writing and personally signed by the President. Similarly, the committees
recommend legislation that requires that the finding be signed prior to the
commencement of the covert action, unless the press ot time prevents it, in
which case it must be signed within 48 hours of approval by the President.

                               .    .    .

Disclosures of Written Findings to Congress

The committees recommended legislation requiring that copies of all signed
written findings be sent to the Congressional intelligence committees.

                               .    .    .

Findings: Agencies Covered

The committees recommend that a finding by the President should be required
before a covert action is commenced by any department, agency, or entity of the
United States Government regardless of what source of funds is used.

                               .    .    .

Findings: Identifying Participants

The committees recommend legislation requiring that each finding should specify
each and every department, agency, or entity of the United States Government
authorized to fund or otherwise participate in any way in any covert action and
whether any third party, including any foreign country, will be used in carrying
out or providing funds for the covert action. The Congress should be informed of
the identities of such third parties in an appropriate fashion.

                               .    .    .

Findings: The Attorney General

The committees recommend that the Attorney General be provided with a copy of
all proposed findings for purposes of legal review.

                               .    .    .

Findings: Presidential Reporting

The committees recommend that consistent with the concepts of accountability
inherent in the finding process, the obligation to report covert-action findings
should be placed on the President.

                               .    .    .

Recertification of Findings

The committees recommend that each finding shall cease to be operative after one
year unless the President certifies that the finding is still in the national
interest. The executive branch and the intelligence committees should conduct
frequent periodic reviews of all covert operations.

Covert Actions Carried Out by Other Countries

The committees believe that the definition of covert action should be changed so
that it includes a request by an agency of the United States to a foreign
country or a private citizen to conduct a covert action on behalf of the United
States.

Reporting Covert Arms Transfers

The committees recommend that the law regulating the reporting of covert arms
transfers be changed to require notice to Congress on any covert shipment of
arms where the transfer is valued at more than $1 million.

                               .    .    .

N.S.C. Operational Activities

The committees recommend that the members and staff of the N.S.C. not engage in
covert actions.

                               .    .    .

N.S.C. Reporting to Congress

The committees recommend legislation requiring that the President report to
Congress periodically on the organization, size, function and procedures of the
N.S.C. staff.

                               .    .    .

Particular attention should be paid to the number and tenure of uniformed
military personnel assigned to the N.S.C.

Privatization

The committees recommend a strict accounting of all U.S. Government funds
managed by private citizens during the course of a covert action.

                               .    .    .

Preservation of Presidential Documents

The committees recommend that the Presidential Records Act be reviewed to
determine how it can be made more effective. Possible improvements include the
establishment of a system of consultation with the Archivist of the United
States to ensure complete compliance with the act, the creation of a program of
education of affected staff as to the act's provisions, and the attachment of
criminal penalties for violations of the act.

During the Iran-contra hearings, Oliver North, John Poindexter, Fawn Hall and
others admitted to having altered and destroyed key documents relating to their
activities. Such actions constitute violations of the Presidential Records Act,
which was intended to ensure the preservation of documents of historical value
that were generated by the Chief Executive and his immediate staff.

C.I.A. Inspector General and General Counsel

The Committees recommend that a system be developed so that the C.I.A. has an
independent statutory Inspector General confirmed by the Senate, like the
Inspectors General of other agencies, and that the general counsel of the C.I.A.
be confirmed by the Senate.

The C.I.A.'s internal investigation of the Iran-Contra Affair - conducted by the
Office of the Inspector General - paralleled those of the Intelligence
Committees and then the Iran Committees. It contributed to, and cooperated with,
the Tower Board. Yet, the Office of the Inspector General appears not to have
had the manpower, resources or tenacity to acquire key facts uncovered by the
other investigations.

                               .    .    .

Foreign Bank Records Treaties

The committees recommend that treaties be negotiated with foreign countries
whose banks are used to conceal financial transactions by U.S. citizens, and
that these treaties covering foreign bank records specify that Congress, not
just the Department of Justice, has the right to request, to receive, and to
utilize such records.

                               .    .    .

Findings Cannot Supersede Law

The committees recommend legislation affirming what the committees believe to be
the existing law: that a finding cannot be used by the President or any member
of the executive branch to authorize an action inconsistent with, or contrary
to, any statute of the United States.

Improving Consistency in Dealing with Security Breaches

The committees recommend that consistent methods of dealing with leaks of
classified information by government officials be developed.

                               .    .    .

Review of Congressional Contempt Statutes

The committees recommend that the Congressional contempt statutes be reviewed by
the appropriate committees. There is a need, in Congressional investigations,
for a swift and sure method of compelling compliance with Congressional orders
for production of documents and the obtaining of testimony. These investigations
raised questions about the adequacy of existing statutes.

                               .    .    .

National Security Adviser

The committees recommend that Presidents adopt as a matter of policy the
principle that the national security adviser to the President of Unites States
should not be an active military officer and that there should be a limit placed
on the tour of military officers assigned to the staff of the National Security
Council.

                               .    .    .

Review of Other Laws

The committees suggest that appropriate standing committees review certain laws
for possible changes:

a. Should restrictions on sales of arms to certain countries under the Arms
Export Control Act (''AECA'') and other statutes governing overt sales be made
applicable to covert sales?

b. Should the Hostage Act be repealed or amended?

c. Should enforcement or monitoring provisions be added to the AECA so that we
better control retransfers of U.S.-manufactured arms by countries to whom we
sell them?

Recommendations for Congress

a. The committees recommend that the oversight capabilities of the Intelligence
Committees be strengthened by acquisition of an audit staff.

b. The committees recommend that the appropriate oversight committees conduct
review of sole-source contract for potential abuse.

c. The committees recommend that uniform procedures be developed to ensure that
classified information is handled in a secure manner and that such procedures
should include clear and strengthened sanctions for unauthorized disclosure of
national security secrets or classified information which shall be strictly
enforced.

THE COUNTRIES HAVE NUMBERS

Congressional investigators used numbers to identify countries that might be
embarrassed by public disclosure of their secret dealings with the United
States. According to officials familiar with the report, these are the countries
in question:

*  Country 1 is Israel.
*  Country 2 is Saudi Arabia.
*  Country 3 is Taiwan.
*  Country 4 is China.
*  Country 5 is South Korea.
*  Country 6 is South Africa.
*  Country 15 is Portugal.
*  Country 16 is believed to be Turkey.

The report does not mention Countries 7 through 13, although those designations
were used at various points in the public hearings. Country 14 has not been
identified.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Senate Caucus Room during Iran-contra hearings (NYt/Jose R.
Lopez); Oliver L. North (NYT/Paul Hosefros) (pg.13); William J. Casey (UPI);
Edwin Meese 3d (NYT); John M. Poindexter (NYT/Jose R. Lopez) (pg.14); members of
House and Senate Iran-contra committee who signed the majority report: Lee H.
Hamilton, Dante B. Fascell, Thomas S. Foley, Peter W. Rodino Jr., Jack Brooks
and Louis S

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Washington Talk: Briefing;
Weinberger Postscript

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 146 words


Amid the military pageantry of the farewell ceremony for Secretary of Defense
Caspar W. Weinberger on Tuesday came a poignant reminder of military reality and
a footnote to recent history.

As President Reagan saluted Mr. Weinberger, there could be heard in the distance
three volleys of rifle fire that echoed softly from the hillside overlooking the
Pentagon parade field where the military review was taking place with drums
rolling and banners flying.

There, in Arlington National Cemetery, a burial detail laid to rest with full
honors the remains of Richard David Stichler, Lieutenant Colonel, United States
Air Force.

He had flown C-130 combat transport planes in Vietnam where he had won the
Distinguished Flying Cross and seven Air Medals for valor in action. He survived
the war, retired from the service and lived in Columbia, Md., at the time of his
death.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1340 words




Mora's 'Communion'

Believe in nonhuman beings?

Philippe Mora does - at least for cinematic purposes.

And that's why the director's next project will be the film version of the
nonfiction best seller ''Communion.''

''Communion,'' published earlier this year by William Morrow and scheduled for
reincarnation as an Avon paperback in February, is an account by Whitley
Strieber - author of the novels ''Wolfen'' and ''The Hunger'' - of his
encounters with nonhuman beings. ''The most provocative of these,'' goes one
passage, ''was about five feet tall, very slender and delicate, with extremely
prominent and mesmerizing black slanted eyes.''

Mr. Mora, whose latest film, ''Howling III,'' opened only last week, is the
French-born director who was raised in Australia and has been a United States
resident for the past eight years. But in 1968, both he and Mr. Strieber were in
London. Mr. Strieber, a native of San Antonio, was a student at the London Film
School. Mr. Mora was a painter, specializing in Pop Art and doing lots of
illustrations for the Beatles, including ''The Beatles Illustrated Lyrics.''

In the years since they first met in London, the two kept in touch, and last
year they formed a production company. '' 'Communion' is such a fascinating book
because it's the first time someone as articulate as Whitley has had these
experiences,'' said Mr. Mora as he explained why they decided to make it their
first film project. ''You know, it's usually people who can't express themselves
in the manner Whitley has. Whitley came to the conclusion the only explanation
for the experience is that these beings were reality in some way.

''So there's a really interesting psychological aspect to this story. It's not
an alien-special effects movie at all, And then, of course, the main thing is
the amount of people - literally thousands of people - who have this experience
of having encounters with these beings. So whether it's real or just a
psychological reality, it's just amazing that it happens on this scale. It's
almost like a religious experience for atheists, because they have their
miracles; they have their angels, which are the beings; and you have to have
faith.''

Mr. Strieber has written the screenplay. Preproduction, including the design of
the beings in accord with their description in the book, is under way. Casting
remains to be done. Shooting is scheduled to begin in Los Angeles in February.
The film should be finished by August. Allied Entertainment, a London-based
distributor, will handle the international distribution, Mr. Mora said, and
negotiations are in progress for United States distribution.

Other than professionally, Mr. Mora has had no experience with nonhumans. ''I've
certainly had vivid dreams,'' he said, ''But I'm confident at this point that
they were dreams.''

The Transformers

Back in the early 1840's, when Herman Melville was sailing the high seas, he
jumped ship in the Marquesas Islands and was taken captive by a tribe of
cannibals.

Although literature students may beg to differ, Melville fortunately escaped the
stewpot and was eventually rescued by an Australian whaler. He spent some time
in Tahiti, returned home in 1844 and began to turn his experiences into romances
- the first being ''Typee: a Peep at Polynesian Life'' in 1846.

Now, it seems, ''Typee'' may be headed for the screen - produced by Jeremy
Thomas and directed by Jonathan Demme.

Mr. Thomas is the British producer whose latest film, ''The Last Emperor,''
directed by Bernardo Bertolucci and starring John Lone as the man who began life
as the emperor of China and finished it as a gardener under Mao Zedong, opens
today (review on page C3).

Mr. Demme was interested in filming ''Typee,'' said Mr. Thomas, adding, ''I
normally try and join the filmmaker's dream. I like to try as a producer to find
film makers and projects that I can love myself. It makes for a lot more
harmony.''

If all goes well, ''Typee'' could be before the cameras sometime next year. Mr.
Thomas also has plans to film William Burroughs's ''Naked Lunch'' under the
direction of David Cronenberg (''Scanners,'' ''The Fly''); and ''The Dead
Girls,'' under the direction of Nicolas Roeg (''Don't Look Now,'' et al.) from a
screenplay by Paul Theroux.

Mr. Thomas is an independent producer who grew up in the movie industry. His
father, Ralph, directed Britain's ''Doctor'' films, ''A Tale of Two Cities'' and
''Iron Petticoat,'' among others. His uncle, Gerald, makes the ''Carry On''
series, now 38 in number; and siblings and more distant relatives are also in
the business.

''It's such a great life,'' Mr. Thomas said. In 1984, Mr. Bertolucci told him
the story of the emperor Pu Yi, and Mr. Thomas set about bringing it to the
screen. It involved the cooperation of the Chinese Government, a budget of $25
million - far beyond the $5 million and $10 million Mr. Thomas had spent on such
previous films as ''Merry Christmas, Mr. Lawrence,'' ''Insignificance'' and
''Bad Timing: a Sensual Obsession''; a crew of 120 from the West, 200 from
China, a cast of thousands and six months of filming in China.

''You make a film day by day over a period of years,'' Mr. Thomas said. And as
''The Last Emperor'' progressed, it seemed to Mr. Thomas that its creation had
been the product of business as usual. But, he said, when he finally saw it
completed and in its 70-millimeter version that the public will see, he
recalled, ''I said to Bernardo, 'I have no idea how we did it.' ''

Hartley a la '1969'

It's an ill wind that blows no good.

Mariette Hartley spent all year trying to breathe life into CBS's ill-fated
''Morning Program'' But about a month ago, she said, she was informed it was
going off the air (its last day is next Friday) and advised to look for other
work. Fans of Ms. Hartley know it is not the sort of news that would daunt her.
Although the news of cancellation subjected her to occasional nightmares in
which she finds herself on the air with no prompter, no producer, half an
audience and one guest who is selling overgrown Barbie doll beds for children,
her waking hours were devoted to thoughts of a productive future.

Because she began her career as a stage actress and had long hoped to return to
the New York stage, she made her first call to Joseph Papp, producer of the New
York Shakespeare Festival, and her second to the eminent agent Sam Cohn.

But almost before anything could happen, Ms. Hartley received a call from her
manager, Arlene Dayton, passing along an offer to make a movie. There were a few
fits and starts before the pieces fell into place, but these days Ms. Hartley is
in Savannah, Ga., where Ernest Thompson, the author of ''On Golden Pond,'' is
filming ''1969.''

The cast includes Bruce Dern, Kiefer Sutherland, Joanna Cassidy and Robert
Downey Jr. Ms. Hartley plays Mr. Dern's wife and Mr. Sutherland's mother in a
story about a small town's reaction to the war in Vietnam. ''It's the rednecks
versus the peaceniks,'' Ms. Hartley said.

Ms. Hartley said her role as Jessie Denny isn't a huge one. ''But to me she is
really the glue that holds the whole atmosphere and the sense of the film
together,'' she said. ''If it's an orchestra, she has a couple of cello solos.''


Jump Cuts

For fans of movie music, Virgin Records has created Virgin Movie Music, a new
label devoted to soundtracks. The first release, last month, was devoted to Bob
Giraldi's first feature, ''Hiding Out.'' This month's releases include the
soundtracks from ''Walker,'' composed by Joe Strummer; ''The Last Emperor,''
with music by Ryuichi Sakamoto (who acts in the film), David Byrne of Talking
Heads and the Chinese composer Cong Su, and ''The Sicilian,'' with music by
David Mansfield. . . . Marlo Thomas plans to star next summer for 20th
Century-Fox in ''Points of Light,'' a supernatural thriller to be adapted from
the Linda Gray Sexton novel by screenwriter Lewis John Carlino, whose credits
include ''Resurrection'' and ''The Great Santini.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of of Whitley Strieber nonhuman being (Avon Books)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV WEEKEND;
Lives of Amerasian Children Studied on ABC's '20/20'

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section C; Page 28, Column 6; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 312 words


A father and daughter, strangers to each other, are united on ABC's ''20/ 20''
tonight. The father had fought in Vietnam; the daughter, in a way, was one of
the war casualties. The program, on Channel 7 at 10 P.M., is touching.

The story is told in sequence. The father, Barry Huntoon, says that while
serving as a medic in Vietnam he met a young woman he wanted to marry.
Apparently, bureaucracy stood in their way. Then, in 1972, Mr. Huntoon had to
leave Vietnam. The young woman was nine months' pregnant.

Shortly afterward, Mr. Huntoon learned that she had died. ''It was very, very
hard,'' he says. ''I found myself not being able to have a normal relationship
with anybody for years and years.''

In 1983, however, Mr. Huntoon did marry and settled in California. Then, in
1985, he saw an article in Life magazine about Vietnamese children - the
so-called Amerasians - fathered by United States servicemen. An accompanying
photograph showed a 13-year-old girl; there was a resemblance. Mr. Huntoon was
sure she was his daughter.

He wrote to her. She was illiterate, but with the help of a neighbor wrote back:
''Dear Father, when I received the news that you were looking for me, I was very
happy.''

The ''20/20'' segment - produced by Ene Riisna, with Stone Phillips as
correspondent - follows Mr. Huntoon as he travels to Vietnam to find her.
Meanwhile, Mr. Phillips reports on the Amerasian children. ''It's a concern,''
he says, ''that the U.S. has done little about.'' A State Department official,
however, denies this; she says the Vietnamese Government has impeded the
children's emigration.

Whatever the case, Mr. Huntoon's daughter is allowed to leave Vietnam. Mr.
Huntoon meets her at the airport in Ho Chi Minh City. He tells her she looks
beautiful; indeed, she has a wonderful smile. ''20/20'' is worth watching if
only for that scene alone.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words


INTERNATIONAL    3-6, 28

A Cuban immigration understanding with Washington will be revived by that
country's Government. They will accept nearly 2,600 Cubans who are to be
deported from the United States, State Department officials said.    Page 1

The top arms control official in the Pentagon, Frank J. Gaffney Jr., announced
that he was leaving the Government and leveled a blast of criticism at the
Reagan Administration for seeming to rush to conclusion of an arms treaty with
Moscow.    1

Kosher food is available in Moscow for the first time in more than 50 years. The
food is being imported in regular shipments from Hungary.    3

Mikhail Gorbachev renewed his call for change in the Soviet Union. The Soviet
leader has been faced with an unexpectedly strong public backlash against the
recent dismissal of a former political ally.    1

An address by Mr. Gorbachev to a joint session of Congress will not be supported
by the White House. Instead, Administration officials want Mr. Gorbachev to meet
directly with lawmakers and encourage support for an arms treaty.    6

Two Salvadoran rebels will return from exile soon to test the terms of the
Central American peace treaty. The two Salvadorans, lead the Democratic
Revolutionary Front.    1

A U.S.-Laotian pact was reached under which the United States will consider the
''humanitarian problems'' of the country as Laotians step up the search for
Americans missing since the Vietnam War, the two nations announced.    3

Belem journal: Amazon tribe braves the wilds of the city    4
On-site test monitoring questioned    6
Shamir is offering to meet Hussein    6
Police raid frees abducted girl on Costa del Sol    28

NATIONAL    7, 33, 48-49, 54

A bipartisan agreement on the deficit was reached that, if implemented, would
reduce the Federal deficit by $30 billion this year. President Reagan signed the
accord and an order to activate $23 billion in automatic spending cuts.    1

The first mandatory spending cuts ordered by President Reagan will reduce
Government payments to doctors and dairymen, and raise students' cost of
acquiring a Government-subsidized loan.    49

News analysis: The deficit reduction may not impress the marketplace. The
agreement still has to be go to Congress, and it encompasses estimates of
savings that economists find exaggerated.    49

A major effort to reduce ozone by requiring changes in the gasoline sold in the
warmer months will begin next summer in New York, New Jersey and six New England
states. The changes would increase gasoline costs by 1.5 cents a gallon.    1

Volkswagen will close its U.S. plant by the fall of next year. The company said
that the Pennsylvania plant had been losing money for five years because of
sluggish sales and had little prospect of becoming profitable.    1

A capitalist-Marxist love feast of sorts was held in Washington, as the Soviet
Ambassador honored Blanchette Rockefeller, the widow of John D. Rockefeller 3d,
and celebrated the return of two Russian art treasures to the Soviet Union.    7


The Consumer Price Index climbed four-tenths of 1 percent last month, the Labor
Department reported. Although the October increase was twice that of September,
analysts expressed little concern.    35

Organized groups are more involved than ever in trying to influence the
Presidential campaign in Iowa. Many groups, representing everyone from the
unborn to the elderly, are national organizations.    33

Senate confirmation hearings for Judge Anthony M. Kennedy, the nominee to the
Supreme Court, will begin on Dec. 14. The hearings should take no more than a
week, the commitee chairman said.    54

Haig in new battles    7
Moderate Governor pleases New Mexico    7
Reagan opposes bill to reduce indoor air pollution    33
Shultz makes points for Deaver in trial testimony    33
Plane's engines had normal power    33

REGIONAL    29-32

A plan to build 750 apartments for middle-income families in the Bronx was
approved by the New York City Board of Estimate, after nearly 20 hours of
negotiations. The proposal is part of a plan to build 66,000 apartments
citywide.    1

A panel from the Board of Regents of New York State will explore whether
minority-group students have distinct ''learning styles'' that may call for
teaching techniques that are different from those used for whites.    29

The plan to name the task force to study the New York City school system was
criticized by state officials as a needless effort that would only delay
solutions to the problems of the city's schools.    31

AIDS testing for prostitutes and sex and drug offenders may be required as well
as a heavy crackdown on all forms of prostitution because of the AIDS epidemic,
New York's City's Health Commissioner said.    29

In the Howard Beach murder trial, the prosecution rested its case. The final
witness was an ophthalmologist, who testified that one black man who, the
prosecution says, was attacked by white teen-agers suffered a contusion in his
eye.    31

Mario Cuomo met supporters who told him that he had not done enough to help the
homeless, to build affordable housing or to make real the eloquent vision of his
speeches. Mr. Cuomo defended his record.    29

A judge's decision to bar Yonkers from assisting developers until it complies
with a court order calling for the construction of public housing was met with
confusion and anger by city officials.    30

A nurse suspected of killing patients at a Long Island hospital was ordered held
without bail on assault charges, as authorities said it might take ''at least
weeks'' to obtain evidence needed to lodge murder charges.    31

Hard times for dairy farmers in New York state    29
Radiation level cut outside plant in Queens    30
M.T.A. urges end to one-way tolls on Verrazano-Narrows    30
Boy's presence renews mother's confidence    31
Daily News and Guild reach pact    32
AIDS virus in pregnancy studied    32

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. and Laos in Accord on the Missing

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos, Nov. 20


The United States and Laos announced today that Washington would begin
considering the ''humanitarian problems'' of this isolated country as Laotians
step up the search for Americans missing since the Vietnam War.

The agreement is similar to one concluded this past summer between the United
States and Vietnam, under which American experts on the missing have already
visited Hanoi for consultation.

At the same time, the United States is about to deliver a shipment of rice to
Laos, where this year's crop, now being harvested, has been severely affected by
drought.

The announcement today followed the first formal Laotian-American technical
meeting on the search for missing Americans, held here Nov. 11-13.

It also follows a visit to Vientiane last week by David Lambertson, Deputy
Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific, and a trip to Washington in
October by the Laotian Deputy Foreign Minister, Soubanh Srithirath. #555
Unaccounted For in Laos Fourteen years after the United States withdrew from
Indochina, 555 Americans are still unaccounted for in Laos. Most of them were
shot down in bombing raids on the Ho Chi Minh Trail, along which the North
Vietnamese resupplied Communist armies in the South through Laotian territory.

The United States also bombed the Plain of Jars, where Lao Communist forces were
numerous.

In addition to the missing in Laos, 1,757 Americans are unaccounted for in
Vietnam and 91 in Cambodia.

Laotians say they are reluctant to make the search for missing Americans a
national priority when so many of their own people were killed by American
bombing from 1964 to 1973. Farmers in Laotian villages are still dying and being
maimed by ordnance exploding in fields.

But pressures in the United States from organizations representing the families
of the missing in action and unaccounted-for prisoners of war have forced the
Communist Pathet Lao Government, which seized power in 1975, to deal with the
issue as a prerequisite to better relations with Washington.

Private Searches Condemned

Both Laos and the Reagan Administration have condemned private American efforts
to mount searches in Laos. American opposition to these illegal forays into this
country was repeated today in a joint statement, which said such
''irresponsible'' acts were impeding government-to-government cooperation.

The United States maintains diplomatic relations with Laos at the charge
d'affaires level. The small American mission in Vientiane, led by Harriet W.
Isom, is the only American embassy in the three Indochinese Communist countries
of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

But there is no United States aid program in Laos, one of the world's poorest
nations. Until recently, aid been blocked by Congress, and no funds have been
authorized in a tight foreign aid budget.

Today, a joint press release from the Government of Laos and the United States
Embassy said the Laotians were considering excavating by themselves a crash site
in Savannakhet Province. Two previous excavations were conducted in cooperation
with American teams from the Joint Casualty Resolution Center in Hawaii.

Trying to Resolve 3 Cases

In today's statement, the Laotians also said they were trying to resolve three
cases where there are discrepancies about missing Americans. The statement gave
no details, and Lao officials declined to be interviewed.

In return, the United States said it would respond ''within the limits of its
capabilities'' to the humanitarian concerns of Laos.

As an example, the statement said an American non-governmental organization was
considering erecting a prefabricated clinic in the area where Laos will conduct
its excavation of the site of an American plane crash. The clinic would be
stocked with medicines at American expense.

The statement did not specify the organization involved. The Mennonite Central
Committee and the American Friends Service Committee have development programs
in Laos, but those organizations said tonight that they were not the agency
planning the clinic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Haig, the Old Warrior, in New Battles

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1426 words

DATELINE: NASHUA, N.H.


Alexander M. Haig Jr. has been working hard to become a politician. But
sometimes the soldier in him shines through.

Campaigning in a delicatessen here not long ago, the candidate for the
Republican Presidential nomination met Robert Paine, a Nashua native who
mentioned that he had served in the Marines.

''Do you know the difference between a marine and an Army man?'' Mr. Haig said
with a hearty smile. ''The marine is the fella who puts the grenade in his mouth
and throws the pin at you.''

It was not your typical bland campaign chitchat, and Mr. Paine looked a little
puzzled as the candidate moved away. But the general, as his aides call him -
''Did you get jelly doughnuts for the general?'' they will ask one another - is
not your typical candidate.

'The Biggest Education'

''What I knew about politics before this you could put on the head of a pin,''
said the man who has been Secretary of State, White House chief of staff and
Supreme Allied Commander. ''This campaign has been the biggest education of my
life - some good, and some very bad.''

Party leaders and keepers of the conventional wisdom do not take the Haig
campaign seriously, even when his events draw good crowds and he turns up in
third place in some national polls, most of which put him lower. As Mr. Haig's
old White House nemesis, Michael K. Deaver, put it in his new book: ''My guess
is that it's a fine way to keep up the price of his speaking engagements.''

That kind of talk frustrates Mr. Haig, who clearly believes that he is the best
man for the job. He has thrown his helmet into the ring, as one supporter, the
comedian Mort Sahl, put it, and now, he says, he is ''hanging tough.''

''You have to be a little nuts to do this, and you have to like people, and I
meet both criteria,'' he said as he took a walking tour through Nashua to meet
the shopkeepers. ''A successful commander is one who spends a lot of time with
the troops in the field.''

A More Genial Al Haig

Al Haig the politician is a more genial and self-depreciating sort than was Al
Haig the self-proclaimed ''vicar of foreign policy.''

''Hi, I'm the dangerous dynamo,'' he told a worker outside the Anheuser-Busch
brewery in Merrimack, giving him campaign literature and adding, in a dry aside,
''He probably thinks I'm a process server from his ex-wife.''

With startling whimsy, he told voters to ''shake a leg for Haig, beware of Dole
and Dole - it's only watered-down pineapple juice - and, above all, don't get
Bush-whacked.''

Mr. Haig looked impressive, with his winter tan, his pin-striped military
bearing and his trademark white pocket handkerchief, and he offered the sort of
candid remarks rarely heard on the hustings.

''We need somebody in charge who is what we call a kicker, not a pleader,'' he
told a group of appliance salesmen in Nashua.

''Well,'' one of the men responded, with wry admiration, ''we all know you know
how to do that.''

At La Legion Barber Shop, the owner, Roland Roberge, asked Mr. Haig about the
problems in the Persian Gulf. ''You put me in the White House, and we won't be
in the Persian Gulf,'' the candidate replied. ''It makes Khomeini feel he can
take a shot at our boys. The Soviets pull strings from the background and pick
up all the goodies. That's the way they do it, and we're dumb enough to let 'em
do it.''

The 'Wimp' Episode

He is just as blunt about his Republican rivals and about President Reagan. He
has criticized his old chief for what he deems erratic and sometimes excessive
military spending, confused economic policies and a ''pie-in-the-sky'' attitude
about arms control.

Asked about the incident, at the Republican debate in Houston this fall, in
which he told Vice President Bush that while in the Administration he had not
heard a ''wimp'' out of the Vice President on an agreement to ban medium-and
shorter-range missiles, Mr. Haig said with a grin: ''That's Haig-speak. Wimp
plus whimper equals wimp.'' Mr. Haig pronounced himself disgusted with the way
Mr. Bush had instantly helped his image by speaking forcefully at the debate to
Pete du Pont and scornfully calling him ''Pierre.''

''It's a horrible commentary on contemporary events,'' Mr. Haig said. ''A man's
reputation is not decided in a minute-or-two exchange.''

Asked what had been his biggest surprise so far in his political education, he
said, ''My biggest disappointment is that so many people, the political
consultants and others, are in this business for money.''

Wrestling With the Past

Whether the image makers come to him for love or money, Mr. Haig knows he needs
their services. The 62-year-old candidate has to wrestle down negative ratings
he received as State Department chief at a time when he was praised for his
grasp of substance but criticized by a number of White House officials as being
tightly wound and petulant.

His most damaging moment came when, trying to quell White House confusion and to
reassure the nation and the world in the hours after the 1981 assassination
attempt on President Reagan, he went on national television and said, ''I am in
control here.''

Some critics' caricature of Mr. Haig as the sort of power-hungry general who
showed up in movies like ''Seven Days in May'' continues to linger.

''One of my colleagues said he reminds you of 'Dr. Strangelove,' '' remarked Don
Stacy, an associate lawyer at a large Manchester firm that Mr. Haig visited
recently. ''He's obviously a very intense guy. I see shades of Richard Nixon.''

Many others come away impressed with his first-name discussions of foreign
leaders and his cautionary analysis of Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

''I had the picture of a trigger-happy, guns-blazing sort of guy before we
met,'' said Richard Galway, a managing partner at the Manchester law firm. ''But
he strikes me as a dynamic, straightforward guy with a good sense of humor.''

More the Family Home

In addition to humor, he is warming up his image by presenting himself less as a
solitary workaholic who was often at the center of national crises like
Waturgate and more as a family man. He and his wife of 37 years, Patricia, have
three children: Alex, a 35-year-old Washington lawyer who works in the Haig
campaign; Brian, 34, an Army officer, and Barbara, 31, a program director for
the National Endowment for Democracy in Washington.

In an interview over tea at the couple's modern, wood-paneled northern Virginia
home, Mrs. Haig tried to show the part of her husband that the public had
missed.

''They say he's a hothead,'' Mrs. Haig said, ''but I don't think he's so hot.
He's energetic. He's a man of action.'' She said that she did not believe she
had ever seen him read a novel but that he liked to ''flip through'' biographies
and other nonfiction. He is not one to help around the house, she said, but when
she was decorating the house he did suggest that she needed more colors in her
off-white scheme.

Mr. Haig, the son of a Philadelphia lawyer, loves tennis, playing with his four
grandchildren, walking along the seashore near his Florida condominium and
movies starring Clint Eastwood, Edward G. Robinson and W. C. Fields.

Besides the death of his father when he was 10 years old, Mr. Haig says he has
been most influenced by his experience as an Army battalion and brigade
commander in the Vietnam War. His aides say that the memory of seeing young men
put into body bags has long haunted him.

''Vietnam made me very, very sensitive to the initial decision to resort to
military power,'' he said.

Long Hours at the Point

Those who believe Mr. Haig is going to fold his tent and disappear should hear
the anecdote offered by his old friend and West Point classmate H. Perry Gainey,
now a San Antonio businessman.

The two young men sneaked out the bathroom window at West Point after curfew one
Saturday and went out on the town. There Cadet Haig ran into an instructor.

Except for classes and athletics, the cadet was confined to his room for six
months and assigned 132 ''punishment tours'' - walking back and forth for an
hour with his rifle. He had barely finished that when he missed a lecture and
was confined to his room for three additional months.

''I never heard him make one complaint in that whole time that it was unfair,''
said Mr. Gainey. ''He has a nature that does not look back, but forward.''

As his son and senior campaign adviser, Alex, puts it: ''He knows he can't snap
his finger and change his image. But people are beginning to take a second look,
to say 'Boy, that's not such a bad guy.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Alexander M. Haig Jr. (NYT/Jeff Davis)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Two Novelists Awarded Strauss Livings for '88

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 163 words


Diane Johnson and Robert Stone have been named the 1988 recipients of ''The
Mildred and Harold Strauss Livings.'' Each will receive $50,000 annually for
five years, for purposes of allowing them to devote their time exclusively to
writing.

The Livings, first given in 1983 to Cynthia Ozick and Raymond Carver, are the
result of a bequest made in 1981 by Harold and Mildred Strauss. Mr. Strauss, who
died in 1975, was an editor in chief of Alfred A. Knopf Inc.

Ms. Johnson is a novelist, essayist and biographer. Her books include ''Dashiell
Hammett: a Life.''

Mr. Stone's ''Dog Soldiers,'' a novel about an American journalist in Vietnam,
received a 1974 National Book Award. His most recent novel, ''Children of
Light,'' was published last year.

Nominations are made by members of the American Academy and Institute of Arts
and Letters, who themselves are ineligible for the award. The 1988 recipients
were selected by John Updike, Alfred Kazin and Joyce Carol Oates.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Soviet Afghanistan Veterans Call For End of Neglect and for Honor

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, NOV. 21


Soviet veterans of the war in Afghanistan have started a nationwide organization
to combat official neglect of those who served in the war and to press for
monuments honoring soldiers killed there, organizers of the group said today.

The formation of the group, which was organized with official support,
represents the most significant response so far to the mounting discontent of
Afghanistan veterans, a group whose concerns have only recently begun to emerge.

At a press conference organized today by the youth department of the official
press syndicate, Novosti, leaders of the group said they had already won
official approval for construction of the first national memorial honoring
soldiers killed in the fighting.

By Public Contribution

The national memorial is to be paid for by public contributions and money earned
by volunteer work, the veterans said today, and is likely to be erected in
Moscow after a design competition.

Nominally the monument will honor Soviet combatants slain in all
''internationalist'' campaigns, from the Spanish Civil War of the 1930's to the
1968 Soviet incursion in Czechoslovakia. But the project is clearly aimed at the
veterans of Afghanistan.

The group's leaders also said that 2,000 service veterans who concluded a
conference this week in Ashkhabad approved a list of demands including an end to
discrimination against disabled veterans in housing and employment and better
pensions for the families of those killed in the war.

On Prime-Time Television

The 10-day meeting in Ashkhabad, the capital of Turkmenia, a Soviet republic
bordering Afghanistan, was conducted under the auspices of Komsomol, the youth
arm of the Communist Party, in an effort to provide official support - and
direction - for informal veterans groups that have sprung up around the country.

The work of the group was reported tonight on the prime-time television news
program, and the full list of the veterans'' demands is to be published in the
official press.

Western diplomats estimate that at least half a million Soviet soldiers have
served in Afghanistan, and that at least 12,000 have died there. No estimate of
casualties has ever been published in the Soviet press.

''Some soldiers would also like to know that number,'' said Vladimir Klimov, a
veterans' leader who served in Afghanistan in 1980 and 1981. ''But at this point
it is not available to us.''

Letters on 8-Year War

Over the last year, the Soviet press has begun printing letters and articles
probing into the sensitive subject of the eight-year war and its effect on
society.

Articles have complained about dodges employed by high-ranking officials to keep
their children from serving in Afghanistan, lamented the brutalizing effect of
the war on young servicemen, hinted at the hashish habit some soldiers brought
back from the war and decried the public indifference or even resentment shown
veterans when they come home and apply for jobs or apartments.

Somewhat like American soldiers who returned from Vietnam, veterans of
Afghanistan often find that citizens prefer not to hear about the war or view it
with distaste. There is no organized opposition to the Soviet military role, but
a recent poll conducted in Moscow by French and Soviet pollsters found that a
majority of those questioned supported a total withdrawal.

The Soviet Government has said it will remove its troops, possibly within a
year, if the United States and Pakistan cease military aid to guerillas fighting
the Soviet-backed Government, and if an acceptable transition government can be
devised.

The bitterness some Soviet citizens feel toward the war was evident in questions
submitted anonymously to journalists last week in a public forum sponsored by
the magazine Ogonyok.

''The main question about Afghanistan is not the truth about the horrors and the
deaths, but why are we there?'' one spectator wrote. Another urged the
journalists to ''call a dirty war a dirty war.'' ''Remember Vietnam!'' scribbled
a third.

Soviet Decision Defended

The veterans who spoke today defended the Soviet decision to enter Afghanistan
in 1979, although one, Yuri Severinchik, who returned in 1982 and now heads a
veterans' group in Moldavia, acknowledged that the war has damaged Soviet
prestige.

Veterans of the eight-year-old war, who are often called ''Afghantsi,'' have
already organized in different cities, sometimes with local Komsomol support but
often on their own.

Visitors to Leningrad in August were startled to see a crowd of 200 veterans in
blue berets like those worn by Soviet paratroopers marching through the city in
a demonstration intended to draw attention to the sacrifices of Afghanistan
veterans.

Veterans who spoke today said the vast majority of the groups were devoted to
more constructive activities like providing solace and financial support to
families of slain servicemen, who often receive minimal pensions, and offering
sports training for youngsters approaching draft age.

The organization of the nationwide veterans' group is an effort by Komsomol to
steer the veterans in what authorities consider a positive direction, and to
make amends for Komosomol's admitted failure to fully address the problems of
returning soldiers.

The new group, affiliated with the Central Committee of Komsomol, is to press
for better veterans' benefits, public respect for those who served, and physical
training and indoctrination of teen-agers destined for military service.

Waiting List for Apartments

Mr. Severinchik said veterans who enter college after their service later find
themselves far down on the waiting lists for apartments, whose short supply is a
major grievance among young people. He said local officials are often
insensitive to disabled veterans who want work, and the pensions are inadequate
for both invalids and families of the war dead.

Afghanistan veterans also complain that they do not receive all of the
privileges accorded soldiers who served in World War II. Like veterans of
earlier conflicts, Afghanistan veterans are entitled to a better choice of
vacation times from their employers, easier entry into universities, and
priority in getting telephones. But they are not guaranteed access to the
special, better-supplied stores that serve older veterans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

In Laos, Anne Gets a Royal Welcome

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos, Nov. 21


A European diplomat was searching to explain why the Government of Laos, which
by most accounts allowed the Laotian royal family to perish miserably in prison
camps less than a decade ago, would even consider welcoming a British Princess.

''Laos is a contradictory place,'' he said.

And so for Vientiane - an aloof capital with a faded French provincial face, a
placid Buddhist soul and an uncompromising Marxist leadership - this was the
week the Princess came to town.

''A lot of people really don't know what to make of it, especially in the
Socialist embassies,'' another Western envoy said as Princess Anne, the first
member of the British Royal family to visit Laos, arrived on Thursday. Her
entourage was the largest delegation of Westerners to visit Laos since the
Communist Pathet Lao seized power from inside a coalition Government in 1975. Is
There a Message?  People ask if there is a message in it. Has the new leadership
in the Soviet Union, Laos's most important aid donor, persuaded the Laotian
Communist Party under Kaysone Phomvihan that the country needs more small-scale,
private, Western-originated development?

In a country where secret government is the norm, nobody knows.

Princess Anne came here as president of the Save the Children Fund, one of a
very few private aid organizations permitted to work full time in this usually
inaccessible country.

But she was received as a representative of the British throne. Foreign Minister
Phoun Sipraseut - and rows of tiny Laotian children waving flags -came to greet
her at the airport. The next day, she met the Acting President, Phoumi
Vongvichit.

Is Britain preparing to reopen its embassy, which was recently folded into the
Bangkok mission in a cost-cutting move? Nobody seems to know about that either.

''Maybe the Lao are just a very welcoming people,'' a Western aid worker said.
''And they are always happy for a chance to have a good time.''

A Gesture of Deference

Vientiane took the royal visit in stride. As Princess Anne paused in a hospital
children's ward where frail babies were struggling to survive dysentery, an old
woman who remembered how thngs used to be done bowed and raised her hands, palms
together, above her head in an age-old Southeast Asian gesture of deference.

But most of the 400,000 residents of Vientiane, accustomed to the motorcades
racing back and forth from the small international airport with Soviet-bloc
delegations in Russian cars, seemed indifferent. When small, silent crowds began
to form, they were shooed away gently by the police.

Many residents of Vientiane, with its signs of economic revival - smart
restaurants, more motorbikes, new houses and baguettes delivered in the morning
by pickup truck instead of bell-jangling bicycle - were just too busy to follow
the royal procession.

A Day in a Laotian's Life

Working in a garden plot on the bank of the Mekong River just after dawn on the
day the Princess arrived, Kampheuy, a 31-year-old engineer, decribed his average
day.

Up at 5 o'clock, he was out tending his small rice terraces, tomato plants and
peanut patches before sunup. By 8 A.M., he was in his Government office. After
work, at 5 or 6 P.M., he went to teach English in a private school.

''I take my meal at about 9:30,'' he said, adding that with all this effort he
still lacked the capital to marry. Per capita annual income in Laos is under
$150. ''There are many people to feed at a wedding,'' he explained.

At the city's markets, full of consumer goods that cross the Mekong from
Thailand, a bicycle, the standard form of transportation, costs upward of $60.
For many, it is still the investment of a lifetime.

Vientiane is a capital with a small-town air, where vegetable plots, roosters,
goats and water buffalo have their places. Patches of bright-green water spinach
are cultivated in wetlands along broad avenues where flowers drop on the heads
of passers-by; bunches of bananas hang above sidewalks.

Clinging to Buddhism

It is also a town distinguished by its Buddhist temples. The 3.6 million people
of Laos have clung to their faith, which they practice with more freedom than
their counterparts in Cambodia and Vietnam, the other two Communist nations of
Indochina.

Although the Buddhist clergy is controlled by the Government, monks continue to
educate the young, take in novices and walk the streets in the early morning to
collect food from worshipful women with baskets of steamed rice.

Here and there, the statues of Laotain monarchs and princes remain in their
places, despite the aboliton of the monarchy and the arrest, in 1977, of the
last Laotian King, Savang Vatthana.

Officially, the King is still alive, Laotian ministers say. But refugees fleeing
the Laotian prison camps where many Government officials were sent for
''re-education,'' say the King died in May 1979 in the northeastern province of
Samneua.

''When he arrived at the camp - it was one of the worst - he was made to carry
his own luggage,'' a former prisoner recalled recently in Thailand, where a
tenth of the country's population has sought refuge since 1975.

''He died of malnutrition; they let him die,'' the ex-prisoner, a former
Government official, said. ''He was all skin and skeleton at the end.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a student tying blessing strings on the wrist of Princess Anne
during a welcoming ceremony at a school in Vientiane. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Carter Says 'Moral Hunger' Is Key to '88 Race

BYLINE: By JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 37, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 481 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON, N.J., Nov. 21


Former President Jimmy Carter said today that there is a recurrence of a ''moral
hunger'' in the nation that he said helped him win the Presidency in 1976 in the
wake of the Watergate scandals, the Vietnam War and revelations of abuses by the
Central Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Carter said the Iran-contra scandal and mistaken or ''deliberately
misleading'' statements by Reagan Administration officials at news conferences
had convinced many Americans that they had been misled. He said candidates for
the Democratic and Republican Presidential nominations would have to set a high
moral tone in their campaigns to meet what he perceived to be a growing public
demand ''for a corrective of absolute truth.''

''The morality issue is becoming a matter of transcendental importance,'' he
said.

Simon Moral Tone Cited

Mr. Carter, who was the guest speaker at a symposium on the Constitution at
Princeton University, sponsored by the Princeton area Chamber of Commerce,
declined to pick a favorite among the Democratic candidates for President.
However, he said he thought Senator Paul Simon of Illinois was trying to project
a high moral tone in his talks on both international and domestic issues.

Mr. Carter also said the Reagan Administration had failed to work as closely
with Congress as his Administration had, as well as those of other recent
Presidents.

The most recent Democratic President said he had often spent hours with
Republican leaders as well as Democratic leaders to make sure his budgets and
major pieces of legislation met with bipartisan support. ''My military budgets
were never changed more than one-half of 1 percent,'' he said. ''And 60 percent
of my legislative proposals were eventually enacted, the same percentages as
those of former Presidents Kennedy and Johnson.''

'Learn the Hard Way'

''I think whoever gets the Democratic and Republican nominations for President
should pledge themselves publicly to work with the Congress,'' Mr. Carter said.
''President Reagan has not done so and has had to learn the hard way.''

Mr. Carter also defended House Speaker Jim Wright's decision to meet with the
Nicaraguan President, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, after the White House had refused
to meet with the Nicaraguan leader. ''The President has a constitutional
obligation to negotiate, but there was a political vacuum,'' Mr. Carter said.
''The President refused to meet with Mr. Ortega as did Secretary of State
Shultz, so he turned to Jim Wright.''

''Had the President and the Secretary of State carried out their duties, Jim
Wright would not have had to take the steps he did,'' Mr. Carter said.

In an hour-long appearance before 700 people in Alexander Hall, Mr. Carter also
said he believed a President should serve one six-year term to eliminate the
pressures of campaigning for re-election and of fighting the image of becoming a
lame duck.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

James Howard, Production Director, Is Planning to Wed Ris Miller in May

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 76, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 178 words


Mr. and Mrs. William R. Miller of New York and Lawrence, L.I., have announced
the engagement of Mr. Miller's daughter Marissa Harris Miller to James W.
Howard, a son of Mr. and Mrs. William T. Howard of Gill, Colo. The couple plan
to marry in May.

Miss Miller, who is known as Ris, is a daughter also of the late Nancy McClain
Harris Miller of Paris, Ill. She graduated from the Rye Country Day School and
Denison University and was, until recently, a production coordinator in the
printing industry in Denver. The future bride, who made her debut at the St.
Nicholas Society Ball in 1976, is a descendant of William Bradford, governor of
Plymouth Colony, and Stephen Hopkins, a signer of the Mayflower Compact. Her
father is the president of Brown, Harris, Stevens Inc., a Manhattan real-estate
concern.

Mr. Howard, the production director at Kerker Associates, a Minneapolis
advertising agency, graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder and
served with the Air Force in Vietnam. He has been married and divorced. His
father is a rancher in Gill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ris Miller (Bachrach)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WARSAW;
Brick by Brick, A Polish Company Rebuilds the Past At Home And Abroad

BYLINE: By John Tagliabue

SECTION: Section 2; Page 43, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1194 words


BRICKLAYERS CLAMBER-ing over spare wooden scaffolds were setting large
Gothic-style brick.

Nearby, dusty plasterers worked on graceful cornices in the antechamber of a
chapel where only weeks earlier magnificent frescoes of four slightly plump,
rather stern ladies had emerged. Their restorers concluded they must have been
allegorical representations of some of the cardinal virtues. The restoration
project in progress was the castle in Pultusk, an oval, island town on the Narew
River north of Warsaw.

The workers were from Pracownie Konserwacji Zabytkow, a state-run company based
in Warsaw that honed its considerable skills resurrecting great works of Polish
art and architecture from wartime damage. The company then mastered the art of
exporting those skills, illustrating the thesis of its associate director of
research, Lech Krzyzanowski, that ''people understood there was a possibility to
re-create life, to wring a victory over death, in symbolic terms.''

Poland is still in the tedious process of healing the scars of war inflicted on
its architectural and artistic heritage, much of which was burned, ravaged and
reduced to rubble between 1939 and 1945. The company, which began its work in
1946, is currently involved in about 400 restoration projects, in Poland and as
far away as Cambodia. Some of the structures are restored to their original
state; others are adapted for modern use.

Pultusk, where the castle is under reconstruction, lies on the outer northern
stretches of what used to be the territory of the Dukes of Mazovia, and served
as an outpost against Lithuanian invaders until Poland and Lithuania united in
the late 14th century. According to Andrzej Lotysz, who is in charge of the
company's scientific and historical documentation, the Swedes later destroyed
and then rebuilt it.

''This town was on the classic route from the west through Warsaw and on to
Vilnius, into Lithuania and Moscow. It's the route Napoleon took,'' Mr. Lotysz
explained, leading visitors recently across broad expanses of rounded stone in
the town square. The restored castle, scheduled for completion next year, will
house a 92-bed hotel and a conference center.

The Gothic bricks being used in the renovation came from the company's own kilns
near Gdansk. Among its numerous facilities the company also possesses
stained-glass ateliers in Torun, a center for restoring organs in Cracow and
tapestry workshops in Lodz and Warsaw. The company, whose Polish name translates
as ''Ateliers for the Conservation of Cultural Properties,'' employs about 9,500
people, 1,100 of them outside Poland.

Indeed the company, which - unusual for a state-run company - is completely
self-financed, can only continue its work in Poland because of its projects
abroad. At the moment, 400 workers are dispersed among 10 sites in Riga, the
capital the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic, restoring wall paintings and
rebuilding organs. But the main project there is the transformation of the
Baroque church and medieval buildings surrounding the Marstall Stables into a
modern recording and video production center, including a recording studio in
the church building itself.

For the last 10 years, company experts have labored in Augustusburg Palace, near
Cologne, West Germany, restoring the magnificent rococo summer residence of the
archbishops of Cologne that the Bonn Government uses for receptions of state.

Company archeologists are also working on 15th-century B.C. monuments of
Hatshepsut near Luxor, Egypt, and on the remains of a ninth-century city in the
deserts of Algeria. In the Cambodian capital of Phnom Penh, company experts are
restoring immense wall paintings in the central pagoda. Others are repairing
medieval temples near Da Nang, in South Vietnam.

''We began going overseas in the 1960's, for our Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
restoring Polish embassies in Paris and London and New York,'' Mr. Krzyzanowski,
who is an art historian, explained. But the first significant non-Polish
contracts came from Munich, when the city was preparing to host the 1972 Olympic
Games.

East Germany soon followed as a client, and 100 restorers worked from 1979 to
1986 virtually reconstructing the Neue Kammern, graceful 18th-century palaces
built in Potsdam's San Souci Park for Frederick II of Prussia. The work involved
restoration of the foundations and vaulted cellars, redoing decorative rococo
stucco and restoring hundreds of paneled paintings, fireplaces and pieces of
period furniture.

Next came other major West German projects. In Bruhl the sumptuous rococo
staircase of Balthasar Neumann was restored, and in Trier the company's experts
worked on 16th- and 17th-century altars.

The company started out in the ruins and rubble of postwar Warsaw, where a
handful of people prepared designs for the faithful reconstruction of the old
city after its destruction by Nazis, which Poland's postwar leaders resolved
should be completely rebuilt, phoenix-like. The crown of that work was the
completion in 1984 of the former royal castle after 15 years of work. The
company's principal activity is now restoration rather than reconstruction.
Acute demand for specialists not only in art history and architecture but also
in such disappearing crafts as stucco, gilding and woodwork has led the company
to recruit young people from schools and universities and meticulously train
them in two-year programs. Work overseas, and the promise of salary and
adventure, binds them to the company and the country at a time when Poland's
stumbling economy provokes many young people to emigrate.

For the restorers, said Mr. Krzyzanowski, ''there is an ideological motive, and
there is the money. They believe they are working for Polish culture, and not
just building the shapes of houses with endless identical patterns and no
individuality. They are pursuing the traditional way of the good craftsman.''

Some contracts are political, as was the case when the Polish Government pledged
assistance to the Communist regimes in Phnom Penh or Hanoi. Then, the lure is
not money but adventure, Mr. Krzyzanowski explained.

''In Cambodia we have been restoring wall paintings in the pagoda of Phnom Penh
for three years,'' he said. ''The income is close to none, but this is high
adventure for a young Polish restorer from Cracow.''

Even as the monuments are restored, however, they face a new, more insidious
threat: pollutants in the environment.

''When we restored the Old Town of Warsaw and opened it in 1953, it was only 20
years before the quality of the roofs, of the water pipes, of the stone, was so
poor that further restoration was necessary,'' said Mr. Krzyzanowski. ''Salts
are forming in the cement, in the chalk, even in the pieces of stone from the
quarry.

''Vitruvius writes that you should leave freshly quarried stones in open spaces,
to let them breathe, before using them in construction,'' he went on, referring
to the ancient Roman architect. ''But today that means that poisons enter the
stone, and you are building into your structures stones that are not of good
quality.

''We do not realize the scale of the trouble,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of bricklayers from the state-run company at work on the Gothic
gatehouse at the castle in Pultusk (The New York Times/Witold Jaroslav Szulecki)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOME VIDEO;
DOCUMENTARY

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 2; Page 36, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 240 words



Vietnam: In the Year of the Pig

Produced and directed by Emile de Antonio. MPI Home Video. 103 minutes. $39.95.

Emile de Antonio, whose films include ''McCarthy: Death of a Witch Hunter,''
appears as passionately opposed to American involvement in Vietnam as he was to
the late Senator from Wisconsin. In ''Vietnam: In the Year of the Pig,'' Mr. de
Antonio has assembled telling footage that traces the origins of the war back to
the French and their defeat at Dienbienphu, followed by scenes of Americans
fighting along the same jungle trails.

The film includes brutal war and street scenes that were not always shown at
length on television. At the film's beginning, Ho Chi Minh, leader of the
Vietnamese revolutionary forces resisting the occupying French, is cited as
seeking the same goals as those in the Americn Declaration of Independence.

American Senators are interviewed who assert that Ho represents his people, that
he led the underground movement against the Japanese before his forces defeated
the French. Journalists who are interviewed include David Halberstam, who says
that the best of a generation of Vietnamese fought to defeat the French at
Dienbienphu. John Foster Dulles, President Eisenhower's Secretary of State,
says, ''I do not expect that there will be a Communist victory in Indochina.''
In his films, Mr. de Antonio likes to dig up old footage to show public
officials uttering eatable words.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Dow Chemical Wants to be Your Friend

BYLINE: By CLAUDIA H. DEUTSCH

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2408 words

DATELINE: MIDLAND, Mich.


TURN the clock back 25 years or thereabouts. The Dow Chemical Company is making
napalm - jellied gasoline that kills in a particularly painful way - for use in
Vietnam, and American students are chasing Dow recruiters off campus. Dow's
reaction: part annoyance, part indifference.

Skip ahead to 1977. Jane Fonda criticizes Dow in a speech at Central Michigan
University. Dow cancels contributions to the college.

Fast-forward a few more years. The Environmental Protection Agency wants to ban
the herbicide 2,4,5-T. The product is just a minuscule contributor to Dow's
sales and profits. Still, Dow fights the ban on general principles.

Finally, move to March of this year. Dow customers and shareholders petition Dow
to pull out of South Africa. And Dow pulls out.

''I'm not proud of it, I think we should have stayed and fought,'' said Paul F.
Orrefice, whose nine-year tenure as Dow's chief executive will end on Dec. 1.
''But sometimes, the pressures are just too strong.''

What? Dow Chemical giving in to outside pressures? The company that once refused
to let E.P.A. inspectors even fly over its plants? The company that was the
focus of litigation over the defoliant Agent Orange, and its lethal byproduct,
dioxin, and that refused to make its research data public? The company that
counts only three non-Dow people on its 16-member board?

Herbert H. Dow, the rugged individualist who founded Dow 90 years ago, would
surely wince. But then again, there is a lot about Dow that would shock him. In
the last few years the company has turned increasingly outward, in its products,
in its marketing and in its attitude.

''We had been a proud group who felt that people who knew nothing were telling
us what to do,'' said Keith R. McKennon, president of Dow Chemical USA. ''It
took us a long time to realize that regulators, legislators, even
environmentalists had a right to ask questions.''

For Mr. Oreffice, a short man whose staccato, fast-paced speech is reminiscent
of Harold Geneen, it is a bitter realization. To him, the idea of granting
Government even a toehold in the business world is anathema. ''I've seen what
overgoverning can do,'' said Mr. Oreffice, who was born in Italy and still
speaks with a slight accent. ''I was born under a Fascist dictatorship, and my
father was jailed by it.''

Still, for reasons that are probably based as much on the company's push into
consumer products as on any new spirit of enlightenment, Mr. Oreffice has led
Dow into an unprecedented period of openness and cooperation - one that is
likely to continue well after Mr. Orrefice's tenure as chief executive ends.
Frank Popoff, the 52-year-old Dow executive who will succeed Mr. Orrefice on
Dec. 1, is already giving strongly worded speeches to groups of Dow executives,
stressing that cooperation with the public is an essential part of their jobs.
And Mr. Oreffice remains Dow's chairman, and will continue to be its main link
to Government and shareholders.

The transition's timing has been known for years. Dow has had a long-standing
policy of ''management deceleration,'' which requires Dow executives to
relinquish all hands-on duties when they turn 60 and become quasi-consultants
and advisers. So all along, the company has known Mr. Oreffice would have to
step down when he hit that critical age this year.

In a sense, it will be business as usual at Dow, in that Mr. Orrefice and Mr.
Popoff are virtual clones when it comes to strategy. But in style, they are
totally different. ''Paul could intimidate me just by looking at me,'' said one
former Dow manager. ''Frank just isn't like that.'' Mr. Popoff, a tall, relaxed
man who looks very much the part of a corporate executive, was also born under a
highly controlled regime - in his case, Sofia, Bulgaria. But he immigrated to
Indiana when he was not yet 6 years old, and any trace of accent has long since
disappeared.

His is a more conventional approach to management. Where Mr. Oreffice dispensed
with organization charts because he felt they ''put people in boxes,'' Mr.
Popoff plans to reinstate them. And where Mr. Oreffice can still get worked up
about the ''lies'' he claims have been told about Dow in the press, Mr. Popoff
is more philosophical. ''I think we have a fair amount of work to do in terms of
the way we are viewed,'' he said. ''We know we'll never change Ralph Nader's
mind. But Dow is at peace with itself, and we want our people to feel good about
the company, too.''

TO understand Dow's new emphasis on wooing public opinion, one first has to
trace the many turnabouts the company has undergone in the recent past.

Until just a few years ago, Dow had a smattering of specialty chemicals and
consumer products - Saran Wrap and Ziploc bags among them - but it was still
deriving most of its revenues from basic chemicals like chlorine, which were
primarily sold to other chemical companies. It was more interested in finding
ever-better processes for making chemicals than in coming up with ever-better
chemicals to make. It had no compunctions about raising prices sky-high whenever
chemicals went into short supply. Mr. Oreffice defended the practice as
''reinvestment pricing;'' disgruntled customers referred to it as gouging. And
when it came to dealing with the outside world, Dow's stance was somewhere
between isolationism and cantankerousness.

Through much of the 1970's, demand for the chemicals Dow made outstripped
supply, so Dow had no economic incentive to change. And in any case, its
executives did not want to. ''Success breeds conservatism, and that means a love
affair with the status quo and an aversion to change,'' Mr. Popoff said.

Moreover, Dow was not all that interested in selling to consumer markets. The
company's labs came up with any number of potential blockbuster products that
simply died of neglect. Its Aztec suntan lotion, for example, was one of the
first to use advanced sunscreens, while its Touch of Sweden body lotion was, as
far as performance went, up there with the popular Vaseline Intensive Care. But
after a brief flurry in the marketplace, both faded away.

''We just never allocated decent resources or good people to consumer
products,'' said Enrique C. Falla, the chief financial officer, who last week
was made a member of Dow's executive committee.

But Dow's world changed in the early 1980's. The oil-rich nations started
flooding the market with low-priced petrochemicals. Suddenly Dow was selling
into a glutted market, and its growth came to a halt. The company's sales
hovered around $11 billion from 1980 through 1986. Its profits seesawed between
mediocre and respectable, but never soared.

Mr. Oreffice responded by tearing Dow apart, and reassembling it with brand-new
pieces. In the last eight years he has divested $1.8 billion worth of
businesses, including oil- and gas-related operations, a medical testing
business, and Dow's share in a couple of joint ventures. The cash went to
retiring debt (Dow's gross interest expenses this year will be $200 million less
than they were five years ago) and making acquisitions in high-growth areas.

DOW bought Richardson-Vicks Inc.'s Merrell drug division, which now forms the
backbone of Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc. It bought Morton-Thiokol Inc.'s
Texise unit, which gave Dow such well-known brands as Fantastik and Janitor in a
Drum. And this year Dow went even farther afield from its basic businesses,
buying Lamaur Inc., a company that makes shampoos and other personal-care items.

In the process, Mr. Oreffice had to preside over a total cultural change at Dow.
Its executives were used to hawking undifferentiated products for which price
and reliability were the only selling points. ''Perhaps the hardest thing I had
to do was persuade other Dow people I really meant this switch,'' Mr. Oreffice
said.

Mr. Oreffice put some of Dow's most respected executives into specialty chemical
areas, gave them a large measure of autonomy and an even larger measure of
research and marketing support. Moreover, Dow ''purchased the marketing skills
we didn't have,'' Mr. Oreffice said. Translation: It acquired only those
companies that could bring proven management talents as well as proven product
brands to the Dow stable.

From the first, Mr. Oreffice's goals were to globalize Dow's business enough so
that the company could take advantage of, rather than be victimized by, currency
fluctuations and country-to-country cost differentials. And while he made no
attempt to pull out of Dow's mainstay commodity chemical businesses, he vowed
that by 1988, they would represent no more than half of Dow's revenue stream.

Mr. Oreffice beat his deadline by a year. Today, about 55 percent of the
company's business is overseas, and it operates an extensive computer system
that weighs exchange rates, transportation costs and materials availability to
fill orders from whatever Dow location qualifies as the lowest-cost producer at
shipment time. Consumer products and specialty chemicals such as engineered
plastics, which are sold in small quantities but at high margins, provide about
half of revenues and profits.

The mix of products and geography has won the company praise. ''They do an
excellent job of taking currencies and other costs into consideration to make a
product on the lowest cost plan,'' said John Henry, an analyst at E.F. Hutton.

They also have good instincts, said William R. Young, an analyst with Drexel
Burnham. ''They are betting their long term growth on differentiated products
and brand names,'' he said. ''It's a good strategy for them.''

Dow's chemical industry customers are viewing the company with a mixture of envy
and admiration these days. ''Dow has been the most successful of the basic
commodity chemical producers who have tried to move into downstream products,''
said J. Lawrence Wilson, vice chairman of Rohm & Haas, a Philadelphia-based
chemical company that tried - and failed - to diversify into pharmaceuticals and
fibers.

Indeed, Dow executives delightedly trot out numbers to prove how well their
company has recovered. Mr. Falla can rattle them off by heart: Sales per
employee, $254,000, up from $181,000 in 1980, the year before the bottom dropped
out of Dow's markets. Earnings per employee: $24,000, compared with just $14,000
in 1980. Even the company's stock, which plummeted to $59 on Black Monday from a
high of $109 in early October, was hovering around $80 for most of last week.

But perhaps most astonishing to long-time Dow watchers, over the last three
years Dow has poured more than $31 million into a public relations and
advertising campaign aimed at persuading the world that Dow is a ''nice''
company as well as a technically proficient one. Dow's proud slogan, ''Common
Sense - Uncommon Chemistry,'' has been retired, replaced by a warmer one, ''Dow
let's you do great things.'' And its ads revolve as much around its charitable
giving and employee relations as around its products.

Most Dow executives say that the campaign was touched off by a spate of negative
- and unjustified, the company contends - publicity it received about dioxin
leaching into the Tittabawassee and Saginaw rivers below the Midland plant. And
most also say that the campaign was mainly designed to make Dow employees feel
good about their company. In fact, the company did survey 175 of its employees
to find out exactly how they saw Dow - and how they felt the outside world saw
Dow.

STILL, the campaign clearly is aimed toward other audiences, as well. Although
controversy intermittently swirls around dioxin and its ill effects, the
much-publicized class action suit by Vietnam veterans who claimed their health
had been destroyed by exposure to Agent Orange was settled several years ago.
Because of that, public outrage against Dow has died down enough so that the
public might be more willing to listen to its message. The Union Carbide
Corporation, in contrast, must put off any formal image-rebuilding campaign
''until we've gotten a Bhopal settlement behind us,'' the company's chief
executive, Robert D. Kennedy, said. ''Then we have to start rebuilding our
reputation the same way we got it - one day at a time.''

The timing also coincides neatly with Dow's push into consumer markets. Other
chemical companies are more likely to sympathize than to denigrate when an
industry colleague is under fire from the press or from Washington. Consumers
are not nearly that loyal. In fact, Dow already gives it product managers the
option of dropping the Dow diamond from their packaging, if they fear it will
hinder sales. ''You have to have a fairly positive image if you are going to
market consumer products,'' said Manuel K. Pyles, an analyst with A.G. Edwards.
In some ways, Dow's decision to concentrate on growth marks a milestone all its
own. ''For the last few years we've been more concerned with qualitative
change,'' said Mr. Popoff. ''The next generation of changes will be
quantitative. The focus will be on growth.''

Mr. Pyles, the analyst, predicts that Dow's sales will hit $13.2 billion by the
end of this year, and will inch up to $13.5 billion by the end of 1988. Mr.
Popoff clearly expects bigger spurts than that over the next few years - by
1992, he predicts, Dow will be a $20 billion company.

Much of the growth will be generated internally. Dow's research budget was
already a healthy $650 million this year; next year, it will be upped to $700
million. And, Mr. Popoff says, much of the money will be aimed at finding new
products.

Already, Dow is doing more surveys to find out what customers want, rather than
simply inventing products and assuming people will buy them. Because research
has shown that people tend to trust scientists more than business executives,
Dow is beefing up existing programs to put top scientists on media tours to talk
about what Dow does. And last year, it gave $375,000 to the University of
Missouri to create a Science Journalism Center.

In the process, it is paying attention to constituencies that the ''old'' Dow
would have disdained. A former Dow executive, surprised that the company had
given up its ''uncommon chemistry'' slogan in favor of a truly simplistic one,
asked a Dow manager the reason for the change. The executive's answer: ''It
plays in Peoria.'' For Dow, acknowledging the importance of what does or does
not play in mainstream America is probably the biggest change of all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of 1987 Dow Chemical company slogan and a 1967 demonstration
protesting recruiting by Dow at the University of California at Berkeley (UPI);
Frank Popoff, who becomes chief executive on Dec. 1, succeeding Chmn. Paul F.
Orrefice (NYT/Peter Yates)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

UNEASY PARTNERS;
Learning to Live With A Coalition Government

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1280 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE American system of government usually proves more ingenious than the men and
women who run it. So it seemed last week, as the suppleness of the system
permitted some self-correcting accommodation and compromise in the struggle
between the legislative and executive branches over control of foreign policy.
In arms control, the Central American peace process and the Iran-contra scandal,
Congress moved, respectively, to impose moderation, fill a policy-making vacuum
and turn toward the curative sunlight a festering sore of secrecy.

This is a 200-year-old contest, set in motion by the Constitution's prescient
recognition that tension between competing centers of power is an effective
brake on the abuse of power. The first skirmish took place in 1793, when
President George Washington issued a Proclamation of Neutrality in the war
between France and Britain; this angered the Jeffersonian
Democratic-Republicans, who were pro-French, and precipitated an erudite debate
between James Madison, who urged that doubt about such authority be resolved in
favor of the Congress, and Alexander Hamilton, who gave preference to the
President in the conduct of foreign affairs.

The beauty is that the competition has never been resolved, and it remains
unresolved as President Reagan's decline contributes to the ascendancy of a
Democratic-controlled Congress.

''The last year of his Presidency is going to be a coalition government,'' said
William Schneider, a political analyst at the American Enterprise Institute.
''Anything that is accomplished is going to be accomplished with cooperation
with the Democrats.'' Some scholars, he added, believe that ''we do really have
a parliamentary system.'' Except that in a parliamentary system, of course, Mr.
Reagan would now be in the opposition, not in the White House.

America's history has seen a constantly shifting balance. The early Presidents
dominated foreign policy, which faded in importance during the 19th century's
preoccupation with domestic issues - slavery, the Civil War, the opening of the
West.

In the 20th century, two world wars gave the executive branch a commanding role
through most periods until the depths of the Vietnam War. Now, Mr. Schneider
observed, we are seeing ''a post-Vietnam syndrome in foreign policy-making.''
''Congress feels that it put a stop to the Vietnam War. In fact, it was more the
press than Congress,'' he said. This emboldened Congress, he said, and has
translated into current issues.

The arms dispute that was temporarily resolved last week focused on Mr. Reagan's
passionate determination to reinterpret the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty
with the Soviet Union so that it would not prohibit the development of a ''Star
Wars'' space-based defense. Mr. Reagan is devoted to the notion of a space
shield against incoming ballistic missiles, but the idea has thrown a monkey
wrench into the talks with the Russians on reducing long-range, strategic
nuclear weapons.

Moscow has insisted on what it calls strict observance of the ABM treaty and has
made the abandonment of ''Star Wars'' a prerequisite for concluding a strategic
arms accord. The issue promises to figure prominently in Mikhail S. Gorbachev's
discussions with Mr. Reagan in Washington scheduled Dec. 7 to 10.

The Administration's loose interpretation of the treaty has been rejected not
only by the Russians, but also by almost all of the treaty's American
negotiators and by many of the senators who ratified the pact 15 years ago. As
such, the confrontation threatened to take on broad constitutional dimensions,
with Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, accusing the Administration of
trying to manufacture a loophole that did not exist when the treaty was
presented to the Senate for ratification.

'Star Wars' Testing

Stepping back from the edge of constitutional combat last week, the White House
and Congressional leaders reached a compromise. Congress would approve the
military budget and President Reagan would approve provisions in the legislation
barring the use of next year's financing for any tests of components of a space
defense that were not consistent with the restrictive interpretation of the
treaty. This meant that the Pentagon would not be able to go ahead with plans to
test such devices as space-based rockets, orbiting laser systems, mirrors in
space to reflect ground-based lasers and electromagnetic rail guns.

Even though the restriction is only for a year and many of the tests would not
have been ready to proceed that soon anyway, the ban may have a significance
beyond its term. It will expire only in the waning months of this
Administration, leaving President Reagan insufficient time to see his project
into the development stage. It also sets a precedent and can be renewed.

On Central America, House Speaker Jim Wright stepped into a diplomatic vacuum
created by what he called President Reagan's ''ideological fixations,'' namely,
the President's desire to continue military support for the Nicaraguan rebels
even during the peace process.

Administration officials accused Mr. Wright of trying to usurp the executive's
role in foreign policy-making by holding talks with President Daniel Ortega
Saavedra of Nicaragua and Miguel Cardinal Obando y Bravo, the Nicaraguan Roman
Catholic primate, who has been selected to mediate cease-fire talks.

Ortega's End Run

President Ortega has so far foiled the Administration's skeptical predictions
about Nicaraguan behavior by taking steps toward complying with the peace
agreement signed Aug. 7 by the five Central American countries. But since
Nicaragua is the one area of foreign policy where President Reagan seems immune
to the counsel of Congress and some moderate advisers, President Ortega's end
run has left the Administration standing helpless on the sidelines, unable to
adjust quickly enough to events. Enter, Mr. Wright.

The result was a flurry of bitter denunciations between the Speaker and the
White House. Mr. Wright called Mr. Reagan ''a person with whom you can't
seriously discuss serious issues.'' He told stories of meetings in which the
President, taking cues from aides, seemed unable to listen to Congressional
leaders' reasoning. ''I don't have the feeling that even once, any of us have
gotten through to him with any point of view other than the one he entered the
meeting with,'' Mr. Wright declared.

All this took on a burlesque quality last week as Secretary of State George P.
Shultz, seeking to quell the feud, found a mediator of his own - Robert S.
Strauss, the former chairman of the Democratic National Committee - to help
smooth a Shultz-Wright meeting at which the two agreed on a ''peace plan'' that
endorsed the principles of conciliation and negotiation in Central America.
(Nicaraguan opposition is itself divided, page 2.) Finally, the Congressional
committees issued their voluminous indictment of the White House scheme to sell
arms secretly to Iran and use the profits for the Nicaraguan rebels. A majority
found that a ''cabal of zealots'' had taken over in areas of foreign policy and
that the President had foresaken his constitutional mandate to ''take care that
the laws be faithfully executed.''(Impact of the report, page 4.) But the
attempt to avoid the system's checks and balances ultimately failed. The secret
policy fell far short of its goals, it was exposed, it caused dismissals and
resignations and may result in criminal indictments of some of those who were
responsible.

''We're going through a self-cleansing process,'' said Rep. Lee H. Hamilton, the
Indiana Democrat who was chairman of the House committee. ''It's not a tidy
process.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Credits were reversed on two cartoons in The Week in Review last Sunday. One,
showing President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua sitting on a shipment from
Moscow, was drawn by Steven Turtil of the Charleston (W. Va.) Daily Mail. The
other, showing a contra leader as a puppet on President Reagan's foot, was by
Rainer Hachfeld of the Hamburger Rundschau in West Germany.

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Who's In Charge Here?

BYLINE: By Seymour M. Hersh; Seymour M. Hersh's most recent book, ''The Target
Is Destroyed,'' was published in paperback last month by Vintage Books.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 35, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5922 words


TO HIS SUPPORTERS in the early 1980's, Army Col.

James E. Longhofer was the right man in the right job. An expert in night
helicopter flying and a combat veteran of Vietnam, Longhofer was in charge of
one of the Army's most sensitive activities - a newly established Special
Operations Division whose mission was to provide the military with the
capability to strike back quickly anywhere in the world, and without trace,
against terrorists and hostage-takers.

The special unit's operations were kept secret from many senior Army generals
and civilian leaders in the Pentagon, though not from the Central Intelligence
Agency or its director, the late William J. Casey. By the fall of 1983, the
Army, working through Longhofer's unit, had become an invaluable asset in the
Reagan Administration's secret war against the Sandinista Government of
Nicaragua. The unit that had been set up to fight terrorism was now heavily
committed to supporting the contras, a United States-subsidized military force
thought by many to be conducting terrorist activities itself.

In many ways, the work of the Special Operations unit anticipated the later
White House operation that would lead to the Iran-contra scandal. Both Longhofer
and Marine Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North worked with a small group of men,
operating with enormous power and under tight secrecy. Both operations suggested
a lack of control at the highest levels of authority; both left many questions
of who knew what, and when.

Today, after a series of internal scandals that led to investigations by the
Army and the Justice Department, Longhofer's unit has been abandoned. He was
secretly court-martialed and sentenced to two years in prison (since reduced to
one); two other members of his unit also were convicted after a court-martial
and Federal trial, and a number of his key aides have received career-ending
reprimands.

The picture that emerges in the investigations is ugly. At one end of the
spectrum was expense-account fraud; some officers and their operatives allegedly
traveled first-class and took wives on personal trips at Army expense.
High-priced luggage was purchased and fancy hotels and rental cars booked as the
military men sought to ''live their cover'' as prosperous businessmen.

At the other end were multimillion-dollar acquisitions of aircraft, most of them
for operations in Central America, that were not purchased through the Army's
existing intelligence organizations, which are carefully audited. Longhofer's
office instead went to outside businessmen and arms dealers to make
off-the-books airplane purchases. Payment was in cash, with funds that had been
''laundered'' through a secret Army finance office at Fort Meade, Md.

More than $325 million was appropriated for the Special Operations Division
between 1981 and the autumn of 1983. Most officers at the top of the Army, who
had no idea what Longhofer was doing and how his funds were being accounted for,
were apprehensive and resentful. Those generals who had lived through the
Watergate scandals and participated as junior officers in the Vietnam War viewed
unaccountable activities as wrong - and as very likely to get the Army in
trouble. They were right.

HAD THEY BECOME PUBLIC, a number of Longhofer's operations would certainly have
caused enormous political damage to the Reagan Administration's campaign in
Central America. The men in Special Operations were instrumental in ferrying
Army Special Forces personnel under cover to Honduras, where they helped C.I.A.
operatives train specially recruited Honduran troops for bloody hit-and-run
operations into Nicaragua. They supplied Army rapid-firing cannons known as
''bushmasters'' to the small boats used by the C.I.A. to mine harbors and
destroy oil depots during a series of controversial raids on Nicaragua's east
coast in the fall of 1983.

One of Longhofer's helicopter mechanics was aboard the C.I.A. ship that directed
the 1983 mining of harbors inside Nicaragua, an action subsequently adjudicated
by the World Court at The Hague to be a violation of international law.

All this was at a time when Congress had barred the Defense Department and the
C.I.A. from any actions aimed at overthrowing the Government of Nicaragua or
provoking a military exchange between Honduras and Nicaragua.

The C.I.A.'s attacks caused a political uproar when they were disclosed to
Congress the next spring. But the Army's role was known to only a few members of
the Congressional intelligence subcommittees, who said nothing. Many of their
colleagues on Capitol Hill would have been astonished to learn that the Army and
the C.I.A. had gone so far as to jointly purchase a $7 million commercial
freighter, operated under cover from a civilian port in Louisiana, which was to
be used in hostage rescue missions or to secretly resupply paramilitary
ac-tivities. In all, Longhofer's unit was involved with the C.I.A. in more than
40 operations in Central America and elsewhere.

Today, Longhofer remains on duty in an administrative job in Washington while
appealing his conviction. Unlike some of his subordinates, he was not accused of
any financial wrongdoing, but was found guilty of attempting to cover up the
earliest official investigation. He believes that he and his men, most of whom
chose to retire after being reprimanded, have been made scapegoats - as, he
believes, was Oliver North - for their superiors.

Longhofer insists that his unit's activities, especially those in support of the
contras, were approved, at least broadly, at the top of the Pentagon. For
example, Caspar W. Weinberger, who resigned this month as Secretary of Defense,
and Secretary of the Army John O. Marsh Jr., among others, approved the ship's
purchase in a top-secret memorandum of understanding between the C.I.A. and the
Army in August 1983.

According to Longhofer, Marsh, as the Army's top civilian official, ''didn't
know the specifics of person-to-person contact - who was passing $5,000 to
someone in Central America - but he knew about the operations,'' including those
involving the Army's cooperation with the C.I.A.

Longhofer also believes he was the target of senior officers who were upset
because they were denied information about his unit or its activities.

Marsh refused to be interviewed for this story, but senior Army and Justice
Department officials categorically reject those assertions. ''There are things
you can't talk about in special operations, but there are laws and guidelines
that you have to operate by,'' says Gen. Arthur E. Brown Jr., the Army's vice
chief of staff. ''The Army leadership wasn't out to get Special Operations.''

JAMES LONGHOFER'S new job had its origins in the April 1980 failure of the first
Iranian hostage-rescue mission, known as Desert One. After the negotiated return
of Iran's hostages on Jan. 20, 1981, President Reagan's Inauguration Day, the
Army decided that it would fight terrorism with secret teams, secret training
and secret operations.

Initially, Longhofer was to develop more advanced helicopter capabilities and
train the best pilots to fly them. Within a few months, his world had become one
of laundered money, clandestine military units, shielded operations and vague
lines of authority. The Special Operations Division operated ''in the black,''
that is, under stringent cover inside the office of the Army's Deputy Chief of
Staff for Operations, known by the abbreviation DCSOPS, pronounced ''dess-ops.''

But Longhofer's real patron was the Army's top military man, Gen. Edward C.
(Shy) Meyer, the Chief of Staff. Meyer's support would provide enormous power to
Longhofer and his handful of aides, who were assigned to a basement office in
the Pentagon that came to be known as ''the zoo.''

Throughout his career, the short, squat, cigar-smoking Longhofer had proved
himself - like Oliver North - to be a can-do officer, a man's man who would
never turn back from a rescue operation because of a shortage of helicopters.
His top aides, some of whom had served with him in the late 1970's in the Army's
24th Infantry Division at Fort Stewart, Ga., enthusiastically lived their
civilian cover, dressing in casual clothes and letting their hair grow long.
Many senior Pentagon officers were enraged by their demeanor - and by their own
inability to do anything about it.

Longhofer was not only protected by Meyer, but he seemed to have access to
unlimited money. Lieut. Col. Michael V. Foster, one of Longhofer's aides,
recently recalled early advice from Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., Meyer's chief
deputy. ''Figure out how much money you need, double it, and then come see me,''
Foster says Vessey told him. (Vessey, now retired, said in a telephone interview
from his home in Minnesota that he ''did tell them to come up with a
consolidated budget instead of coming up with a request for every new gadget
that cost 10 bucks.'' But, he added, ''I didn't tell special ops to go off and
do whatever they wanted.'') The men who worked with Longhofer understood that it
was Meyer's support that enabled them to freewheel. ''If you want to stage a
Delta rescue,'' says Foster, referring to the Army's Delta Force commando unit,
''it's not intelligence, but a military operation.

''If you want to send somebody from Delta to watch and collect information in a
third-world country, that isn't intelligence - give a Delta guy a round-trip
ticket and an advance of $500. This is precisely what Meyer understood. Meyer
saw conflict on a spectrum. He saw that our adversaries were affecting us below
the threshold of war. He recognized that the United States needed the ability to
employ clandestine techniques - but not intelligence.''

SPECIAL OPERA-tions became involved in a series of clandestine activities, under
the top-secret codename Grid Circuit. Defense Secretary Weinberger and other key
Department of Defense civilians were to be informed of these activities, and
regular briefings were given to the House and Senate Appropriations and Armed
Services Committees, whose members and senior staff knew when not to ask too
many questions. But no information was provided to the House and Senate
Intelligence Committees.

Lieut. Col. Bruce P. Mauldin, one of Longhofer's subordinates, recalls the
reasoning: ''Our assumption was that it was the C.I.A.'s responsibility to brief
the intelligence committees.''

In March 1981, Longhofer's unit went operational. The Army and the C.I.A. agreed
to set up a special aviation company, called Seaspray. Only a few of the senior
Army generals were briefed on the new unit, which was formally endorsed in
writing a week later by Vessey and John H. Stein, deputy director of operations
at the C.I.A. Seaspray's unmarked helicopters, specially adapted Hughes 500D's,
were to operate out of Fort Eustis, Va.

That April, Longhofer won approval from Meyer and the Office of the Secretary of
Defense for the establishment of the 160th Special Operations Aviation
Battalion, another secret helicopter training and support unit based at Fort
Campbell, Ky., whose existence became widely known in the aftermath of the
October 1983 invasion of Grenada. The reason for setting up the 160th, Longhofer
now says, was ''deception.'' He explains, ''We set it up so the media would
think the 160th was the big secret unit and would dig up Fort Campbell looking
for it.'' Seaspray remained unknown until 1985.

One early mission supported by Seaspray was a trip to Washington in August 1981
by the late Bashir Gemayel, the Lebanese Christian leader who without public
notice visited the White House, State Department and Pentagon. The trip was
handled by the C.I.A., with Army Special Operations responsible for Gemayel's
safe return.

He was flown by private jet to an airfield west of Cairo; from there, a Seaspray
helicopter ferried him to a rendezvous point at a beach just north of Beirut.
Longhofer and several aides flew to the Middle East to monitor the operation,
and to coordinate with the Israeli Air Force, which provided search and rescue
support.

Longhofer's most enduring accomplishment was an aerial intelligence operation in
Central America, which his unit established in March 1982. The Administration's
secret war against Nicaragua was still in its early phase, and the National
Security Agency, which is responsible for intercepting communications around the
world, was only beginning to increase its collection assets in Central America.

Within two weeks, Longhofer's team, through a front company, secretly bought
several small, twin-engine light aircraft, outfitted them with the most advanced
electronic and interception gear, and began operating them without detection
from a small landing strip in Honduras. It was supposed to be a civilian aerial
photography operation. But some of the photographers were specially assigned
National Security Agency communications experts, whose function was to monitor
Nicaraguan Government and Salvadoran rebel messages and relay them to the United
States. The operation was code-named Queens Hunter.

IN A RECENT INTER-view, Meyer, who retired as Army Chief of Staff in 1983,
defended his role in setting up the Special Operations Division. He said his
goal, after the debacle of the hostage-rescue effort in Iran, was for the Army
to develop its own operational group capable of conducting sensitive and
clandestine military activities.

At the time, there was a widespread belief throughout the intelligence community
that the C.I.A., which has primacy for such paramilitary operations through its
Special Activities Group, had been weakened by the personnel policies of Adm.
Stansfield Turner, its director in the Carter Administration. Turner had forced
out and retired hundreds of old hands, including many clandestine operatives
with Vietnam War experience. If the C.I.A. couldn't do it, the Army would.

A new cover unit was set up, known as the Intelligence Support Activity; it
would be a separate entity in the Army's new secret world of special operations,
with its own commander, Col. Jerry M. King.

Both King and Longhofer were self-assured officers who would become bitter
rivals. The support activity was to rely on Longhofer's unit for mission
planning and operational support, including all the laundered cash deemed
necessary. The men and officers assigned to the unit were issued no military
weapons or clothing; they trained at civilian locations, flew in unmarked
aircraft and were prepared to be disavowed by their Government if necessary.

As he had done with the special operations unit, Meyer put the support unit
under Army operations -DCSOPS - rather than under intelligence. This freed it
from the bureaucracy, and scrutiny, of most military-intelligence activities.
Longhofer and his colleagues in Special Operations considered any involvement on
the part of Gen. William E. Odom, who was assistant chief of staff for Army
Intelligence, to be a form of bureaucratic death.

Meyer said that he had no qualms about the less rigid reporting requirements for
King and Longhofer's activities in operations: ''I never worried about placing
it in Ops because I knew there was a reporting system in place. Longhofer had to
go to the deputy chief of staff for operations and to the Secretary of the Army
for approval. There was a regular trap line.''

The Army's involvement in secret operations first became known to the House and
Senate Intelligence Committees in early 1982, shortly after retired Army Lieut.
Col. James G. (Bo) Gritz, a former Green Beret, began telling newsmen about his
contacts with Jerry King in planning a privately financed prisoner-of-war rescue
effort in Southeast Asia.

At the time - unbeknown to Congress and with no apparent authority from the
C.I.A. or any other intelligence agency - the Intelligence Support Activity was
running an undercover operation in Panama City to monitor Gen. Manuel Antonio
Noriega, the Panamanian Army chief. It was also in the midst of extended
negotiations with Iraq for a Soviet tank, a deal that was canceled after Israel
voiced heated objections to the unit's trading howitzers for the tank. Israel,
which believed the howitzers might well end up being used against it, was in the
position, as it would be in the Iran-Contra affair, of knowing more about
American intelligence operations than the Congressional intelligence committees.

When they heard of the support unit's links to Gritz, House and Senate
Intelligence Committee members were appalled. ''We stumbled on it,''
acknowledged one intelligence committee official. ''The Army did not come
forward in 1981 to tell us that they were setting this up. They explained that
this was in DCSOPS, but they looked like intelligence organizations to us. It
was clear that the Army was evading our scrutiny.''

Senior Army officials said that Secretary John Marsh felt that he also had not
been sufficiently briefed on the new intelligence organization. His superiors in
Caspar Weinberger's office also claimed to be in the dark.

The job of cleaning up the support activity was assigned to retired Army Gen.
Richard G. Stilwell, the deputy under secretary of defense for policy, who was
widely considered to be the intelligence czar in the Pentagon.

Stilwell placed the support unit under his trusted ally, General Odom of Army
Intelligence. From that point on, Intelligence Support Activity would have to
submit all of its proposed activities for approval to the House and Senate
Intelligence Committees, and submit to the various bureaucratic reviews.

The travails of the support unit reinforced the feelings of those Army men who
were convinced that Longhofer and his subordinates were out of control, whether
or not he had the total confidence of General Meyer.

By the fall of 1982, however, Longhofer was attached to the C.I.A. as the Army's
first military assistant to the C.I.A.'s director of operations, John Stein. The
timing couldn't have been better: Longhofer had been pro-moted out of the
Pentagon, at the request of Meyer and Casey, just as a number of Army generals
were determined to make things rough for him. Longhofer's new position was
designed, according to a classified memorandum, to ''enhance cooperation and
control'' between the Army and the C.I.A.

This was a period of intense demands on the Special Operations unit by the
C.I.A., which was becoming increasingly involved in clandestine operations in
Central America. Longhofer, who had officially been replaced in Special
Operations by Col. Robert A. Kvederas, continued to work closely and meet often
with the men in the ''zoo'' - a fact that few of the generals in DCSOPS, as they
testified later at Longhofer's court-martial, knew.

THE CLOSE TIES BETWEEN THE C.I.A. and Longhofer's unit were mutually beneficial.
Special Operations, with its virtually unlimited budget and access to aircraft
and helicopters, could supply untraceable - and expensive - airlift for the
C.I.A.'s Central American operations, which were being closely monitored by the
press and Congressional intelligence committees.

The C.I.A., in turn, provided specialized support for clandestine activities,
such as pseudonymous passports for Longhofer's undercover operatives. C.I.A.
station chiefs could also convince local officials in third-world countries to
look the other way when members of the Special Operations unit needed to land
without scrutiny at a foreign airport.

There was another reason for the C.I.A.'s eagerness to work closely with the
Army unit. Longhofer recalls that, by mid-1983, there was a consensus inside the
agency that Congress would eventually vote a cutoff or ceiling on funds for
military support of the contras - indeed, a limit of $24 million for support was
enacted on Dec. 8, 1983 - and the men running the contra war had contingency
plans for increased operations by the Army.

Because Longhofer's unit was not officially involved in intelligence, it
provided the C.I.A. with an arguably ''legal'' way to continue supporting the
contras without informing the intelligence committees.

In addition, the special operations unit developed an ingenious method for
improving efficiency and further masking the movement of helicopters and
materiel: it contracted a private citizen, Richard B. Gadd, a retired Air Force
lieutenant colonel, to transport men and aircraft. In subsequent years, Gadd and
one of his associates, retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord, would
later work for Oliver North, as the National Security Council dramatically
expanded the use of the private sector in its covert operations.

IN MID-1983, MEYER RETIRED, and Gen. John A. Wickham Jr. was named the new Army
Chief of Staff. Wickham took office not knowing very much about Special
Operations - he had been cut out of the flow of information shortly after
replacing John Vessey as Meyer's deputy.

According to Longhofer, the initial intent was to brief Wickham fully on
everything. But Longhofer came to feel that Wickham was too careful; he
delegated requests to his immediate staff for recommendations, whereas Vessey
had given his approval within hours. As Meyer's deputy, ''Wickham refused to
make decisions, and we were waiting two weeks or more,'' says Longhofer. ''We
needed answers in one or two hours.'' So, Longhofer says, he removed him from
the chain of command, with Meyer's approval.

In defending his decision not to brief senior officers such as Wickham,
Longhofer contends he was merely following Meyer's orders. ''I could have been
very friendly and told a lot of senior officers what I was doing,'' Longhofer
says. ''But I thought I was doing special ops for General Meyer. I wasn't
supposed to talk.''

Meyer, in a recent interview, said: ''I don't remember ever cutting Wickham out
of anything. That would be abnormal. I just can't imagine that ever happening.''

By the time Wickham became Chief of Staff, Longhofer had decided that Special
Operations had grown too unwieldy for the Pentagon basement and needed a cover
organization, which would become known as Business Security International, with
offices in suburban Virginia and a separate bank account.

Longhofer briefed Gen. Max R. Thurman, Wickham's new deputy chief of staff, on
his plan for the new cover organization in early August. A training and
recruitment expert, Thurman was known as one of the Army's leading intellects -
and a careful bureaucrat, like Wickham.

''Thurman got a paper plus a briefing, but he didn't know all the operational
details,'' Longhofer recalls. ''It was my position that they didn't need to
know.'' It took two briefings before Thurman finally signed on - but he hadn't
been told exactly what it was he was approving.

The rest was easy. Financing - the first year's budget was $750,000 - was
supplied without question by an Army auditor, and Business Security, known
inside special operations as ''Yellow Fruit,'' was under way. Its director was
Lieut. Col. Dale E. Duncan, who had been recruited the year before by Longhofer
to handle security for the special operations unit.

Duncan's job was, among other things, to make sure that the cover for the unit's
operations wasn't blown. His professional life revolved around safe houses,
false identities and a constant suspicion of penetrations by foreign
intelligence.

By most accounts, Duncan was an arrogant, insensitive officer who insisted on
personal loyalty from his small staff of a half-dozen operatives - all of whom,
in turn, understood that they could share the good life inside Yellow Fruit if
they could cope with their boss.

Longhofer's subordinates saw Duncan as a self-promoter who always seemed too
eager to spend money and live well; they warned Longhofer emphatically that he
had picked the wrong man. ''This was a guy who you'd ask to buy a widget for
monitoring the telephone and he'd come back with a suitcase,'' one member of
Special Operations recalls. ''He was a big spender.''

But Longhofer says that he viewed the complaints as normal infighting among
highly competitive officers. In his view, the overall mission of Yellow Fruit
was essential and Duncan's experience in operational security was unquestioned.

Yet an internal audit of Yellow Fruit in September 1983 turned up enormous
inconsistencies in Duncan's financial accounts. After one Special Operations
field exercise in Salt Lake City in mid-1983, for example, Duncan had turned in
an expense account statement for $16,000, with no receipts. The inconsistencies
were reported to Colonel Kvederas, who asked Longhofer to investigate.

It was at this point that Longhofer undertook what the Army would later describe
in his court-martial as a cover-up. He assigned a former Army intelligence
officer who was in charge of finance for the Special Operations unit, to
investigate Duncan.

A month later, the Yellow Fruit staff members were told that Duncan had been
cleared. Court-martial witnesses later testified, however, that Duncan removed
critical evidence from a secure safe in the Business Security International
offices. Despite the findings, it was clear that Business Security would have to
be shut down; Duncan's dispute with his staff posed obvious problems in
operational security. Kvederas, amazingly, permitted Duncan to break the news to
his staff. Duncan summoned them to a meeting, told them he was dismissing them
and, if he had his way, would see to it that they never worked in special
operations or Army intelligence again.

Duncan, as part of his responsibility in Yellow Fruit, had authorized electronic
surveillance during several Special Operations exercises. He had also planned
for counterintelligence activities during the annual formal ceremonial dinner
for Special Operations personnel, known as a dining-in, that was to take place
in the fall of 1983 at a suburban Washington hotel. Yellow Fruit personnel were
ordered to attend the dinner, carrying weapons, and pose as celebrants.

Duncan's expressed goal was to determine whether the partygoers were maintaining
''operational security.'' But Yellow Fruit operatives subsequently testified
that his real intent was to embarrass Jerry King, the Intelligence Support
Activity commander. ''Duncan's purpose was to nail King - to wire his room, set
him up with a prostitute and get it on tape,'' a former Yellow Fruit officer
recalled in an interview. ''We also knew there was an underlying motive'' for
Duncan - to ingratiate himself with Longhofer. ''Longhofer and King hated each
other's guts.'' (John M. Dowd, Duncan's lawyer, said recently that he had ''no
knowledge of those allegations.'' The Government, he said, had never raised any
questions, ''formally or informally,'' about Duncan's motives for conducting the
dining-in security.) Before the dining-in security measures were carried out,
however, word of Yellow Fruit's alleged wiretapping activities had begun to
spread through the top of the Army, causing near panic. One senior general
warned associates that the Special Operations Division would be responsible for
President Reagan's defeat in the 1984 election.

ON DEC. 8, 1983, WICKHAM ordered Yellow Fruit and all other special operations
to shut down immediately. The Business Security offices and safes were sealed,
pending an official investigation, and Longhofer and his subordinates were
suspended from all duties.

Secretary of the Army Marsh, according to an aide, was particularly incensed
because he believed the problems inside Longhofer's unit had been resolved after
the controversy over the Intelligence Support Activity's involvement with Bo
Gritz. ''The Army had gone through the same drill two years earlier, and
regularized it,'' the aide recalled. ''Marsh was furious when he found that its
house had not been put in order.''

Most Army officials shared Marsh's view, but there were a few who also
recognized that there were some institutional failures. The Army general
counsel's office had been urged in early 1982 to write new guidelines to revise
and tighten the auditing procedures for Longhofer's unit, but had not done so by
late 1983.

There was also, in the view of these officials, too much eagerness on the part
of many senior officers to strike a blow against Special Operations. ''There
were people who were out to get'' Longhofer and his men, one Army lawyer
acknowledged, for reasons having nothing to do with the allegations against
Yellow Fruit.

The case against Special Operations eventually landed on the desk of Theodore S.
Greenberg, an assistant United States Attorney with a reputation as a hard-nosed
prosecutor in national security cases. Greenberg had played a key role in the
successful prosecution in 1981 of Edwin P. Wilson, a former C.I.A. operative,
for, among other charges, the illegal export of explosives to Libya.

Greenberg was appalled by the extent of financial abuses and the lax attitude of
the Special Operations Division toward the Army's requirements for bookkeeping.
''Their attitude was, 'We don't have to follow the rules,' '' Greenberg said in
an interview. ''Only Government slobs get by on the $50 per diem. These men
learned how to manipulate the system; they learned how to brief a concept to a
general staff officer and then take that statement as authority to take action.
Where did they get off buying airplanes with no contracting warrant?''

Ironically, the most dramatic and upsetting allegation against Yellow Fruit -
illegal domestic electronic surveillance - didn't pan out. Greenberg concluded
that Duncan had been acting without criminal intent in conducting random
electronic surveillance. Nor was Greenberg able to make a Federal criminal case
against Longhofer. But he did recommend the court-martial for the former Special
Operations chief.

In the end, Longhofer, Duncan and another member of Yellow Fruit were convicted
and eight others were forced to resign as a result of the investigations.
Duncan's Federal court conviction for theft was overturned early this year, but
he is serving a 10-year sentence at Fort Leavenworth, Kan. for his court-martial
conviction for filing false claims, theft and obstruction of justice. He has
appealed the military conviction. Longhofer remains convinced that his
subordinate did nothing wrong and will be vindicated by a military court of
appeals.

Longhofer now sees himself as a victim of an Army leadership that is frightened
of special operations. He also believes that other players in Army intelligence,
including King, Odom and the bureaucracy of Army intelligence combined to poison
the atmosphere and make impossible any objective assessment of his liability in
the Yellow Fruit incident. And he feels that Greenberg behaved unprofessionally
by insisting, after having failed to develop a criminal case, that the Army
leadership initiate court-martial proceedings against him.

The court-martial charges were not filed until May 1985, 17 months after
Longhofer was suspended from his Special Operations duties. He describes the
charges of cover-up and conduct unbecoming an officer as ''a little like being
court-martialed for wearing the wrong tie to the general's reception.'' He was a
stand-in, he believes, for the real target of the Army prosecution: General
Meyer.

''They didn't have the moral courage to go after Meyer, so they went after me,''
he says. ''They didn't want to attack the lion, so they went after the cubs.''

''As I look back at it,'' he says now, ''I should have picked up and left when
Meyer left.''

General Meyer, who last year wrote a letter to Marsh urging a full pardon for
Longhofer, says that no official from the Department of the Army or the Justice
Department has ever questioned him about his role in the Special Operations
Division.

Greenberg acknowledges that he has emerged, in the view of Longhofer and his
associates, as the villain, the ambitious prosecutor who forced the Army into
courts-martial and career-damaging letters of reprimand to most of the men who
worked in the Special Operations Division.

''I wasn't the heavy,'' Greenberg insists. ''The Army leadership felt these guys
should be sternly dealt with. Subversion of the chain of command is a very
serious offense in the Army, especially when you're talking about special
operations. The Pentagon had systems for doing anything with money in a
classified maneuver. There was no reason to hide things from their commanding
officer.''

Greenberg and the Army are proud that the military and Federal systems were able
to effectively investigate and prosecute in such a highly classified area. ''The
Army found something wrong and it corrected it immediately,'' Greenberg says.

THE ARMY'S INVOLVEMENT IN commandolike activities - which has always been
characterized by an uneasy ambivalence - is now at a crossroads.

Morale today inside the Intelligence Support Activity, which has grown into an
organization of nearly 300 men, is widely considered to be low. (Col. Jerry King
was reassigned in May 1984 to the military's Rapid Deployment Joint Task Force
at MacDill Air Force Base in Florida.) One senior Congressional investigator
depicted the support unit in a recent interview as ''the biggest bunch of
misfits you ever saw.''

''They have no sense of mission,'' he said. ''They have no operatives who are
Oriental or Middle Eastern, and no language capability. If I had my way, I'd
say, 'Get rid of them.' They don't do a thing.''

The investigations into the Special Operations Division suggest to some of
Longhofer's former colleagues that the Army as an institution may simply be, of
all things, too democratic, too ingrained with the concept of civilian and
Congressional leadership, to cope with the flexibility and unpredictability of
special operations.

''Army intelligence should be limited to trying to find out whether the enemy is
poking around our perimeter,'' one long-time intelligence operative says
bitterly. ''We should never have become involved in strategic intelligence.''

Michael Foster, Longhofer's former aide who retired from the Army early this
year, reached a similar, but far broader, conclusion. ''In our heart of hearts,
covert operations are distasteful and immoral to us,'' he said. ''If we have an
enemy, we Americans buy war bonds and go fight face-to-face. We don't believe in
sneaky stuff - cutting throats and all that. We don't really believe we're
imperiled. We're sure our oceans will protect us. By God, it's laughable, but
that's the way we are.''

Longhofer remains the subject of much controversy inside the Army. Retired
Lieut. Gen. Robert L. Schweitzer, the former chairman of the Inter-American
Defense Board, and a Longhofer supporter, calls his court-martial conviction
''the worst miscarriage of justice I've seen in my 35 years in the Army.''

Other senior Army generals, however, caustically characterize Longhofer and his
senior aides as men incapable of operating inside the system. ''They think they
were railroaded,'' one major general said, ''like a guy named North.''

During his troubles, Longhofer waited quietly for William Casey to defend him to
the Justice Department and Pentagon higher-ups. Casey did nothing, but Longhofer
remains loyal to the late Director of Central Intelligence. Casey had planned to
support him, Longhofer insists, but decided not to do so because of a reluctance
to get involved in Army personnel matters.

Foster has a different explanation for Casey's silence: ''They used us for their
benefit and then, as soon as there was trouble, they walked away.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Theodore S. Greenberg; Col. James E. Lonhofer (Bill
Ballenberg)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By NEWGATE CALLENDAR

SECTION: Section 7; Page 45, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 790 words


You finish THE JERICHO RUMBLE by Christopher Murphy (Walker, $16.95) and then
turn back to the first page. Facing it is a Xerox copy of a ''brevet
d'invention'' from the French patent office dated Feb. 12, 1965. It appears to
be the real thing. (Later in the book an English translation is provided.) It is
the patent of an invention that can scramble brains and destroy buildings by an
ultrasound device. Then questions arise. Is this for real? Does it work as
described? If so, why hasn't it been used? Why haven't we heard about it? Or is
it in the secret arsenal of the great powers?

This weapon is integral to the plot of ''The Jericho Rumble.'' A British
liquidator meets a woman whose father and husband have been jailed in an African
country named Ghat, run by a despot who makes Caligula look like a Girl Scout.
The liquidator decides to help her free them, using the ultrasound weapon. A
most ingenious man, and a lethal one, he works out a plan to get the weapon into
Ghat.

The book is an expert espionage-adventure caper, another of those ''Mission:
Impossible'' setups, but well written and full of hectic action. Mr. Murphy
writes so smoothly that one can accept his implausible story.

                                      *  *  *

Another lively adventure-cum-espionage is RED ICE by Nicholas Barker and Anthony
Masters (Dunne/St. Martin's, $16.95). This novel takes place mostly in
Antarctica, where a British patrol ship operates. The time is the immediate
future. The skipper of the ship, a bristly and independent type not popular in
Whitehall, feels that the Russians are up to something and that terrorists are
working with them. He comes to the conclusion that the Russians are planning to
blow up oil tankers with a new device, but he has no proof. He also feels that
there has been a cover-up. Is there a Russian agent in the upper reaches of the
Admiralty? It is revealing no great secret to say that there is.

The naval episodes are splendidly handled. One of the authors, Mr. Barker,
commanded a British ship in action during the Falkland war. Mr. Masters is a
professional writer. Between the two they have written an absorbing, exciting
and realistic sea adventure with an espionage background. And there is a strong
streak of poetry in the authors' descriptions of the bleak, icy, beautiful
Antarctica.

                                      *  *  *

In a way, OUR FATHERS' SHADOWS by Jack Fuller (Morrow, $16.95) is a legitimate
mystery. A state district attorney in Chicago, Frank Nolan, starts investigating
a case on his own. A child has been beaten to death, and he is not satisfied
with the police findings. The department maintains that the case is
open-and-shut. Against the wishes of the top brass Nolan goes ahead and does
find the real killer.

Fine. But that is only a relatively short part of the book. Most of it is
concerned with Nolan's emotional problems. His marriage is breaking up because
he has a secret that he finds himself unable to tell his concert pianist wife.
His father, a remarkable man of a philosophical bent, is dying of a disease that
has been genetically passed from father to son. His brother, a Vietnam veteran,
has problems of his own. After a while all of this becomes tedious, with soap
opera aspects.

Mr. Fuller, who won a Pulitzer Prize last year for his editorials in The Chicago
Tribune, has not made up his mind what kind of novel he wants to write. Yet he
is a more than competent stylist, with a good ear for dialogue and obviously a
literate background. But in ''Our Fathers' Shadows'' he has not been able to put
everything together.

                                      *  *  *

MURDER IN SOHO by Harvey Shapiro and Paulett Tumay (Dutton, $16.95) moves
quickly and has some funny moments. But ultimately it fails. Its authors are the
editors of a newspaper in lower Manhattan, and of course they know the
territory. There is a murder, and a private investigator who tries to unravel
everything. But what this book is really about is the fakery of the SoHo art
world, the gullibility of the public and the venality of the dealers and critics
who manipulate reputations and prices.

The authors have attempted a satire. All of the characters are caricatures, and
SoHo is seen through the innocent eyes of the private investigator. He is a sort
of Gulliver in Laputa, the chronicler of a strange society writing down the
local customs in a bemused manner. The trouble is that the writing does not live
up to the premise. Despite a few telling observations, the approach is generally
heavy-handed and sophomoric.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE END OF A MARRIAGE, LIVE FROM TIMES SQUARE

BYLINE: By ROBERT PLUNKET; Robert Plunket, the author of the novel ''My Search
for Warren Harding,'' is a columnist for Sarasota magazine.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words



CLEA & ZEUS DIVORCE
By Emily Prager. 259 pp. New York: Vintage Books. Paper, $6.95.

WHEN Emily Prager's first book, a collection of very odd short stories entitled
''A Visit From the Footbinder,'' was published several years ago people took
notice. Here was a voice not just quirky and original but dangerous - critics
were upset with her troubling insights into women, pornography and masochism.
Her technique also drew fire, for her stories were the literary equivalent of
comedy skits (she used to write for National Lampoon), and in her world of hip
young women in stiletto heels using sex or being used by it, some people saw
brilliance while others saw only ambiguity. Ms. Prager's first novel, ''Clea &
Zeus Divorce,'' will heighten the debate. The concept is audacious; the singular
prose style intact and flourishing, as sharp as a brand-new Lady Schick. But
talk about ambiguous!

Clea and Zeus are dancers, but like no dancers you've ever seen. They are more
famous than rock stars and live on a scale Prince or Madonna might envy,
surrounded by retainers, bodyguards, agents and hangers-on. Their extravagant
shows combine music, dance, television and just about every other art form with
special effects so elaborate they have to be rehearsed in the antigravity
chamber at NASA. The subject matter is always their life together - Clea and
Zeus at the Cairo Hilton, Clea and Zeus in Love, Clea and Zeus at Carnegie Hall,
Clea and Zeus Grow Up. Their fans adore them; they are the ultimate fantasy
couple. ''They seemed the same, lithe and magnetic . . . their fate
predetermined long ago in a shadow play on the wall of a cave.''

But tonight things are different. Clea is undergoing a crisis that threatens to
change everything. She feels that Zeus doesn't love her anymore, that she
doesn't love him, that sexual love has made her weak, that ''her talent was
robbing her of her life.'' Since art and life are one as far as Zeus and Clea
are concerned, they will act out their breakup on a prime-time TV special being
broadcast live from a theater in Times Square. The timing couldn't be worse,
though. Clea's mother is dying of leprosy in Hawaii (she contracted it from her
job, skinning and stuffing armadillos for a man out in Oklahoma who painted them
gold and sold them as gewgaws); Jerry, Clea's astrologer, is calling in from
Vegas with the news that an atomic bomb will be detonated at Kennedy Airport at
10 P.M., just before the third act begins.

Clea takes the bomb threat seriously, and soon the reader does too. Jerry has
always been right in the past, and Clea, who has her own war room with access to
the Norad computers, confirms the prediction in a fortunetelling ceremony
performed by her faithful retainer, Miss Florie. Nuclear war will be traumatic
but it may have its good points; if she survives ''there's just got to be a
return to innocence.'' It is Clea's effort to get everyone - including the
audience and a performing cat named Pilar (''an animal actress with a resume
that spelled trouble: one cat food commercial after another, a career of downers
and starvation'') - to wear special radiation suits that propels the action of
the novel forward.

Obviously, Ms. Prager is a writer who requires interpretation. In ''A Visit From
the Footbinder'' this was great fun. She teased the reader along, layering
irony, comedy and horror in the title story, about how women acquiesce in their
own oppression and, paradoxically, acquire power from it. If there are any high
school English teachers out there I suggest they use it as subject matter for
those ''What does the author mean?'' type essays. It's right up there with
Shirley Jackson's classic story ''The Lottery.''

In ''Clea and Zeus'' the teasing is still there, but the interpretation turns
into an unwelcome chore. Somewhere there's an organizing principle in all this,
but where? Is it a heavily ironic fable about a woman driven to madness, or a
wicked parody of Joan Didion's writing at its most overwrought? How seriously
are we supposed to take all this nuclear war business? Is it all just a big
joke? We're never quite sure, so all we have for consolation is the aura of
glamorous despair that pervades every page.

This problem of not knowing how to take things extends to the characters. Zeus's
life is mostly external. He is described by admiring fans as a cross between
Lord Byron, Robert Donat, Frederic Chopin and Mel Gibson. He is a white
Rhodesian, a laudanum addict because he killed his mother (accidently, sort of.)
''Honorable . . . but weak,'' says his factotum. ''There is something . . .
absent.''

We learn more about Clea; this is definitely her book. I'm not sure what Ms.
Prager thinks of her, but to me she comes across as your worst nightmare of a
stereotypical Sarah Lawrence girl - so cool, so talented, so hip in her little
deer-hoof boots, so very obsessed with herself. ''Beneath her dolly exterior
lurked a raging little animal that bit and clawed and threw itself around rooms,
causing destruction.'' But we never really learn why. She and Zeus remain
enigmas. ''Equally charismatic and sparkling, equally talented, equally larger
than life, equally - what was it? - lost, no, hidden, no, bereft.''

Even though ''Clea & Zeus Divorce'' eventually sinks under the weight of too
many ill-matched metaphors (colonialism, art, Western gods vs. Eastern gods,
stardom, Vietnam, the Bomb and so on), Ms. Prager emerges with her reputation as
a stylist and innovator intact. No writer around is quite so visual; her prose
is a series of images out of Calvin Klein ads and MTV (she's constantly
describing the lighting), made all the more remarkable by the beauty and
significance she finds in such commercial trash. She loves a good show-biz joke.
She positively revels in clothes and makeup. And even though the book does not
succeed, there is a very skillful artist at work here, trying to articulate the
unexplained and maybe unexplainable terror of modern life.

WHO GETS THE COCKATOO?

Placed in a semicircle, beginning downstage right, along the upstage flat, and
ending downstage left, were eight conical heaps of objects, the possessions of
Clea and Zeus. Each object was tied separately onto one massive rope, which
formed the heaps and coiled between them along the stage floor. Each heap was a
mass of colors, shapes and textures containing articles of clothing, books,
mementos, shoes, letters, furniture, and even some live things, a bowl of fish,
a cockatoo and a Siamese cat. The colorful detritus of ten years of marriage and
of art. . . .

Clea was scrambling around the right conical heap, picking at it. As she was
sifting through the objects, she could feel the energy ebb and flow around her,
and without looking at Zeus, she chose the precise moment when the smile was
played out on his face. She cut from the rope a large wing-tip shoe.

''This yours?'' she asked, holding it aloft on one finger. He nodded. She threw
it onto the dog sled, where it hit with a thud.

She addressed the audience. ''We're getting a divorce,'' she said. The audience
gasped.

From ''Clea & Zeus Divorce.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 22, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 50, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 895 words




$

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     3    GARDEN OF SHADOWS, by V. C. Andrews.
            (Pocket, $4.95.) The beginnings of the evil that
            beset the Dollanganger family in four previously
            published novels.

 2     2    WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
            (Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
            woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.

 3     4    WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Avon, $5.95.)
            Iran during the month following the Shah's
            departure.

 4     7    THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $4.95.)
            Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New
            York family begun in ''Evergreen.''

 5     2    THE PRINCESS, by Jude Devereaux. (Pocket,
            $3.95.) A European princess's passionate affair
            with a United States naval officer.

 6     6    FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen
            Coonts. (Pocket, $4.95.) Navy aviators in the
            Vietnam War.

 7     5    PAPER MONEY, by Ken Follett. (Signet/NAL,
            $3.95.) Crime, high finance and journalism form
            the threads of this newly reissued 1977 thriller.

 8     19   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley,
            $4.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
            World War III.

 9     8    A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Warner,
            $4.95.) Comdr. Adam Dalgliesh investigates a
            brutal double murder.

10     7    FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov.
            (Del Rey/Ballantine, $4.95.) The hero of the
            ''Foundation'' series searches for Earth.

11     14   IT, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)
            Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman
            who grew up in a small Maine town.

12     2    ALL FOR THE LOVE OF DADDY, by Marcia
            Rose. (Ballantine, $4.95.) A family crisis after a
            tycoon decides to sell his business.

13     2    ALL THAT GLITTERS, by Thomas Tryon. (Dell,
            $4.95.) Five Hollywood sex goddesses and the
            agent who helped their careers.

14     4    KENTUCKY! by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam,
            $4.50.) The latest in the ''Wagons West'' series tells
            of a plot to assassinate President Grant.

15     80   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom
            Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
            brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction

 1     7    ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
            Wambaugh. (Bantam, $4.95.) A case involving the
            1979 murder of a high school teacher.

 2     2    DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland
            with Greg Lawrence. (Jove, $4.50.) The ballerina
            recalls her checkered career.

 3    213   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
            (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
            spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 4     39   NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.
            (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
            author says, and we must confront them to grow.

 5     3    WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney.
            (Berkley, $3.95.) Essays on contemporary life by
            the journalist and television commentator.

 6     55   WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.
            (North Point, $12.50.) A woman's adventures
            flying in Africa and across the Atlantic in the 30's.

 7     3    PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon
            Eisenhower. (Zebra, $4.50.) The biography of the
            former First Lady, written by her daughter.

 8     30   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Berkley, $6.95.)
            Anecdotes and ruminations by the television star.

 9     12   KAFFIR BOY, by Mark Mathabane. (Plume/
            NAL, $8.95.) Coming-of-age in South Africa.

10     5    ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John
            Madden with Dave Anderson. (Jove, $3.95.)
            Observations on football.

11 *   5    ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Avon,
            $4.50.) The comedian's autobiography, taking her
            up to age 26.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1     4    THE FAR SIDE OBSERVER, by Gary Larson.
            (Andrews & McMeel, $5.95.) A new collection of
            cartoons.

 2     13   BILLY AND THE BOINGERS BOOTLEG, by
            Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $7.95.) More
            ''Bloom County'' cartoon strips.

 3     30   CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson.
            (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $6.95.) Cartoons
            about a boy, his toy tiger and his parents.

 4     3    GARFIELD SWALLOWS HIS PRIDE, by Jim
            Davis. (Ballantine, $5.95.) The 14th collection of
            cartoons about a fat cat.

 5 *   76   WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin
            Norwood. (Pocket, $4.95.) How to avoid or end
            addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
New Warmth for New Plays

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 22, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1879 words


REVIVALS once were the mainstay of regional theaters, with an occasional
obligatory nod to the new play, about which artistic directors have
traditionally felt an understandable ambivalence.

After all, isn't it the theater's responsibility to nurture new playwrights?

Still, for audiences, nothing is more forbidding than the unfamiliar, and what
are the odds that a new play is going to be a good one?

All that now seems to be changing. Indications are that new attitudes toward new
plays are emerging and that audiences are more willing to take a chance, to have
an adventure or, perhaps, to just try potluck.

In defense of the new play, one could argue that yet another ''Sea Gull'' could
be risky, too. How many mediocre productions of Chekhov -or, for that matter,
Shakespeare or Shaw - have driven people from theaters, perhaps forever more?

The fallout from a new failure is not so hazardous. No one is going to swear off
theater on the basis of one failed effort by a fledgling playwright. But Ibsen,
done ineptly, can be crushing.

A survey of the state's regional theaters indicates a new emphasis on new plays
that may well be unprecedented.

Referring to the American Stage Company's audiences in Teaneck, Jim Singer, the
theater's executive director, said:

''They are not willing to settle for standard fare; we have to find new works
instead of putting on another 'Talley's Folly.' ''

Ted Rawlins, the theater's executive producer, pointed out that box office
receipts were higher for American Stage's new works than for its revivals.

''We were startled,'' he said, ''and we don't have to hitch on to a star's name
value. The play really is the thing.''

In its first two seasons, the American Stage Company put on revivals of ''The
Rainmaker'' (with Gary Sandy) and ''The Diary of Anne Frank.'' Although Arthur
Miller's ''The Price'' was the recent opening play, the remainder of the season
in Teaneck consists entirely of new works.

With other theaters, the trend began at the season's start.

Unusually, Montclair's Whole Theater and New Brunswick's George Street Playhouse
opened last month with new plays - ''Princess Grace and the Fazzaris'' and
''Beautiful Bodies,'' respectively - and Millburn's Paper Mill Playhouse had a
musical debut (''Sayonara'').

And the newer and more expansive the theater, the more intense, it appears, is
the dedication to new work.

Having presented lightweight plays for 14 summers, Pemberton's Foundation
Theater took a first step toward becoming a year-round playhouse with the
premiere of Enid Rudd's ''The Other Side of Newark.''

Also, Hoboken's two-year-old Renegade Theater, which has previously presented
nonmainstream but proven plays, is now dedicating itself solely to the
development of new works and new playwrights.

Both the Foundation and Renegade plays are scheduled to end today.

Perhaps even more adventurous than the selection of previously unproven plays is
the movement of a couple of theaters toward the avant-garde and multi-media
pieces.

Note ''Autobahn,'' described as an ''innovative comic pageant,'' which will be
performed at Montclair's Whole Theater by The Adaptors Movement Theater, and
''Lear,'' coming to the George Street Playhouse in New Brunswick next month.

The latter is to be a premiere of what is being called a ''radical reworking''
of the Shakespearean text, which the experimental Mabou Mines Company has been
working on for three years. Once it is completed, the performance is expected to
last five hours.

University theater groups, such as the Mason Gross School of Arts at Rutgers,
which is presenting an interesting and offbeat season but one that consists of
plays of proven quality, began its season with a new work, ''Rainbow Dancing.''

And after presenting three staged readngs at three different theaters earlier
this year, the New Jersey Theater Group, the associaton of the state's
professional theaters, has scheduled another series of ''New Jersey Plays'' to
be underwritten by a grant from the Geraldine R. Dodge Foundation.

The schedules for those - and more new plays - as well as the standard
repertories of selected theaters for the remainder of the current season are as
follows:

ANDOVER - Perona Farms Dinner-Theater, Route 517, (201) 729-6161: Alternating
now through Dec. 31, ''Going My Way,'' an original musical adaptation of the
film, and ''Schnozzola,'' a revue about the life and music of Jimmy Durante;
Jan. 15 through March: ''Brighton Beach Memoirs.''

ATLANTIC CITY - Claridge Hotel-Casino, (609) 340-3700: Through next Sunday, ''My
One And Only,'' starring Georgia Engel; Dec. 27-April 3, ''42d Street,''
starring Peter Marshall.

ENGLEWOOD - Creative Theater Inc., the John Harms Center for the Arts, 30 North
Van Brunt Street, (201) 568-5448: Feb. 11-21, ''Oliver!''; April 7-17,
''Barnum.''

HOBOKEN - Renegade Theater Company, V.F.W. Hall, 10th and Garden Streets, (201)
659-1480: All new plays, including ''The Ghostman'' (today at 3 P.M., although
the engagement may be extended); Feb. 11-March 6, ''Five Scenes From Life'';
April 21-May 15, annual One-Act Play Festival.

Also in Hoboken, The Writers Series, readings of works in progress, will take
place on Dec. 7, Jan. 11, March 14, May 9 and June 6 at Lady Jane's Cafe, 51
14th Street.

HOPEWELL - Off Broad Street Dessert-Theater, 5 South Greenwood Avenue, (609
466-2766): Now through Saturday: ''I Ought to Be in Pictures''; Dec. 4-Jan. 9,
''My Husband the Wife''; Jan. 15-Feb. 13, ''The Gin Game.''

MONTCLAIR - Whole Theater, 544 Bloomfield Avenue, (201) 744-2989: Dec. 1-20,
''Autobahn,'' an avant-garde satirical work; Jan. 5-24, ''The School for
Wives,'' by Moliere; Feb. 9-28, ''Tracers,'' a play about Vietnam written and
performed by the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company (a co-production with
the George Street Playhouse of New Brunswick); March 8-27, ''The Rose Tattoo,''
by Tennessee Williams.

MOUNTAIN LAKES - Neil's New Yorker Dinner-Theater, 90 Route 46, (201) 334-0058
for matinee reservations and (201) 334-0010 for evening and weekend
reservations: Dec. 12-May 29, ''Eubie.''

OAKLYN - Ritz Theater, 915 White Horse Pike, (609 858-5230): Friday through Dec.
19, ''The Ritz Riots,'' a holiday show with comedy and music in celebration of
the theater's 60th anniversary; Jan. 8-Feb. 6, ''Singin' in the Rain''; Feb.
19-March 19, Dame Agatha Christie's ''A Murder Is Announced''; April 8 (no
closing date), ''A Midsummer Night's Dream - the Musical''; May 20-June 18,
''Lovers and Other Strangers.''

NEWARK - Ironbound Theater, 19 Van Buren Street, (201 792-352): Feb. 19, 20, 26,
27 and March 3, 4 and 5, ''The Golden Handshake,'' by Robert Sturmer, a drama
about ''hucksterism''; May 13, 14, 20, 21, 26, 27, 28, an original work to be
chosen from the theater's reading series.

PEMBERTON - Foundation Theater, Burlington County College campus,
Pemberton-Browns Mills Road, (609 894-2138): ''The Other Side of Newark,'' by
Enid Rudd, today at 2 P.M.

PERRYVILLE - Hunterdon Hills Playhouse (luncheon and dinner theater), Route 173,
(201) 730-8007: Now through Dec. 15, ''No Hard Feelings,'' a comedy by Sam
Bobrick and Ron Clark.

PRINCETON - McCarter Theater Center for the Performing Arts. 91 University
Place, (609 683-8000): Shakespeare's ''Coriolanus,'' today at 2 P.M.; Dec.
12-26, Dickens's ''Christmas Carol,'' adapted and directed by Nagle Jackson;
Jan. 20-31, ''Three Ways Home,'' by Casey Kurtti, a Stage Two performance with
the audience seated on the stage; Feb. 10-28, ''Stepping Out,'' by Richard
Harris; March 9-27, ''The Dark Sonnets of the Lady,'' by Don Nigro, a new drama
about Sigmund Freud and his famous case study, ''Dora''; May 11-29, '' 'Master
Harold' . . . and the Boys,'' by Athol Fugard.

Also, Intime Theater, Princeton: Dec. 3-6 and 10-12, ''The Promise''; Feb. 18-21
and 25-28, ''The Prisoner of Second Avenue''; March 24-27 and March 31-April 2,
''The Serpent''; April 14-17 and 21-23, ''Aunt Dan and Lemon.''

MADISON - New Jersey Shakespeare Festival, Drew University, Route 24, (201)
377-4487: Through Dec. 12, ''Translations''; Dec. 16-Jan. 3, ''The Diary of Anne
Frank'' in repertory with Dickens' ''Christmas Carol.''

METUCHEN - Forum Theater Group, 314 Main Street, (201) 548-0582: Dec. 9-Jan. 10,
''The Mystery of Edwin Drood''; Feb. 3-28, ''What the Butler Saw''; March
23-April 24, ''Personals,'' a musical revue.

MILLBURN - Paper Mill Playhouse, Brookside Drive, (201) 376-4343: Now through
Dec. 13, ''My One and Only''; Jan. 6-Feb. 7, ''Biloxi Blues''; Feb. 17-March 20,
''Two Into One,'' an English comedy; March 30-May 8, a new musical (to be
announced); May 18-June 26, ''Mack and Mabel,'' a revision of the musical.

NEW BRUNSWICK - Crossroads Theatre Company. 320 Memorial Parkway, (201)
249-5560: ''Woza Albert!'', today at 3 P.M.; Dec. 2-Jan. 22, ''Sophisticated
Ladies,'' the Duke Ellington musical; Feb. 3-March 6, ''Lady Day at Emerson's
Bar and Grill,'' a one-woman show about Billie Holiday; March 16-April 10, ''To
Gleam It Around, To Show My Shine,'' an adaptation of Zora Neale Hurston's
novel, ''Their Eyes Were Watching God''; April 20-May 22, ''Spooks,'' (formerly
called ''In the House of Johnson.'')

NEW BRUNSWICK - George Street Playhouse. 9 Livingston Avenue. (201) 246-7717):
Through Dec. 13, New Jersey premiere of ''Nunsense,'' the comic adventures of
the Little Sisters of Hoboken, by Dan Goggin; Jan. 8-31 (preview Jan. 6 and 7)
''Lear,'' an adaptation of Shakespeare's play by Lee Breuer; Feb. 12-March 6,
(previews Feb. 10 and 11), a new play to be announced; March 11-April 3
(previews March 9 and 10), ''Tracers,'' (co-produced with the Whole Theater of
Montclair); April 15-May 8 (previews April 13 and 14), a contemporary comedy to
be announced.

Also, at the George Street Playhouse: Presentations of new works in progress
will include ''The Meeting,'' by Jeff Stetson, on four weekends starting Jan.
15, and ''When Daddy Dies,'' by J.A. Whitcomb, to be offered in February and
March.

SOMERS POINT - South Jersey Regional Theater, (609 653-0553): Dec. 1-13, ''She
Loves Me,'' the musical; April 5-17, ''Veronica's Room''; May 3-15, ''A Day in
the Death of Joe Egg''; May 31-June 12, ''Brighton Beach Memoirs.''

STONY POINT, N.Y. - Penguin Repertory Company, Barn Playhouse, Crickettown Road,
(914) 786-2873: Feb. 19-March 13, ''Dead Serious,'' the world permiere of three
new comedies by William B. Keating; April 8-May 1, ''The Immigrant,'' a new play
about Russian pogroms at the turn of the century; May 27-June 17, ''The
Breadwinner,'' by W. Somerset Maugham.

TEANECK - The American Stage Company, in residence at Fairleigh Dickinson
University's Becton Theater, (201 692-7744): Three premieres: Dec. 2-27,
''Possessed -The Dracula Musical''; Jan. 13-Feb. 7, ''Fast Girls,'' a comedy;
March 2-27, ''Whispers''; April 27-May 22, a new play to be announced.

Readings to be presented by the New Jersey Theater Group:

Nov. 30 at 8 P.M., ''Prospect Park,'' a musical, at the Forum Theater Group,
Metuchen; Dec. 6 at 4 P.M., ''Stars With No Stripes,'' a musical, at the Mutual
Benefit Life building, 530 Broad Street, Newark, and Dec. 13 at 8 P.M., ''The
Plantings,'' to be performed by the American Stage Company in Teaneck.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT;
FICTION IN SHORT;
FICTION

BYLINE: By MEL WATKINSBy RANDALL SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 538 words



NIGHT NEVER FALLS. By Bud Shrake. (Random House, $17.95.) Bud Shrake's sixth
novel, set at the time of the Vietminh assault on Dien Bien Phu in 1954, uses
the early stages of the war in Southeast Asia as a backdrop for a gritty
romantic adventure. Harry Sparrow, the central character, is a tough,
hard-drinking American foreign correspondent. In quest of a Pulitzer Prize, he
leaves the comfort of London and slips into Indochina just prior to the
Communist onslaught. Mr. Shrake vividly re-creates both the entrenched French
Army's frustration as it helplessly awaits the Vietminh attack and the carnage
of the final battle. Harry escapes, along with Claudette, a nurse who is the
daughter of a French Government official, and manages to file the best stories
of his career. He also falls in love with Claudette. Back in London, Harry
attempts to integrate his macho life style into the genteel domestic world of
his new bride. But Claudette's mysterious connections with the Vietminh and with
a German mercenary fighting in Indochina ultimately lead Harry and Claudette to
the novel's quick-paced conclusion in Algeria, which is torn by its struggle for
independence. Mr. Shrake renders the details of a reporter's life in the
mid-50's with authenticity, and the action in the final scenes moves expediently
if not always convincingly. Elsewhere, however, the story is clogged with turgid
soliloquies on the relative merits of fascism and communism. In the end, though,
''Night Never Falls'' is illuminating on some aspects of the beginnings of the
Vietnam conflict and often entertaining as an adventure tale - if one ignores
Mr. Shrake's occasionally heavy-handed prose and gratuitous philosophizing.


A WORLD TOO WIDE. By Gregory Mcdonald. (Hill/ Kampmann, $17.95.) About a third
of the way through Gregory Mcdonald's new novel, one character asks another:
''What the hell are you and I doing sitting here this June morning by a swimming
pool on a farm in Tennessee?'' An apt question, and one the reader has likely
asked about 60 pages earlier. Mr. Mcdonald, whose ''Fletch'' detective series
would seem to provide assurance of his competence as an entertaining
storyteller, has produced a curious thing: a farrago of undigested ideas and
banal conversation unrelieved by any semblance of believable life. The plot
revolves around a world-famous jazz musician and composer who has invited the
children of old friends to celebrate their marriage at his farm. The resulting
assemblage includes fashion models, diplomats, drug smugglers, sensitive but
misunderstood rich people, regular-guy farmhands and detective novelists who are
Tired of It All. When not engaged in trite relationshipspeak and overextended
seductions, the guests spend their time issuing to one another the sort of
plaintive, grouchy tirades - about modern music, technocracy, politics, aging
and the like - usually found marked ''show, don't tell'' in creative-writing
classes. What can Mr. Mcdonald, a talented hand at commercial fiction, have
thought he was up to? These characters, we are told, are scheduled to appear in
future books; the author should think long and hard before putting them through
such embarrassing paces again.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Sihanouk to Meet Cambodian Official in Peace Bid

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 595 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Nov. 20


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian head of state, plans to meet Prime
Minister Hun Sen, the most powerful figure in the Vietnamese-backed Communist
Government in Phnom Penh, around Dec. 10 in Paris in a new peace effort,
according to Cambodian and other Asian diplomats.

At the meeting, first sought by Mr. Hun Sen, the two men are to review growing
demands by Vietnam and the Soviet Union for a political settlement in the
economically and politically troubled Southeast Asian nation that would allow
Prince Sihanouk to return to power in a new coalition government and enable
Vietnam to withdraw its forces, these diplomats say.

''Sihanouk wants to find out how sincere they are about wanting a settlement,''
said one Southeast Asian diplomat close to the negotiations.

The 65-year-old Prince is the effective leader of an opposition coalition
recognized as Cambodia's legitimate government by the United Nations. The Prime
Minister heads the Government of President Heng Samrin, which is kept in power
by an occupying Vietnamese army.

Vietnam Backs Talks

The Heng Samrin Government controls the capital, Phnom Penh. Prince Sihanhouk's
opposition coalition is centered on the Thailand border but its guerrilla forces
operate throughout much of the country.

A spokesman for the Vietnamese Embassy in Beijing said today that the Vietnamese
Government backs the proposed peace talks.

''We support the meeting with Hun Sen and hope it will produce good results,''
the spokesman said. ''This is a new development. We support this. We support the
meeting regardless of what comes out.''

The Paris meeting is expected to follow the annual Congress of the French
Communist Party, which Mr. Hun Sen is attending as an observer. The Vietnamese
Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, will also be in Paris for the congress and
could become involved in the talks, Asian diplomats said.

France Is Intermediary

A few weeks ago the Chinese Ambassador in Bangkok said that Beijing had no
objection to the planned meeting, indicating China was ready to accept a
government in Phnom Penh that would not be dominated by the Khmer Rouge, the
faction that Vietnam ousted in 1979 and that is now part of Prince Sihanouk's
coalition.

Last July, Prince Sihanouk announced he was taking a year off as leader of the
coalition, apparently to free his hands for negotiations with the Phnom Penh
Government.

France, a former colonial power in both Cambodia and Vietnam, is acting as
intermediary in trying to bring the two Cambodian leaders together, diplomats
said.

Although diplomats loyal to the Sihanouk coalition now appear confident the
Prince and the Prime Minister will meet in Paris next month, a somewhat bizarre
procedural difficulty remains.

Since neither leader recognizes the other, Prince Sihanouk has insisted that
Prime Minister Hun Sen request the meeting as a private citizen and not in his
official capacity. He also said that the Prime Minister should address him as a
commoner and not use his royal title since this might imply recognition of his
role as opposition leader. Diplomats loyal to Prince Sihanouk appear optimistic
that this matter can be resolved.

If the planned talks succeed, the expectation is that the various political
factions will then try to organize an informal meeting among themselves to
discuss a settlement.

Indonesia has already offered to invite all the rival leaders to what one
official calls ''a cocktail party'' to talk about the future without appearing
to recognize one another's political organizations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Nixon Skips Conference, but the Enigma Attends

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1410 words

DATELINE: HEMPSTEAD, L.I., Nov. 22


The issue under debate here for three days was one of the central political
questions of the age: What was the true meaning of Richard M. Nixon's Presidency
and how will he be judged before the bar of history?

Thanks to Hofstra University, which organized the retrospective on the Nixon
Presidency this weekend, historians and participants in the tumultuous events of
the Nixon era could debate their meaning and the life of a man who was a
dominant figure in political life for three decades.

And it became clear almost immediately that while tempers have cooled in the 13
years since Mr. Nixon resigned the Presidency over the Watergate scandals, he
remains singular among American political figures in his ability to inspire
passionate opposition and equally fervent devotion.

At times, the three days which ended Saturday seemed more a reunion -Watergate's
Greatest Hits? - than an academic exercise. Here were H. R. Haldeman, Mr.
Nixon's chief of staff, joining hands again with John D. Ehrlichman, his
domestic policy counselor. Maurice Stans greeted Jeb Stuart Magruder for the
first time in years, and Egil (Bud) Krogh, the head of the White House
''plumbers,'' discoursed affably about what he and his crew had in mind with
those wiretaps and break-ins.

A Warm, Unlikely Handshake

And there were occasions when the Nixon era seemed thoroughly a thing of the
past as the lions and the lambs freely lay down together. Charles W. Colson, one
of Mr. Nixon's top political lieutenants and tough guys who became a born-again
Christian while serving a Watergate-related prison term, shook hands warmly with
Tom Hayden, one of the Nixon Administration's most prominent tormentors.

Mr. Hayden, now a Democratic assemblyman from California, said there was ''a
mutual recognition that we're survivors, and that we were caught up in
insanity.''

But the concord was deceiving, for not very far below the surface there raged a
battle over whether Mr. Nixon had been judged too harshly, whether his foreign
policy achievements had been trivialized because of Watergate.

This view was forcefully advanced by the President's men and supported by
revisionist scholars who contended that Mr. Nixon's tenure looks far better now
than it did on that day in August 1974 when he left office in disgrace.

Views From Kissinger

The view was summarized by Henry A. Kissinger, Mr. Nixon's Secretary of State,
who said he told the President, ''History will treat you more kindly than your
contemporaries.'' Reflecting the revisionist tone, Mr. Kissinger added, ''This
conference is a sign that this process is well under way.''

But Mr. Nixon's critics were having none of it. ''Richard Nixon is struggling
for the soul of history and for the souls of historians,'' Stanley I. Kutler,
professor of American institutions at the University of Wisconsin, declared.
''Historians ought to worry about theirs.''

In a passionate denunciation of Nixon revisionism, Professor Kutler argued the
central brief of the Nixon critics, that ''Richard Nixon cannot be separated
from Watergate, however valiant his own efforts, those of his friends and of
media trend-setters.''

The struggle for history, Professor Kutler added, was Mr. Nixon's ''final
crisis.''

Nixon Declines Invitation

As is everything involving Richard Nixon, the very act of holding the conference
was controversial. Conference organizers finally satisfied Mr. Nixon's critics
on the Hofstra campus and his friends on the outside that they were seeking
neither to damn the former President nor to praise him.

Mr. Nixon himself was invited, but declined to come, and some of his reasons
suggested just how bitter the feelings from his time in office remain. An aide
to Mr. Nixon wrote that the former President did not want to be on the same
program with Mr. Hayden, Dave Dellinger, another leading antiwar figure, and
Frances Fitzgerald, a writer who was prominent in her opposition to Mr. Nixon's
Vietnam policies.

Still, Mr. Nixon's defenders did quite well in his absence. Two of his strongest
defenders were Han Xu, China's Ambassador to the United States, and Aleksandr M.
Belonogov, the Soviet delegate to the United Nations.

The Chinese Ambassador said his countrymen would ''never forget President
Nixon'' for his policies toward Beijing. He used a proverb to explain: ''When
you drink water from the well, don't forget who dug it.''

'Fruitful and Productive'

In a statement sent to the conference, Mr. Belonogov said the Nixon era was
''the most fruitful and productive in the 40 postwar years'' for American-Soviet
relations.

In his address, Mr. Kissinger sought to lay the basis for a foreign policy that
avoided the ''endless oscillation betwen optimism and despair'' that
characterized America's attitude toward engagement in world affairs.

What several scholars called ''upward revisionism'' was also prevalent in the
view many took toward Mr. Nixon's domestic program.

There was strong criticism of Mr. Nixon's civil rights policies. But several
scholars said that, contrary to his conservative reputation, Mr. Nixon presided
over a substantial expansion of the welfare state. Carl Lieberman, a professor
of political science at the University of Akron, said Mr. Nixon approved of
indexing Social Security payments - a boon to the elderly.

Domestic Spending Noted

Joan Hoff-Wilson, a professor of history from Indiana University, said the Nixon
years marked the first time in the postwar era that domestic spending exceeded
military spending.

And several scholars called attention to Mr. Nixon's family assistance plan,
which would have provided a guaranteed annual income for all Americans, had it
passed Congress. Barry D. Riccio, a historian at the University of Illinois,
concluded that Mr. Nixon was ''a paradoxical figure who despised liberals while
endorsing liberal objectives'' and who showed that ''the party of conservatism
could also be the party of innovation.''

Mr. Ehrlichman pointedly contrasted Mr. Nixon's domestic activism with President
Reagan's policies, which he characterized as ''a sense of almost governmental
indifference to the problems of needy Americans.''

Stephen E. Ambrose, a professor of history at the University of New Orleans,
said that the revisionist attitude toward Mr. Nixon - as toward any President -
was inevitable, and that, given his low standing at the end of his
Administration, he had nowwhere to go but up.

Truman's Stature Cited

Professor Ambrose compared historiography on Mr. Nixon to the treatment of Harry
Truman, who was regarded as a failure when he left office and now is remembered
fondly by historians.

But Herbert S. Parmet, a professor of history at the City University of New York
who can also be cast as a revisionist, said the fundamental question for
historians was, ''Is Watergate inseparable from the Administration?''

In the view of many at the conference, it was not, in part because of Mr.
Nixon's personality, which was described at least two dozen times as
''complex.''

''Richard Nixon was gripped by a paranoid view of the world that was divided
into two camps, good and evil,'' Mr. Hayden said. But he added that Mr. Nixon's
opponents, he among them, developed a ''paranoid style of our own.''

'The Seed of Watergate'

Alan F. Westin, a professor of political science at Columbia, said the result
was that the Nixon Administration seemed to operate under a theory of
''totalitarian democracy.'' Professor Ambrose, expressing the view of many Nixon
critics, said his undoing was his failure to bring an early end to the Vietnam
War. ''It was the continuation of the Vietnam War which prepared the ground and
watered the seed of Watergate,'' he said.

The conference did not seek to reach any conclusions, though by the end it was
clear that the judges of history would be as passionately divided as were Mr.
Nixon's contemporaries.

Mr. Haldeman called the meeting ''a giant step forward'' toward ''the
realization that there was much more to the Nixon Presidency than Watergate.''

Professor Kutler said that, while ''revisionism perhaps is as certain as death
and taxes,'' Watergate would not be pushed aside so easily.

''Watergate at times seems to get lost in the mists of history,'' he said; ''an
odd fate for an event that consumed and convulsed the nation and tested the
constitutional and political system as it has not been tested since the Civil
War.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of H.R. Haldeman, John D. Ehrlichman, Tom Hayden, Charles
Colson, Elliot Richardson and Jeb Stuart Magruder (NYT/Brian M. Ballweg)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Nynex Names Chief For Directory Unit

BYLINE: By DANIEL F. CUFF

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 329 words


Donald B. Reed is stepping into a competitive slot at the Nynex Corporation. The
company has named him president of the Nynex Information Resources Company,
which publishes white and yellow page directories.

Mr. Reed, 43 years old, will replace David L. Wibbelsman, 52, who is taking
advantage of the company's early retirement program. The change is effective
Dec. 1.

''Don brings to this assignment a keen understanding of the market forces in
this hghly competitive business,'' Nynex's chairman, Delbert C. Staley, said in
a statement.

But Mr. Reed acknowledged that he was not familiar with the ins and outs of the
telephone directory business. ''It's a new part of the business for me,'' he
said. For the last year and a half, Mr. Reed has been based in Washington as
vice president for government affairs, ''interfacing with the F.C.C. and Capitol
Hill,'' he said.

But Mr. Reed added that ''my marketing skills and also my work in external
affairs will certainly help me.'' The company that he will head publishes white
and Yellow page directories for New England Telephone and New York Telephone,
both Nynex units. The New York market is particularly competitive, with
Southwestern Bell publishing a rival directory.

The Nynex company also publishes directories in New Jersey and Connecticut and
oversees directories in Southern California through a unit, the United
Publishers Corporation.

Mr. Reed and his family will be moving from Great Falls, Va., to the Lynn,
Mass., area, where the Nynex company is based. Mr. Reed is a native of another
Massachusetts town, Winthrop. He joined New England Telephone as a trainee after
graduating with a degree in history from the Virginia Military Institute in
1966. After a year, he left for the Army and served with the 82d Airborne and
the First Infantry Division as an infantry officer in Vietnam.

After he returned he became state vice president for external affairs in New
Hampshire for New England Telephone.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

What Congress Didn't Ask

BYLINE: By Michael Maren; Michael Maren is a contributing editor of Africa
Report, a magazine.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 595 words


Lieut. Colonel Oliver L. North said during the Congressional hearings into the
Iran-contra affair that he has fought in two American wars, Vietnam and Angola.
During his examination by the Iran-contra committees, he proudly offered
information about his service in Vietnam but never mentioned what he was doing
in Angola. And no one on the committees bothered to ask him.

Colonel North's statement was part of a mountain of circumstantial evidence
pointing to close links between the arms pipeline to the contras and efforts to
supply Unita rebels fighting the Marxist Government of Angola. Just as the
Boland Amendment banned assistance to the contras, the Clark Amendment, until
its repeal in August, 1985, barred aid to Unita.

The evidence strongly suggests that the same people involved in the Iran-contra
diversions were responsible for the illegal arming of the Unita rebels.

Though elements of the Africa connection surfaced on a few occasions during
testimony, committee members never pursued the angle, never asked a single
question or subpoened a single document relating to charges that the Federal
Government was arming Unita.

The committee's questioning focused on Iran and Nicaragua even though an
investigation of the Angola connection might have shed more light on efforts to
build the ''privately funded off-the-shelf covert operations capability'' that
Colonel North described. Without consideration of the African dimension of this
covert foreign policy, the final report of the Iran-contra committees is at best
incomplete.

Representative Howard E. Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, wrote several letters to
the chairman of the Iran-contra committees explaining the ties between southern
Africa and the Iran-contra affair. Similarities included ''key personalities
initiating and directing events, the principal sources of financing and the
commercial cargo carriers employed,'' he wrote.

Mr. Wolpe's aides even supplied a witness who was willing to testify that Saudi
Arabia had agreed to arm and train Unita forces in exchange for United States
Awacs planes, which it received in 1982. The committees declined to question
him, and questions pertaining to southern Africa were pushed aside.

Why the omission? Some Congressional staffers placed the blame on the hurried
nature of the hearings; investigators employed by the committees neither knew
the issues nor cared much about Africa. Moreover, in their single-minded pursuit
of Presidential culpability, members of the committees might have viewed the
Angolan question as a superfluous element that only complicated an already
complex picture.

Also, there was less public pressure to explore the African aspects of the
scandal. Much of what had happened in Nicaragua had already been exposed by the
press, and the public expected some answers.

Finally, the Angolan and Nicaraguan affairs are, indeed, quite different. While
much of the blame for the contra situation could be laid on individuals, the
Unita arms pipeline is supported by the Governments of Zaire, Morocco, Saudi
Arabia and South Africa - all friendly nations that the committees' members may
have been reluctant to embarrass. While the Iran-contra affair is history,
covert aid to Unita continues.

The Iran-contra committees' condemnation of the people who operated a
clandestine foreign policy in the Middle East and Central America could, in
principle, be extended to activities in Africa. Their failure to make such a
connection implies that a different standard of conduct is permissible where
Africa is concerned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 24, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

In Remote Laos, Soviet Changes Trickle Down

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1593 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos, Nov. 21


In the early morning, when temple gongs and roosters are the only sounds to be
heard on this side of the Mekong, Laos seems to be living in a timeless world of
its own.

But soon after daybreak, unseen loudspeakers high on lampposts begin to blare.
Vietnam's trade figures, events in the Persian Gulf war or Moscow's hopes for an
arms treaty rain down on this little capital, locked in the center of Southeast
Asia.

Buddhist Laos, poor and underpopulated, has been part of the Soviet bloc since
1975, and what happens in Hanoi, in Moscow or at the Gorbachev-Reagan summit
meeting in Washington can make a difference.

Western diplomats and officials from the small corps of international aid and
development organizations based here - no more than 300 people in all, compared
with several thousand Soviet and Eastern European advisers - say that because of
ferment in the Communist world this is a critical period for Laos.

Under Soviet tutelage, the Laotian Government, headed by Prime Minister Kaysone
Phomvihan, now in his 60's, has begun ''renovating'' and loosening the economy.

Superficial changes in Vientiane are evident to a visitor who has not been here
for three years, Western correspondents rarely being allowed in. Now there are
new buildings and businesses, home improvements, well-stocked markets, the
blossoming of restaurants, a high school courtyard shimmering with new chromed
bicycles.

Buddhist temples, while under Government control, seem to be thriving. Diplomats
say officials have begun to appear at religious rites. Market stalls offer gifts
that people give to monks to gain spiritual merits.

More Laotians are optimistic about the future, residents say.

''They are pulling money out of their socks and investing in their houses and
shops,'' a Western aid worker said. Other development experts said travel in the
country is less restricted for them now.

Diplomats, however, remain mostly confined to within four miles of the city
center. There is no tourism in Laos, and few foreign visitors are permitted to
enter the country.

Laos is the 10th poorest nation in the world - poorer than Haiti, according to
United Nations statistics. Excluding foreign trade, the value of its goods and
service totaled $137 a person in 1985.

Many Laotians and outsiders believe that to hasten the development of this
isolated nation of 3.6 million people, more political and bureaucratic
relaxation is needed along with the economic changes. There have been few signs
of this, and some Westerners say political control has tightened.

Furthermore, the benefits of economic liberalization appear to be concentrated
in Vientiane. Laotians and foreigners who are able to travel in the country say
public services are minimal in the countryside, where roads and airstrips have
deteriorated. Many parts of Laos are very hard to reach.

Children die of dysentery, malaria or respiratory ailments while the Government,
wanting to increase the population, rejects family planning.

Communism of the '50's

Unlike in Moscow and Hanoi, where recent leadership changes have been dramatic,
Vientiane's revolutionary Pathet Lao are still in charge, retaining the austere,
secretive and inflexible Communism of the 1950's.

For a new atmosphere to take hold, diplomats and aid officials suggest, not only
the Laotian leadership but also that of Vietnam, and by extension Moscow, will
need to enjoy a sense of security and be able to sustain commitments to change.

Through its history, this nation, once known as the Kingdom of a Million
Elephants, has had its fortunes determined by other powers.

For hundreds of years, its neighbors, Siam and Vietnam, took turns invading. A
young Laotian from the south told a visitor this week that he calculated the
nation's population at 25 million - ''counting those living in northeast
Thailand,'' he said bitterly.

In the 19th century, Laos was colonized by France, which did little to develop
it. A hundred years later, it was ''liberated'' from French rule largely by the
Vietnamese, with the help of the Soviet Union and, to a lesser extent, China.

Vietnam, fighting first the French and then the American-backed government in
Saigon, nurtured if not created the Pathet Lao as part of the Indochinese
Communist Party, and has never voluntarily reduced its influence here since.

During the American military involvement here, Hanoi used Laotian territory to
ferry weapons to South Vietnamese Communists along what became known as the Ho
Chi Minh Trail.

This brought a firestorm of American bombs down on Laos. The destruction left a
legacy of fear and resentment of Washington among the revolutionaries who now
run the country.

At least 40,000 ''friendly'' Vietnamese troops are still here, mostly out of
sight. The presence of Vietnamese soldiers and a large contingent of civilian
advisers prompts many other Southeast Asians to regard Laos as a satellite of
Hanoi.

Sanctuary for Guerrillas

Thailand, meanwhile, gives sanctuary to anti-Communist guerrillas who may not be
strong enough to threaten the Laotian Government but who have the capacity for
terrorism.

This year, two bombing incidents and several appparent ambushes of troops
heightened a sense of insecurity in Vientiane, residents say.

The first bomb went off on Feb. 15 near a fuel depot at the airport, according
to official press reports. More embarrassing and unnerving was the explosion on
March 9, which blew in the front doors of the Soviet cultural center in
Vientiane during a visit to Laos by the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A.
Shevardnadze.

In July, what the Laotians describe as an anti-Vietnamese resistance force -
''lackeys of imperialism'' - numbering in the hundreds was intercepted in
southern Laos on a march toward the Vietnamese port of Da Nang. Mysteriously,
the incident was not reported anywhere until October.

Such events may be motivating a series of official exhortations to the Laotian
Army to smarten up.

Repatriation Is Slowing

Continuing resistance activity could also partly explain the Laotian
Government's reluctance to take back some of its citizens who fled the country
after the Pathet Lao seized power from within a neutralist coalition government
in 1975, refugee officials in Thailand believe.

One-tenth of Laos's population escaped into Thailand in a decade, including
whole villages of Hmong hill tribes, who had supported the American-backed Royal
Lao government. Hmong are still leaving Laos, sometimes only to be pushed back
by Thai troops.

But more than 3,000 refugees, mostly lowland or ethnic Lao, have applied to come
home since 1980 through the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. From
1981 to 1986, 200 to 600 Laotians were repatriated each year. This year, only 59
applicants to return have so far been approved.

Thailand also exerts immense influence over the Laotian economy. With the Mekong
River not navigable to the sea, the best route to the outside world is through
Thailand, where transportation systems are good.

Some development experts believe Thailand will remain the preferred route to the
sea after a road to the Vietnamese port of Da Nang is completed. Vietnam's
seaports are inefficient and outmoded, and many Western goods Laos wants are not
available there.

Thai consumer goods and machinery are much sought after in Laos, where markets
accept Thai currency.

In addition, the Lao and Thai people share a common culture: they are Theravada
Buddhists, speak an almost identical language and - cosmopolitan Bangkok
excepted - eat, dress and live in similar fashion.

For many Lao, this makes the prosperity of Thailand, whose lights glitter at
night across the Mekong, harder to bear.

''They treat us like little brother,'' is an often-heard complaint here.

Thailand, for cultural and strategic reasons, has tried to maintain links to
Laos, if only to keep Vietnam off balance and prevent the Laotians from being
swallowed into an Indochinese empire centered on Hanoi.

Thai-Lao border openings or closings - and occasionally tensions that turn to
armed skirmishes - seem carefully orchestrated on both sides according to the
warmth or coolness of relations.

In Bangkok's view, the Vietnamese in Laos are a perennial danger because they
have the capacity to restart a Communist movement in north or northeast
Thailand.

But Bangkok's most immediate concern is the presence of 140,000 Vietnamese
troops in Cambodia, more soldiers than Moscow has in Afghanistan.

Some diplomats and scholars in the region believe that for Vientiane as well as
for Bangkok, the key to regional peace and security will have to be a resolution
of Hanoi's nine-year-old war in Cambodia.

American officials who have traveled through Southeast Asia recently say they
expect Cambodia to be discussed by Soviet and American teams preparing for the
summit meeting.

These officials and the governments of the non-Communist nations of Southeast
Asia say that only the Soviet Union has the power to persuade the Vietnamese to
withdraw from Cambodia, and to reduce the Hanoi's military presence in Laos.

If tensions in the area were lowered, diplomats say, both Vietnam and Laos might
find Thailand and the wider outside world less threatening, and Vientiane might
be free to emerge from its isolation if new leaders chose to do so.

''There are already many good, young people in the middle levels of
government,'' an international development agency official said. ''When they
replace the old boys down from the hills, there will be changes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Laotian monks (Pg. 1); a Laotian paddling to shore (pg. 12);

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 24, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Washington Talk: Military Forces;
Army Chief's Order of the Day: Teach Them Well

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1070 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 23


The Army's new Chief of Staff, Gen. Carl E. Vuono, has begun to put his imprint
on the service and, subtly, to rebut critics of the military.

Since he took office in June, General Vuono's main instruction to officers,
sergeants and soldiers around the country has been straightforward: ''Our
business is war-fighting. If you prepare for war, that is a deterrent in
itself.''

That message has also been a response to critics who have contended that the
services have become so bureaucratic they are incapable of fighting well.
William S. Lind, president of the Military Reform Institute, has accused the
services of breeding ''milicrats.''

On another front, General Vuono has instructed the Commandant of the Army War
College, Maj. Gen. Howard D. Graves, to turn it into a center ''of strategic
thought for the Army.''

Perhaps the most vociferous of those who have criticized military strategists
has been Edward N. Luttwak, of Georgetown University, who has asserted that few
officers are capable of strategic planning.

Critics Within Army

Some critics are within the Army itself. In a survey in 1985, one-third of the
officers queried thought that many colleagues had been ''promoted before
becoming competent at existing grade levels.''

General Vuono has ordered staff officers in the Combined Arms Center at Fort
Leavenworth, Kan., to determine whether officers are being properly educated,
spending enough time in command or staff positions and acquiring sufficient
experience before being promoted.

Many critics have maintained that the armed forces are riven with inter-service
and intraservice rivalry. General Vuono has told infantry, artillery and armor
officers that they must be a team and that they must cooperate with the Navy and
Air Force.

''Our greatest challenge,'' he has said, ''is to integrate combat power.''

Critics have contended that the armed forces have been trained only to fight the
Soviet Union in Europe. General Vuono has told soldiers they must be ready to
fight anywhere in a mix of heavy, light and unconventional forces.

''We simply cannot indulge,'' he has said, ''in preparing for a single war
against a single type of enemy in a single region of the world.''

Responding With Action

Unlike some officers, General Vuono has avoided personal attacks on the critics.
Rather, he said in an interview, his guidance to the Army had been drawn from
his own experience over the 30 years since he graduated from West Point.

General Vuono, a restless, energetic and gregarious man, has become the top
soldier at a time that he sees as a turning point for the Army.

The Chief of Staff from 1979 to 1983, Gen. Edward C. Meyer, describe the force
he inherited as a ''hollow army.'' With funds provided by President Reagan and
Congress, he brought the Army out of its post-Vietnam valley of gloom.

The next chief of staff, Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., was a consolidator who filled
the ranks with well-qualified young men and women and saw Army combat capability
improved.

But the Army today, like the rest of the Defense Department, is confronted with
a shrinking supply of money. Congress has insisted that half of the budget cuts
intended to reduce the Federal deficit come from military spending.

Thus, said General Vuono, ''my greatest concern is that we will lose momentum.''
He has said the Army must make ''a disciplined and clear presentation of
requirements'' for programs that contribute most to ''our war-fighting
capability.''

'Zealot' on Training

Topping that list is training. ''When it comes to training,'' General Vuono
said, ''I guess I'm a zealot.'' In a squeeze, he said, he would rather postpone
buying equipment than slice into training that prepares soldiers for battle.

Thus he told senior sergeants at the dedication of the Sergeants Major Academy
at Fort Bliss, Tex.: ''I promise you, we are going to protect non-commissioned
officer education. We're going to find whatever is necessary to keep these
courses going.''

The general, who has served in Washington as the Army's chief operations
officer, said he was comfortable as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and as
the Army's senior uniformed spokesman to the Congress, the press and the public.

But his true element is clearly with other soldiers. While visiting Fort Bliss,
he worked the crowd at the Sergeants Major Academy with the art and fervor of a
ward politician seeking re-election, particularly in greeting senior sergeants
with whom he had served.

At Fort Leavenworth, General Vuono met with 50 colonels and lieutenant colonels
about to assume command of brigades and battalions, the most demanding
assignments in the Army. Instead of an expected 20 minute pep talk, he gave them
a two-hour discourse on war-fighting, doctrine, training, modernizing weapons
and developing leaders.

After telling the officers what he expected of them, the general got their rapt
attention with what he called free advice. ''You have a responsibility to your
wife and your children as you embark on this command tour,'' he said. ''They
need your time. You must take leave to be with them.''

Emphasis on Ethics

In another instance, General Vuono and the Secretary of the Army, John O. Marsh
Jr., led staff generals on a rainy Saturday tramp through the Civil War
battlefield at Chancellorsville, Va. Afterward, General Vuono conducted a
seminar on what would help them prepare today's Army for battle.

As the Army's leading teacher, General Vuono has been seeking to infuse officers
with a new sense of ethics. In the Iran-contra affair, Rear Adm. John M.
Poindexter and Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North of the Marine Corps brought military
ethics into question.

In his instructions to the Army War College, General Vuono said, ''The study and
application of ethics and military history - cornerstones of the profession of
arms - must be woven throughout the curriculum.''

Several months ago, the Joint Chiefs of Staff were asked whether it was
permissible for a military officer to lie and, if so, under what circumstances.
The chiefs, a spokesman said then, declined to reply as it would not be
''appropriate.''

When the question was repeated to General Vuono, he said: ''In peace and in war,
a military officer's word is his bond. There can be no equivocation of integrity
whether in Washington or in the field.'' Shaking his head, he added, ''You just
can't equivocate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. Carl E. Vuono (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 25, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

4 Aid Laos Against Bombis and Other Horrors

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 602 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos, Nov. 21


There are only four of them, if you don't count the children.

Lois Foehringer, David Merchant, Jacqui Chagnon and Roger Rumpf are the totality
of the United States' unofficial aid program in Laos.

There is no official aid, at first because Congress blocked it, and now because
there is no money in the budget to create it.

So Ms. Foehringer and Mr. Merchant, a husband-and-wife team representing the
Mennonite Central Committee of Akron, Pa., and Ms. Chagnon and Mr. Rumpf,
another couple who are the delegation in Laos of the Philadelphia-based American
Friends Service Committee, do what they can to help an impoverished nation on
which Americans dumped tons of bombs and defoliants for a decade during the
Vietnam War.

''Whenever the Lao find out that we are Americans,'' Ms. Foehringer said, ''they
don't believe it.''

Where the Money Goes

The Quakers and Mennonites, pacifist organizations that were the first American
development agencies welcomed by the Communist Pathet Lao when it seized power
from within a neutralist coalition in 1975, administer programs worth nearly $1
million.

The money goes into projects that catalogue the needs of Laos, one of the
world's poorest and most isolated countries: cottage industries, agricultural
cooperatives, aid to lepers and the handicapped, irrigation, forestry, animal
husbandry, appropriate technology, rural health care, teacher training, women's
groups and disaster assistance.

And then there are shovels. There have to be shovels because of the bombis.

Bombis are what the Laotian farmers call the American antipersonnel bombs that
fell on them and their villages - at the rate of 1,000 per person, Ms. Chagnon
and Mr. Rumpf said.

Hoe Explodes Bombs

In Xieng Khouang Province, where the Laotian Communist forces were concentrated
in substantial numbers on the Plain of Jars in the 1960's and early 1970's, the
bombis fell everywhere. Many never exploded: they lay in wait in the fields.

Lao farmers use a type of hoe for tilling the soil. It is swung high overhead
and driven into the earth with force. When a Lao hoe hits a bombi, another man,
woman or child is lost or maimed.

The American Friends Service Committee estimates that more than 4,700 people
have been killed in these explosions since 1964. The deaths and injuries go on.

A shovel, on the other hand, may turn over a bombi, which can then be taken to a
dump to be exploded or defused. The Quakers think Laos needs at least 50,000
shovels.

American officials have offered to sweep the area, but the Laotian Government,
now controlled by the Pathet Lao, has consistently refused United States help.

U.S. Visitors Welcomed

Ms. Foehringer and Mr. Merchant -Midwestern Lutherans who talked the Mennonites
into sending them to Laos - think the local farmers would welcome the former
enemy if the land could be made safe.

Ms. Foehringer remembers how an American peace delegation came to Xieng Khouang
in 1985 ''to say we are sorry.''

''The warmth with which they were received was touching,'' she said.

The four Americans are hopeful that in the era of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's
economic changes - which in Laos have translated into tentative efforts to
liberalize the economy and turn from grandiose projects to small human
achievements - there will be more scope for private aid projects like theirs.

The four get used to being asked if they are not in fact aiding a Communist
government that imprisons its critics and closes it borders to the democracy and
humanism of the West.

''We think we do things here that open people's minds,'' Mr. Merchant said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 25, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A Thanksgiving Feast in Many Languages

BYLINE: By HILARY STOUT

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 679 words


At least a half-dozen of the kindergartners who took part in the Thanksgiving
feast at Public School 162 in Bayside, Queens, yesterday had never tasted turkey
before. Some did not have a word for it in their native language.

Others, like Padraia Philpott, newly arrived from Ireland, had tasted plenty of
turkey but were at a loss to explain this strange holiday.

It looked like a typical classroom Thanksgiving, replete with homemade pilgrim
hats and apple pie, which was devoured off paper plates. But among the 50
make-believe Pilgrims and Indians were more than 12 children whose families were
natives of China, Taiwan, Korea, Vietnam, Poland and Colombia, who like many of
the growing number of immigrants' children in New York City public schools, had
never heard of the holiday.

They dined at 2-foot-high desks in a cluttered classroom adorned with posters of
Pilgrims.

Liya Hsi liked the turkey well enough, but did not know what to call it. ''We
use the Chinese word for chicken and fire,'' said Sylvia Mac Lin, who teaches
English in one of the school's bilingual education programs. ''It is 'chicken of
fire' in Chinese. For 'Pilgrims' and 'Indians,' we just use the English.''

Last week, their teachers began introducing them to the story of Thanksgiving.

''I wouldn't say teaching it has become more complicated,'' Mrs. Kramer said.
''But for more and more children it has become a new experience.''

''I had turkey for lunch once,'' said Katherine Chu, her long black bangs
peeking from a construction-paper Indian headdress. The construction-paper
pilgrim bonnets, Indian headresses, and tall Pilgrim hats bobbled as Harriet
Meyer, a kindergarten teacher, led the children through the Thanksgiving songs
they had practiced last week.

''When the Pilgrims came to America, one of the first things they did was to
make friends with the Indians, so let's sing about the big tall Indian,'' Mrs.
Meyer said.  The voices sang, ''This is how the big, tall Indian beats his drum
. . .''

As the singing ended and mothers and teachers began serving turkey roll,
stuffing, broccoli and mashed potatoes, as well as cranberry sauce and cornbread
made by the students, Steven Berzok, the principal, asked, ''Where was the first
Thanksgiving feast?''

Katherine Chu's hand shot into the air. ''England,'' she said.  Thanks to Guan
Gong ''It takes a little more explaining sometimes, a little more repetition,''
Mrs. Kramer said.  To Padraia from Ireland, Mr. Berzok said: ''Some of the
Pilgrims probably came from Ireland. The first settlers of America probably came
from England and Ireland, and the Indians helped them, and that's why we
celebrate Thanksgiving - to remember. Are you thankful for anything?'' ''My
books, my toys,'' Padraia said.

To Liya Hsi, from Taiwan, who speaks little English, or Ting Ting Yang, who was
born in the United States but raised in Taiwan, bilingual education teachers had
earlier told the tale of Guan Gong, the Chinese God of loyalty, to whom
Cantonese people give thanks every day.

''We teach them about all American holidays, but we try to make a comparison,''
Ms. Lin said. They also tell the story of Guan Gong to American students, she
said.

Still for many kindergartners at P.S. 162, Thanksgiving will be a classroom
experience only.

'We Don't Do This at Home'

Jeff Lee, whose family is from Taiwan, announced that he was only ''going to
play'' on Thursday.

But Jared Eng said he was going to eat a big Thanksgiving dinner. ''Turkey, ham
and rice,'' he said.

There were old pros in the class too, veteran Thanksgiving celebrants, like Hans
Van Leuvan who could identify broccoli and mashed potatoes.

But in the end, it did not take long for most of the students to grasp the story
of the American holiday of thanks, no matter their land of birth.

Jonathan Giraldo, whose family is from Colombia, explained it proudly. ''The
Indians, they were nice. The Pilgrims were nice, too. And they're friendly. They
helped hunt and helped to fish for food. So we say Thanksgiving. But we don't do
this at home.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of children dressed as pilgrims and indians; children displaying
their Thanksgiving drawings (pg. B24) (NYT/Vic Delucia)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 25, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

New York Ordered to Find Care for Homeless Woman

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 619 words


A state judge yesterday directed New York City to discharge a 41-year-old woman
who was picked up under a Koch administration program to involuntarily
hospitalize severely mentally ill homeless people living on city streets.

It was the second time a court overruled a decision by city psychiatrists, who
under the month-old program are seeking to expand the limits of when the
government can hospitalize mentally ill people who refuse treatment.

The woman, identified as Tsinh Long, formerly of Saigon and Washington, had been
held at Bellevue Hospital Center since she was picked up at the Staten Island
Ferry Terminal on Nov. 3. She was described by city officials as severely
psychotic.

But at a hearing at Bellevue yesterday, Acting Justice Leonard N. Cohen of State
Supreme Court barred the city from transferring her to a state psychiatric ward
for long-term care, and ordered instead that a place be found for her in a
community residence or in a supervised single-room occupancy hotel for the
mentally ill.

Far Less Sweeping Ruling

City officials immediately said they would appeal the ruling because they
believed the woman would continue to deteriorate and might return to the streets
if she were placed in a group home.

The precise reasoning behind the ruling was not immediately clear. At one point
Justice Cohen raised questions about whether Miss Long, who testified through a
Cantonese interpreter, could get proper treatment at a state hospital because of
her cultural differences.

In any event, the ruling, which did not question Miss Long's need for treatment,
appeared to be far less sweeping than a decision by another state judge several
weeks ago that the city had improperly held Joyce Brown, a homeless woman who
lived on the sidewalk on Second Avenue at 65th Street in Manhattan.

In that case, a key test of the limits of Mr. Koch's program, Acting Justice
Robert Lippmann found the city had failed to prove that Miss Brown was either
mentally ill or was a danger to herself or anyone else.

Miss Long, who was born in Saigon and is of Chinese descent, told the
authorities that she came to Washington from Saigon in 1972, but hospital
officials have been unable to verify her story or locate any family.

One official said that when asked what she was doing, Miss Long said she was
''waiting for Government permission papers to go back to Vietnam.''

Miss Long was first spotted in lower Manhattan in 1985 by a city outreach team,
which tracked her over the last few years as she lived mainly at the Ferry
Terminal and occasionally at the World Trade Center.

City officials said Miss Long was diagnosed as suffering from chronic
schizophrenia, a disorder of thought and feeling in which people increasingly
lose touch with reality.

Suzanne Halpin, a spokeswoman for the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation,
said Miss Long was ''losing weight, believed she could not eat because her food
was poisoned,'' and was ''compulsively washing herself to the point where she
was washing her skin away.''

Miss Long, who was represented by lawyers from the Mental Hygiene Legal Service,
contended she had been able to function well in the community for a long time
and was not in danger.

Seven Hearings Requested

According to city officials, Miss Long, unlike Miss Brown, had not contested her
initial pick up, and had agreed to voluntarily take two anti-psychotic drugs
during her stay at Bellevue. They said she did not respond to the medication and
was therefore in need of longer-term care.

City officials said that of the 33 patients taken in under the new program, so
far seven had requested hearings, and only two, Miss Brown and Miss Long, had
won their cases.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 25, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Stage:'Puta Vida Trilogy,' One-Act Plays by Povod

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 715 words


IT isn't as easy as it once was for white middle-class theatergoers to get a
quick fix of guilt, so there may well be a crying need for ''La Puta Vida
Trilogy,'' the Reinaldo Povod bill of one-act plays at the Public Theater. In
the evening's prologue, a hostile young Hispanic monologuist (Michael Carmine)
waves a knife at the audience, accuses us of hating ''spics,'' and threatens to
commit a random murder, possibly in our privileged neighborhoods, if his ailing
offstage mother is allowed to die. Has there been a play this naked in its moral
one-upsmanship since the late 1960's? ''La Puta Vida Trilogy'' (''This Bitch of
a Life'') reminds me of nothing so much as Brian De Palma's satirical film ''Hi,
Mom,'' in which a black-militant theater company earns the raves of a
well-heeled Off Off Broadway audience by beating it up.

While Mr. Povod doesn't go that far, this long, self-indulgent escapade does
submerge the lively talent for streetwise naturalism that he revealed in ''Cuba
and His Teddy Bear.'' Here again we are among junkies and prostitutes and
drifters of the underclass, but this time the characters are subordinated
entirely to the author's mission of edifying ignorant and bigoted white folks. A
suicidal young Hispanic man (John Leguizamo) in a shooting gallery turns out to
be a martyr who miraculously gives an addicted black Vietnam veteran (Michael
Guess) a new spiritual lease on life. A homosexual child molester (John
Turturro) is presented as a guileless victim of the machismo ethic, and one heck
of a promising poet besides. For a grand finale, Mr. Povod demonstrates that an
incest-minded stripper and hooker (Rosana DeSoto) can be human, too - at least
until her son (the excessively busy Mr. Turturro) beats her with a baseball bat.

All of these exemplarily tragic figures might well exist, but, as drawn here,
they have scarcely more life than the plaster Jesuses displayed in their homes.
They serve to make the playwright's sanctimonious (and patronizing) points
rather than behave as independent, compelling people with minds of their own.
Whenever a funny or well-observed scene starts to breathe - notably a casual,
cross-generation sharing of masturbation anxieties in the second play - it is
soon snuffed out by florid acts of violence (sexual, physical or vocal) designed
to shock the audience's supposedly sheltered sensibilities or by the official
bombast of a playwright hammering in a message. ''We're the last of the big-time
losers,'' says the homicidal son in the third play - one of many illustrations
that people of all ethnic origins can sound exactly like the characters of
Clifford Odets or Paddy Chayefsky if only they assimilate into the mainstream of
American kitchen-sink drama.

Although the director, Bill Hart, also staged the well-acted ''Cuba,'' the
performance of ''La Puta Vita'' is alternately feckless and broad. Instead of
Robert DeNiro, we get, from Mr. Turturro, an out-of-control DeNiro impersonation
that reaches a peak of ridiculousness when he and Ms. DeSoto exchange repeated
declarations of ''I love you!'' and ''I hate you!'' during their incestuous
dance of death. (Here is a love-hate relationship that never stops shrieking its
name.) The only focused acting comes from Mr. Carmine, in the problematic role
of the narrator. Potential visitors to ''La Puta Vita'' may be relieved to hear
that when he reappears at evening's end, Mr. Carmine is suddenly more obsequious
than contemptuous, thanking us profusely for allowing his mother to survive.
True, such flattery of the audience seems to reverse the author's previously
expressed convictions, but plays this sentimental tend to succumb to the more
pragmatic principle that the customer is always right.


The Lower Depths

LA PUTA VIDA TRILOGY - THIS BITCH OF A LIFE, by Reinaldo Povod; directed by Bill
Hart; scenery by Donald Eastman; costumes by Gabriel Berry; lighting by Anne
Militello; sound designer and composer, Daniel Moses Schreier; associate
producer, Jason Steven Cohen. Presented by Joseph Papp. At the Public/LuEsther
Hall, 425 Lafayette Street. Papo...Michael Carmine Lookout...Rafael Baez Alley
Boy...John Leguizamo Randy...Michael Guess Raisin...Miguel Correa Chino and
Angelo...John Turturro Mafia...Rosana DeSoto

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Michael Carmine (Martha Swope)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 26, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Mayor of Charlestown, W.Va., Steps Down

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 330 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, W.Va., Nov. 25(AP)


Mayor James E. (Mike) Roark has resigned, fulfilling the agreement he made with
Federal prosecutors in pleading guilty last week to charges of possessing
cocaine.

Mr. Roark, a second-term Republican, resigned two minutes after calling to order
a special meeting of the City Council Tuesday night. The 26-member council
elected Charles Gardner, the City Manager, to serve the remaining 3 years and 5
months of Mr. Roark's term.

In a two-minute speech, Mr. Roark apologized to the council members and the
citizens of West Virginia's capital city for his ''personal misconduct.''

He then resigned his $60,000-a-year job and walked out of the meeting without
further comment.

Faces Up to 6 Years in Prison

Mr. Roark, 42 years old, pleaded guilty Nov. 17 to six misdemeanor cocaine
possession charges in a plea bargain agreement that allowed him to avoid 24
other cocaine and obstruction of justice counts, including 13 felonies.

He faces a maximum of six years in prison and a $30,000 fine, with sentencing
likely in January.

Mr. Roark, a Nitro, W.Va., native, entered law school at West Virginia
University in 1967 but dropped out to join the Marines and served two years in
Vietnam. He then finished law school and served as an Assistant United States
Attorney in Pittsburgh in 1973-77.

In a state where Democrats outnumber Republicans 2 to 1, Mr. Roark rose to
political prominence when he returned to Charleston in 1978 to defeat Cletus
Hanley, the incumbent Kanawha County prosecutor. He won that election by
claiming that his office would not enter into plea arrangements with criminals.

Mr. Roark was nicknamed Mad Dog because of his relentless prosecution. He
frequently wore a Marine fatigue jacket and carried a gun on drug raids. He also
was a staple of Charleston's nightlife.

He won election to a full term as prosecutor in 1980, but was defeated a 1983
bid for Mayor. It was in that campaign that rumors linking Mr. Roark to drugs
first sprang up.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 26, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Armed Forces Report Safe Aviation Records

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 25


For the second year in a row the armed forces had unusually safe flight records,
but the number of deaths rose despite the relatively low number of accidents,
reports show.

The reports, obtained last week, indicate the aviation accident rates of the Air
Force, Army and Marine Corps worsened only slightly in the fiscal year 1987
while the Navy posted one of its best records.

All told, in the year ending Sept. 30, the services had 165 accidents resulting
in either a fatality or property damage to a plane or helicopter exceeding
$500,000, or Class A accidents. There were 163 such accidents in 1986, when the
Defense Department logged its safest flying year in history.

The slight increase in the combined number of accidents came in a year in which
the services slightly increased slightly the number of hours spent in the air by
their crews. Military aviators flew 7.4 million hours in fiscal 1987, as against
7.3 million the year before.

Increase in Death Toll

While the overall accident rate changed only slightly, the number of servicemen
killed in aviation mishaps increased from 148 fatalities in fiscal 1986 to 167
in 1987, a 13 percent rise. Only the Marine Corps had fewer fatalities, with 21
in 1987 and 38 in the previous year. The Navy, which did the most to improve its
accident rate, had 45 deaths in aviation accidents in 1987, up from 36 the year
before. The Army toll was 40 in 1987, up from 27 in 1986, while the Air Force
toll was 61, up from 47 in 1986.

The reports show the Navy had 50 Class A accidents, or 2.93 for every 100,000
hours of flight time, compares with 58 and a rate of 3.39 in 1986.

The Marine Corps reported 20 serious accidents, for a rate of 4.88 in 1987, up
from 18 and 4.18 the year before. The Army had 38 serious accidents, or a rate
of 2.22, up from 34 and a rate of 2.04. The Air Force reported 57 accidents and
a rate of 1.65, as against 53 accidents and 1.53 the previous year.

Historically, the accident rates of the Navy and Marine Corps have exceeded
those of the Army and Air Force because of the number of operations conducted at
sea.

Many of the Navy and Marine mishaps in 1987 involved the types of
high-performance jets assigned to aircraft carriers. For example, the two
services together lost 10 A-6 attack jets and eight F-A-18 fighters in the year.

The Navy announced last Friday that it was grounding dozens of the F-A-18's to
correct engine problems.

The Navy and Marine Corps also lost seven F-14 fighters in the fiscal year,
although the records show a total of eight. The eighth incident involved an
accident last September in which an F-14 shot down an Air Force reconaissance
plane; the Navy was told to count that loss against its record.

As for the other services, the records show the Air Force lost 12 F-16 jet
fighters, along with one B-1B heavy bomber; 10 of its aging F-4 fighters; three
of its front-line F-15 fighters, and three F-111 bombers.

The Army continued to have the most problems with its aging fleet of UH-1 Huey
helicopters from the Vietnam War era, losing nine. The replacement for that
type, the UH-60 Blackhawk, suffered eight Class A accidents, up from the three
that crashed in 1986.

The Army also lost seven of its aging OH-58 light observation helicopters, along
with four Vietnam-era AH-1 Cobra gunships and four of its new AH-64 Apache
gunships.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 26, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Storm Leaves Woodlands In Shambles

BYLINE: By MICHAEL FREITAG, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 756 words

DATELINE: GALLATIN, N.Y.


From the Taconic State Parkway, Ray Helm's pine plantation looks as if it was
attacked by a maniac wielding a chain saw. What was once a lush, seven-acre pine
forest on a gentle hill is now a field of jagged stumps.

''People have actually pulled off the highway and cried, because they could
remember what it was like before,'' Mr. Helm said as he gazed at the remains of
5,000 trees. ''It looks like the Vietnam War - like those places that were
bombed.''

But neither war nor psychopath is to blame for the devastation. The dead pines
on Mr. Helm's hill here are among the hundreds of thousands of trees that died
or were damaged in the severe snowstorm that struck New York and parts of New
England on Oct. 4. The storm - the earliest of its size on record in the region
- dumped more than a foot of wet snow in the Hudson Valley, felling trees and
causing widespread blackouts.

Devastation Along Highway

The damage was particularly severe, foresters said, because most of the trees
still had their leaves, and the extra weight of the wet snow caused branches to
bend and snap. State, county and local crews have replaced fallen power and
telephone lines and reopened most of the roads blocked in the storm.

Now, as workers continue to clear away the tons of debris lining roads,
government officials and ecologists have begun to investigate the long-term
effects. So far, they say, the most obvious result is the radically altered
landscape.

In New York, the devastation is most dramatic along the Taconic Parkway, long
regarded as one of the most beautiful drives in the state. From northern Putnam
County to the parkway's terminus in northern Columbia County, thousands of
uprooted trees line the road.

Thousands of others have had their tops shorn off or have fresh gashes where
large branches were ripped away. In many locations, dead branches dangle
ominously, threatening to drop on cars.

Costs Exceed $13.2 Million

''We lost some beautiful specimens,'' said James McGovern, a state engineer
responsible for the cleanup of the Taconic. ''It will be years before they come
back.''

Virtually all hardwood trees taller than 40 feet were damaged, Mr. McGovern
said. Coniferous trees, which adapt better to winter, fared better, he said.

The cleanup of the Taconic has cost about $300,000, according to state
transportation officials. New York's total bill for the cleanup has exceeded
$13.2 million, according to the State Emergency Management Office. On Nov. 10,
President Reagan declared seven counties in the Hudson Valley disaster areas,
enabling local governments to receive almost $10 million in Federal aid.

''The old-timers say it was the worst thing they've ever seen as far as storm
damage goes, since hurricanes don't come up this far,'' said Mr. Helm, a retired
engineer who has lived for 20 years on a farm just east of the Taconic Parkway
in the Dutchess County community of Milan, about 75 miles north of Manhattan.
His pine plantation in Gallatin, across a state road from the farm, is in
Columbia County.

''All that was going to be sold,'' Mr. Helm said, pointing to the hill where the
trees once stood. ''But now it's so dangerous in there that most of the lumber
people won't even go in.''

The pines, which are 50 years old, were just about thick enough to be sold for
use as telephone poles, he said.

'It Is Really Heartbreaking'

Mr. Helm estimates his loss in the thousands of dollars, none of it covered by
insurance. After receiving cleanup estimates of $6,000 to $10,000, Mr. Helm
said, he has decided to do the work himself.

Nearby, at Stissing Mountain, a 450-acre state forest in Milan, the scene is
almost as dramatic. Thousands of larch trees planted in 1969 have been uprooted
or severely damaged.

''It is really heartbreaking to see this kind of devastation of trees we've been
babying for years,'' said Fred Gerty, a state forester. ''Had we had a little
more time, five years maybe, we would have been able to get a value out of
them.''

The state stands to lose $500,000 it expected to receive in sales of timber
damaged in the storm, according to Tom Wahl, a spokesman for the state's
Department of Environmental Conservation.

Nonetheless, the storm damage is more a matter of esthetics than money, Mr. Wahl
said.

''People should be patient and let the road crews catch up with the cleanup,''
he said. ''By spring, once the trees leaf out again, it will look better,
although it may take a little longer for the cover to get back to its original
height.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of part of a seven-acre stand of red pines destroyed in storm
last month in Gallatin, N.Y. (The New York Times/Alan Zale)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET SPUR SEEN IN CAMBODIA TALKS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Nov. 26


The Soviet Union has apparently played a major role in persuading Cambodia's
Communist leaders to begin negotiating with Prince Norodom Sihanouk, according
to foreign residents in this isolated capital.

Prime Minister Hun Sen will leave Cambodia on Friday for a meeting in Paris with
Prince Sihanouk, according to diplomats and unofficial Cambodian reports. The
encounter is expected to take place Wednesday.

Cambodians express hope that the meeting will be the first step toward a peace
agreement between the Hanoi-backed Phnom Penh Government and a coalition of
resistance armies fighting it from bases along the Thai border. Prince Sihanouk,
the former head of state, is the coalition's nominal leader.

The speed with which this meeting was arranged has surprised many Cambodians and
members of the small diplomatic corps in Phnom Penh, where there are no Western
embassies.

Atmosphere of Expectation

Residents said an atmosphere of expectation had been building since the
Government formally proposed in September that it would reserve a high position
of state for the Prince if he returned to Cambodia.

Residents say that on Oct. 31, Prince Sihanouk's birthday, Cambodians in some
neighborhoods came out to clean streets in the hope that the popular Prince
would return soon. His era, in the 1950's and 60's, is remembered by many people
as a golden age.

Diplomats in the region said Moscow was in effect paying for Vietnam's
occupation of Cambodia by supplying ammunition and other materiel.

But today as Vietnam began a highly publicized annual troop withdrawal - which
Western and some East bloc diplomats regard as more of a rotation of forces -
Hanoi's soldiers left the town of Battambang in a fleet of ancient Dodge and
DeSoto buses. The only noticeable Soviet equipment was the trucks towing old
American howitzers.

Apart from the cost of the war in Cambodia, the Soviet Union has apparently also
taken into account its desire to improve relations with non-Communist nations of
Southeast Asia. Those governments have told visiting Soviet officials that
Moscow will first have to persuade the Vietnamese to leave Cambodia.

Commentary on Sihanouk Shifts

Foreigners who have followed events here over the last few months said that
after a meeting in Moscow in July between the Soviet leader, Mikhail S.
Gorbachev, and his Cambodian counterpart, Heng Samrin, the current of commentary
on Prince Sihanouk had changed in the official press here.

Photographs of the Prince with Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge leader who was
responsible for the deaths of at least a million Cambodians from 1975 to 1979,
were removed from public exhibitions.

On Nov. 18, the Cambodian leader sent a cablegram to Prince Sihanouk,
acknowledging that he sought a meeting, a condition demanded by the Prince. In
the cablegram, a translated text of which was shown to a reporter, Mr. Hun Sen
referred to the Prince as samdech, the honorific title that has been forbidden
in Cambodia since 1979.

On Nov. 20, Prince Sihanouk, who had earlier demanded that Mr. Hun Sen request a
royal audience, accepted the less obsequious formulation in the Hun Sen
cablegram and replied that the Prime Minister should come to France.

According to reports here, the Sihanouk-Hun Sen meeting would be followed by
talks later in December between Vietnam's Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, and his Indonesian counterpart, Mochtar
Kusumaatmadja. Mr. Mochtar represents the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
in meetings on this issue.

Hopes for Talks Have Seesawed

The way would then be open for a wider international conference on Cambodia.

Hopes for a negotiated settlement of the Cambodian war have seesawed over the
last few years, as Mr. Hun Sen sent peace feelers to the Prince, who lives in
exile in Beijing and Pyongyang, North Korea.

The 65-year-old Prince, a former King and later Prime Minister, has resisted the
idea of giving legitimacy to the Phnom Penh Government that Hanoi installed in
1979 and has supported with troops ever since.

In contrast to the cosmopolitan, multilingual Prince, Mr. Hun Sen, who is only
36, has rarely traveled abroad - he has never been to Paris - and speaks no
foreign languages.

The Prime Minister was a former Khmer Rouge deputy regional commander before
going over to the pro-Vietnamese side in a Cambodian Communist split a decade
ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: Veterans' Affairs;
War of Words Over the New V.A.

BYLINE: By JULIE JOHNSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 24


Particularly among conservatives, who remember fondly when President Reagan
strode into office promising to deflate what he deemed a bloated Federal
bureaucracy, the question echoes: How can one justify elevating the Veterans
Administration to Cabinet status?

It was, after all, Mr. Reagan who campaigned in 1980 with a pledge to eliminate
two the Departments of Education and Energy. Yet two weeks ago, on the eve of
Veterans Day, he announced that he had been thinking for some time about the
proposed elevation of the V.A. and that xe had made a ''personal decision'' to
support its being turned into a Department of Veterans Affairs, to give veterans
''the recognition that they so rightly deserve.''

Congressional support, which had been building for some time, was overwhelming.
The measure was quickly approved by a vote of 399 to 17 in the House of
Representatives, and its backers predict it will ''sail through'' the Senate,
where John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, a former Marine pilot, has scheduled
hearings Dec. 9 before his Governmental Affairs Committee.

Representative Jack Brooks, the Texas Democrat who heads the Government
Operations Committee, which shepherded the bill to the House floor, says it
would help reverse a situation in which ''veterans have had little success in
communicating with the President or in participating in policy discussions that
affect their interests.'' But What About Growth?  Such wide support and good
intentions notwithstanding, there is concern among fiscal conservatives about
growth in the size of an agency that already has more than 240,000 employees and
an annual budget of $27 billion. To that, supporters of Cabinet status respond
that the change would hardly dent the Federal budget, since it would not entail
creating an entirely new agency. The cost would be only $30,000 a year, they
say, the amount needed to bring the pay of senior V.A. officials in line with
that of the chiefs and deputies of other Government departments.

The supporters include Thomas K. Turnage, the agency's Administrator, who would
become Secretary of Veterans Affairs and join the 19 officials who currently
make up the President's Cabinet: the secretaries of 13 departments, 5 senior
White House advisers and Vice President Bush. ''We don't think it's an expansion
of government at all,'' said Mr. Turnage. ''We're here already.''

Backing also comes from such seemingly less likely sources as Representative
Gerald B. H. Solomon of New York, the ranking Republican on the House Veterans'
Affairs Committee, who describes himself as a ''Reaganite from years back'' and
''not one of those members of Congress who like to expand the bureaucracy.''

The critics are not convinced. While they concede that the rise to Cabinet
status need entail no immediate creation of new jobs or new facilities, they
fear an escalation of costs as the years pass. The agency's very elevation would
give it more power to soak up Federal money, they say, in part because of the
enhanced access to the President's ear. In such a case, the argument goes, the
agency would be sure to push for expanded and more costly services.

'Hypocrisy,' a Conservative Says

''I can't bring myself to look at the level of hypocrisy in this town,'' said
Burton Pines, senior vice president of the Heritage Foundation, the capital's
leading conservative policy research organization, which for years has deplored
the Federal Government's size and and what it sees as waste. ''It's really
repugnant.''

''The White House is a co-conspirator on this,'' Mr. Pines said. ''They are
almost as bad, not to stand up and say, 'Are we serious about getting Federal
spending under control, or aren't we?' ''

With one element of the critics' argument, Mr. Turnage agrees: veterans issues
have a built-in, ever-growing constituency. Veterans today number more than 27
million, he says, and, when that figure is combined with families and other
dependents, the V.A. constituency totals 80 million Americans.

The agency responsible for administering programs for that constituency would
continue with its current activities without interruption under the bill, which
would rearrange the internal structure of the V.A. to create a deputy secretary,
a chief benefits director, a chief medical director, eight assistant
secretaries, a general counsel and an inspector general. The current department
of veterans benefits would be converted to become the Veterans Benefits
Administration, and the current department of medicine and surgery would be
elevated to the Veterans Health Administration.

Years-Long Effort

The proposal for elevation is itself hardly new. Bills to enhance the V.A.'s
status have been introduced in every session since the 88th Congress a
quarter-century ago, said Anne C. Stewart of the Congressional Research Service,
a division of the Library of Congress.

The outlook for the idea is brightest now, lawmakers and V.A. officials say,
because of growing public support for veterans, an outgrowth in turn of
Americans' efforts in recent years to reconcile their ambivalence about the
Vietnam War.

''I think this is maybe one more step to heal the wounds on the Vietnam era,''
said Representative G. V. (Sonny) Montgomery, the Mississippi Democrat who heads
the House Veterans' Affairs Committee, adding that the establishment of a
Department of Veterans Affairs ''should have been done years ago.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Thomas K. Turnage, the V.A. Administrator, in his office. (The
New York Times/Mike Geissinger)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1410 words




Lahti, at Last

This time, it's front and center for Christine Lahti.

For several years now, it seems, the talented actress has been garnering rave
reviews in films as second banana to luminaries like Goldie Hawn in ''Swing
Shift'' and Mary Tyler Moore in ''Just Between Friends.'' And even though there
were an Oscar nomination and a New York Film Critics' Circle Award for her
portrayal of Hazel, the factory worker in ''Swing Shift,'' film fans were just
waiting for the day when Ms. Lahti would be given the chance to do a star turn.

Well, the day has arrived. The film is the Scottish director Bill Forsyth's
''Housekeeping,'' which opened Wednesday in time to prove that Thanksgiving
offers much more than turkeys. And the role is that of Sylvie, the footloose
aunt who sets down one day in a little Washington State town in the 1950's and
begins to look after her two orphaned teen-age nieces, Ruthie and Lucille.

Sylvie is a continent and generation away from Glenn Close's Alex in ''Fatal
Attraction,'' but she's another of those women about whom audiences are likely
to find themselves debating long after they've seen the movie. What's the right
word for Sylvie? Complex? Eccentric? Insane? ''I think she's touched, really, by
the muses,'' Ms. Lahti said. ''I think she has psychic ability; she has the
innocence and tremendous curiosity of a child, a complete lack of vanity or
self-consciousness. And I also loved the darker side of her. I think she's a
tremendously complex character. I think she's bruised emotionally, suffered so
much loss and abandonment in her life that she's kind of closed emotionally.''

''Housekeeping'' is drawn from the 1981 Marilynne Robinson novel, published by
Farrar, Straus & Giroux in hard cover and by Bantam in paperback; and when Ms.
Lahti was cast as Sylvie last year just a few weeks before the start of filming,
the actress became entranced with the role. ''I'd never read a character quite
like this,'' Ms. Lahti said. ''I loved her eccentricities.''

By way of preparation, Ms. Lahti, who lives in New York, visited the public
library to read up on hoboes and transients, including Boxcar Bertha, a woman
who was a hobo of the Great Depression; and she sought out some of the city's
bag ladies. But, she said, ''They had other things on their mind.''

Sylvie, Ms. Lahti pointed out, is not a hobo. ''That's a very important point to
me. She's a transient. She's not dependent on people. She's truly independent.
She works when she has to.''

Ms. Lahti was not the first choice for the role. Originally, when
''Housekeeping'' was a Cannon project, it was a vehicle for Diane Keaton. But
she dropped out. And then, Ms. Lahti said, three ''megastars'' whose names she
does not know came under consideration. Eventually, the project moved to
Columbia Pictures early in David Puttnam's brief tenure as chairman, and he put
his stamp of approval on casting Ms. Lahti as Sylvie.

Fans will probably get their next chance to see Ms. Lahti in the early part of
next year, in Sidney Lumet's ''Running on Empty.'' In it, she is cast as a
radical from the 60's who has been living underground ever since, as a wife
(Judd Hirsch is the husband) and mother (River Phoenix is the son).

For her next project, Ms. Lahti might be doing a play. In films, she said, ''I'm
looking for a comedy - actually a very light romantic comedy, but a good one,
and they're hard to find.''

Meanwhile, she's waiting for audiences to come to grips with ''Housekeeping.''
''I think they have to understand it's subtle, and they have to do some work in
watching it,'' she said. ''It's not a typical American movie that will spell out
everything for you and tell you what to feel and when to feel it. I think it's
really a celebration of the nonconformist.''

New Travels for 007?

Where's James Bond?

Perhaps China-bound.

That's the word from Richard Maibaum, who - in terms of evaluating intelligence
relating to 007 - must be considered an extremely high-level source.

After all, Mr. Maibaum has written or co-written a dozen of the Bond films,
including last summer's popular ''Living Daylights.'' And he is at work on a new
script, working once again with Michael G. Wilson, his teammate on
''Daylights.''

''We've been working for the last five weeks,'' Mr. Maibaum said. Now, while
saying he was not yet absolutely certain that Bond would pop up in China at
least during part of his new adventure, Mr. Maibaum did note that Albert R.
(Cubby) Broccoli, the producer, John Glen, who directed ''The Living
Daylights,'' and Mr. Wilson had paid a visit to China to scout locations.

Mr. Maibaum said it was a good bet that filmgoers would be looking at a new Bond
movie, with Timothy Dalton once again in the role of the indestructible British
agent, sometime in 1989.

On the Trail of a Dindon

''I'm going to try to rustle up a turkey somewhere and have me a facsimile of a
turkey dinner.''

No word yet on whether Ed Harris succeeded in his quest, but the reason
Thanksgiving dinner was going to be a problem was that the actor was in France,
where turkey goes by the name dindon and Thanksgiving is not a national holiday.
Mr. Harris has spent the past five weeks in Paris, Lyons and, currently, in
Lille, where he is starring in a film drawn from the volatile politics of Poland
in recent years.

The movie is ''To Kill a Priest,'' based on the murder of the Rev. Jerzy
Popieluszko, a popular and powerful pro-Solidarity Roman Catholic priest who was
murdered in 1984 and dumped in a river.

In the film, directed by the Paris-based Polish-emigre film maker Agnieszka
Holland (''Angry Harvest''), Mr. Harris plays Stefan, modeled on an actual
member of a church-monitoring unit of the Polish secret police. ''He has as much
faith in the State, the Communist Government, as Popieluszko does in the Church
and the rights of people to be free,'' Mr. Harris said, ''and it's a parallel
story of the two men and how they wind up confronting each other.''

Mr. Harris will be involved in political turmoil of another sort next week, when
Alex Cox's ''Walker'' opens. In it, Mr. Harris plays the role of William Walker,
the all-but-forgotten American who led a ragtag army into Nicaragua in the
1850's and had himself proclaimed its president.

Neither ''To Kill a Priest'' nor ''Walker'' is the first of Mr. Harris's films
to be involved with politics or current events. After all, besides starring in
such films as ''Alamo Bay'' and ''Sweet Dreams,'' Mr. Harris played John Glenn
as an astronaut in ''The Right Stuff'' at the time the Senator from Ohio was
regarded as Democratic Presidential timber; and he played an American mercenary
in ''Under Fire,'' Roger Spottiswoode's 1983 account of journalists in
Nicaragua.

''It's not that I'm looking for new political films,'' Mr. Harris said. ''It
just turns out that way sometimes.'' He pointed out that the fact that his
portrayals of Walker and Stefan are based on real people ''gives some
credibility and immediacy to playing the character.''

''It gives the work an immediate backbone,'' he said. Mr. Harris, who described
himself as anti-contra, said that when audiences look at ''Walker'' and its tale
of United States involvement in the affairs of Nicaragua, ''Hopefully people
will be intrigued by the story itself, that this was 130 years ago and we're
doing pretty much the same thing now.''

Mr. Harris said ''To Kill a Priest'' was scheduled to finish shooting in January
in the hope that it might be ready for next spring's Cannes festival, but he
thinks it more likely that audiences will be seeing it in the fall.

His next outing will be ''Jackknife,'' adapted by Stephen Metcalfe from his own
play and directed by David Jones, the Briton whose previous films include
''Betrayal'' and ''84 Charing Cross Road.'' In it, Mr. Harris will play a
despairing, down-on-his-luck Vietnam veteran whose life is shaken up by the
appearance of an old buddy from the war.

Jump Cuts

Bud Greenspan, who has filmed every Olympic competition since 1948 and is well
remembered for ''16 Days of Glory,'' his account of the 1984 Los Angeles games,
is setting out for Calgary to film the 1988 Winter Olympics. . . . By way of
tribute to John Huston, Columbia Pictures is re-releasing ''Fat City'' today.
The 1972 film, starring Stacey Keach, Jeff Bridges and Susan Tyrell, deals with
a washed-up boxer in a small California town who tries a comeback.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 28, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DESPERATION REIGNS WHERE COAL BOOM WENT BUST

BYLINE: By WENDY E. SOLOMON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1860 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Nov. 27


The class of elementary and junior high school students at the Pennsylvania
School for the Deaf kept up a volley of questions for the novelist who had come
to call. Courteously and with humor, the novelist, Douglas Bullard, tried to
answer them all.

Mr. Bullard, one of only a few deaf novelists, was asked to talk to some of the
170 students about his current book projects and his first novel, ''Islay,''
which was published last year.

''It's a fantasy about a deaf man who takes over a small state,'' the
50-year-old author explained, using sign language. ''He convinces enough deaf
people to move to that state where they can become the majority, so they can
control their own lives. It's a satire. It's a fun book.''

Mr. Bullard disputes the idea that the book's utopic vision is hostile or
separatist. But he said he hoped those who can hear and are patronizing toward
the deaf would re-examine their attitudes after reading the book.

'The Eternal Question'

The publisher, Terrence J. O'Rourke, who is also deaf, says ''Islay'' leads to a
better understanding of deaf people. ''The book presents the question that is
the eternal question in the world of the deaf,'' Mr. O' Rourke said through a
translator in a telephone interview. ''That is, will we be better off running
things ourselves rather than by the majority?''

The 168-year-old school, situated on an old colonial campus in Germantown,
stresses exposure to deaf role models for their students.

Experts in the literature of the deaf say Mr. Bullard is the first deaf author
to write a novel about the ''deaf experience,'' the lives and aspirations of the
closely knit deaf community. It is also the first time that sign language, a
visual gestural language that lacks a standard written form, has been used in a
novel at any great length.

''There have been novels with deaf characters,'' O'Rourke said, ''but never
novels about deaf people or the deaf sub-culture or minority. It's the first
novel that truly speaks about deaf people.''

Dr. Trent Batson, a professor of English at Gallaudet College, a liberal arts
college for the deaf in Washington, says ''Islay'' is unique in conveying the
social fabric of the deaf world and for getting the sense of American Sign
Language into written form.

Publisher Was Teacher

Mr. O'Rourke, who was also a professor of English at Gallaudet in the 1960's,
started T. J. Publishers Inc. in Silver Spring, Md., in 1978 by publishing
several sign language books he wrote. Over the years, he said, his publishing
company has sold about six million copies of these books, his ''bread and
butter.'' Last year his company published its first novel, Mr. Bullard's
''Islay.''

Mr. O'Rourke describes Mr. Bullard's writing as reminiscent of the late John
Kennedy Toole's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, ''A Confederacy of Dunces,''
because, ''Like Toole, he has a story full of local color and ludicrous
characters.'' Mr. Bullard credits Tom Robbins and Kurt Vonnegut for shaping him
as a writer.

''They taught me that you don't have to follow any rules,'' Mr. Bullard said.
''What you say doesn't have to fit reality because, in the first place, what is
reality? I think they broke through to me. Before, I didn't know what kind of
writer I'd be. Those two freed me to be me.''

An Alternative Style

These liberating forces helped inspire Mr. Bullard to create a new reality in
deaf literature. Faced with the inadequacy of standard written English to convey
the nuances of sign language, with its special grammar and syntax, Mr. Bullard
reached for an alternative style.

He chose to combine a variety of methods, using ''glosses,''or English words
which represent signs, and ''literal'' and ''free'' translations of sentences.
Characters also communicate through teletyped messages. The narrative in
''Islay'' is written through the eyes of its main character, Lyson C. Sulla, a
deaf man. The author says the inspiration for the character's name was a can of
Lysol.

Mr. Bullard grew up in Georgia and Florida with parents and siblings who were
not deaf. Although he lost his hearing at the age of 3 from spinal meningitis,
he says he had an advantage because he could once hear and his mother used to
talk and sing to him as he sat on her lap. ''The circuitry was set up in my head
before I became deaf - it would have been harder to write if I had been born
deaf,'' he said.

The children gathered around the guest's feet gestured in sign language at a
furious pace, sometimes interrupting each other in order to get a question in.
They wanted to know such fundamental things as when Mr. Bullard liked to write
and what he liked to write with.

''I like to write in the mornings. I couldn't work on the book all day. '' He
writes with a pencil because: ''My mind works at the same speed as my hand does.
The typewriter distracts me and the computer is impossible.''

''Islay'' took three years to write and his second novel, ''On Deaf Ears,''
which is about to be published by T. J. Publishers, took him nine months. He is
working on a third novel.  By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr. DAVY, W.Va. - Back in the
1950's, when coal was king in West Virginia, close to a thousand people lived
and prospered in and about Davy. The main street was lined with four groceries,
a pharmacy, a hardware store, a bank, two bars, even a movie theater.

Today the main street is lined with boarded-up and burned-out buildings. A
couple of general stores, a beauty shop and a gas station struggle desperately
for the few dollars in the pockets of the 700 people who still cling on here in
grimy hillside bungalows.

Coal is no longer king in Appalachia. This has been true for some time, but
never truer than now, than here in Davy and the rest of McDowell County, way
down in the southernmost part of West Virginia, where the thick black seams give
up that special high-energy coal needed to make steel.

Davy, set hard by a boulder-strewn stream, squeezed between two mountains, looks
as if it is down for the count. Most of its miners have been thrown out of the
pits by fancy machines that can do the work of 20 strong men and by steel
imports that cancel the need for even machines.

Nuclear Storage Considered

Some community leaders think the county should consider bidding to be the site
of a Federal facility that would repackage and temporarily store spent nuclear
fuel rods from power plants in the East before they are shipped to a permanent
Government storage facility that is to be built in the West.

That such an idea is being talked up is a measure of the desperation hereabouts.

Officially, one in three people is out of work in McDowell County, one of the
highest rates in the United States. In mining hamlets like Davy, that figure
easily doubles. Total personal income in the county, once the economic showpiece
of the state, is only a third of what it was two years ago. The county
government's budget was cut this year from $3 million to $2 million.

Law-enforcement officers report increases in crime. Social workers say there are
more instances of child abuse, wife beating and suicide. Welfare cases at the
local hospital have increased tenfold in the last couple of years. When the
Harvard-based Physician Task Force on Hunger in America visited the region
recently, it found ''widespread deprivations'' and said McDowell County was
''one of the worst in the nation'' in terms of high unemployment and potential
for malnutrition.

Jobs in the Carolinas

Once-proud men who earned $125 a day in a field that produced more coal than any
other in the world now shuffle through welfare lines, head down, hand extended,
almost tentatively, for government dispensations of surplus cheese and flour.
Those who can will themselves away from their beloved mountains, hollows and,
yes, dank and dangerous mines head increasingly for ''$5 jobs'' in the
Carolinas, there to work above ground on the new roads and buildings of the New
South, in the sunlight, hating every minute of it, but at least sending their
kids to bed on a full belly.

Gene Hale, a miner for 14 of his 39 years, ever since he made it back to Davy
from the Marines and Vietnam, was laid off last Dec. 12. ''I've never seen worse
times,'' he said as he ambled about what is left of his hometown, pausing to
watch a dog rummage through the burned-out Davy Elementary School. ''Things
around here close down,'' he said. ''Then they seem to burn down.'' What will he
do?  ''What can I do?'' he countered. ''I'm one of those that's trapped. Can't
find work here - can't even buy a job here - and can't leave because I got a
$50,000 home that I couldn't give away. It's never been like this before. Coal
has always come back.''

The Cycle May Have Ended

Coal has always been a cyclical business - boom, bust and boom - but this time
things may not come around. After the most recent layoffs, some companies,
particularly those owned by ailing steel corporations, began to seal their
shafts and tear down their machinery.

To the miners of Davy and just about every other mining hamlet within an hour's
drive, the message is all too clear: Metallurgical coal is finished, and with it
living off the mines.

''I just never thought it would come to this,'' said Rudolph Holman, who spent
15 years in the mines over around Northfork before being laid off last summer.
''They just shut down and sold out, shut down and sold out.''

Mr. Holman, who is 57 years old, was making his way through a welfare line at
Elkhorn, cradling an empty cardboard box.

''Two flour, two honey, eight rice,'' the commodities agent intoned to the
distribution clerks as Mr. Holman reached the head of the line.

The clerks reached into their piles. Mr. Holman extended his box.  There was no
banter, just the shuffle of feet.

'Things Are Getting Desperate'

One of the keenest observers of hard times in these mountains is David Corcoran,
publisher of several local newspapers, including The Welch Daily News in the
county seat. He has good reason to watch things closely, for over the last year
News circulation has headed downhill with the rest of Welch, to a press run of
only 8,500 copies a day, a loss of 2,000 subscribers.

''It's not overstating things a bit to say that things are getting outright
desperate in McDowell County,'' he said.

That is why he and some other local leaders are talking about a storage facility
for spent nuclear fuel rods.

Hardly any other community in the country wants such a facility, and there are
people in McDowell County and the rest of West Virginia who oppose it on the
ground that the jobs and the money it would bring are not worth the danger they
feel the waste rods would pose.

Nevertheless, the town councils of a number of mining hamlets in McDowell County
have called for a study of the proposal, including the town council of Davy,
where Mary Hale, Gene Hale's mother, is Mayor.

''I say give it a shot,'' said Mrs. Hale. ''Anyway, it's a better idea than that
other one some people are pushing -the one about filling up the hollows and
empty mines around here with garbage from New York and New Jersey and the
like.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Part of Davy, W.Va. (NYT/George Tames); Rudolph Holman a miner
who was laid off last summer, waiting to receive surplus government food in
Elkhorn (NYT); Map of West Virginia

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOUGLAS'S LETTERS CAST LIGHT ON LIFE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 38, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 28


Justice William O. Douglas of the Supreme Court thought Federal agents were
trying to plant marijuana at his ranch in the West and he thought a Pennsylvania
mob was going to lynch him for his role in the Rosenberg spy case, according to
a new book, ''The Douglas Letters.''

The book offers glimpses into the personal life of Douglas, who retired from the
Court in 1975 after serving for 36 years and earning a reputation as a defender
of individual liberties. He died in 1980.

The book, edited by Melvin I. Urofsky, a professor of history at Virginia
Commonwealth University, chronicles Douglas's career from his days as a law
school professor to his relationships with colleagues on the Court.

In a 1970 letter to two of his neighbors in the Cascade Mountains, Douglas wrote
that he suspected that Federal agents he had seen on his land were ''planting
marijuana with the prospect of a nice big TV-covered raid.''

''I forgot to tell you,'' the letter goes on, ''that this gang in power is not
just in search of the truth. They are 'search and destroy' people.'' He was
referring to President Nixon and his Administration.

'See if You Can Spot Any'

Douglas wrote that he was not sure what marijuana looked like or if it would
grow in the harsh climate of the Cascades in central Washington State. ''Mint,
white clover, and rhubarb do well there, as you know,'' he wrote. ''But now that
the snow is gone and summer is near, you might look to see if you can spot any
marijuana.''

In letters in 1967 to Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara, President Johnson
and Senator Henry M. Jackson, Democrat of Washington, Douglas demanded that Air
Force planes stop causing sonic booms over the Cascades because it was
frightening horses.

''We have had very close squeaks riding horseback in those mountains,'' he wrote
to Johnson. ''Some people have been badly injured; none has yet been killed.
McNamara writes polite letters that tell us to go to hell. People here are up in
arms; and many lawsuits will follow.''

He wrote Mr. McNamara that the Air Force reaction to the complaints had been
callous. ''I assure you, Mr. Secretary, that your 'villagers' here are not as
voiceless and impotent as your 'villagers' in Vietnam,'' he said.

Role in Rosenberg Case

In a 1959 letter to Robert Lynd, who conducted sociological surveys, Douglas
recalled the ''volatile atmosphere'' in Washington, D.C., and around the country
after he issued a stay in the case of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, who were
convicted of passing atomic secrets to the Soviet Union. The stay was overruled
and the Rosenbergs were executed in 1953. Douglas had been concerned that they
might have been convicted under the wrong statute. ''The atmosphere seemed to be
as inflammable as that in a gasoline plant,'' he wrote.

He went on to say that he had received a letter from some Western acquaintances
who promised a ''lynching party when I reached that part of the country.'' He
described a mob surrounding him outside a Pennsylvania motel.

''That was the only real mob I had ever seen face to face and I thought surely
they were going to move into action, but they broke forth into loud cheers and
applause,'' the letter said. ''It turned out they were all, or most of them,
immigrants from Eastern Europe working in the coal mines of Pennsylvania. The
demonstration that these simple and perhaps illiterate people put on was one of
the most moving experiences in my life.''

Gleanings From the Letters

Professor Urofsky was given access to the Douglas papers by Cathleen Douglas
Stone, the last of Douglas's four wives. The book is published by Adler & Adler
Publishers Inc., of Bethesda, Md. Other Douglas letters in the collection
reflect these actions by the Justice:

* He told Associate Justices he had received a letter from a man who had
established contact with Tom Paine and Benjamin Franklin, saying: ''Moreover, he
has recorded their conversations, and the tape is in my office. You are welcome
to it.''

* He urged that the Sierra Club, a conservationist organization, seek to place a
plaque on Mount Hood, Oregon, honoring the man who vetoed the idea of a
chairlift to the mountain's top.

* He disclosed that he had been visited by several ''gentlemen from our Central
Intelligence Agency'' who were ''preparing a list of things that they would have
me look into'' on a 1950 trip to Iran.

* He told Justice Hugo L. Black, ''If the Catholics get public money to finance
their religious schools, we better insist on getting some good prayers in public
schools or we Protestants are out of business.''

* He suggested to Edward R. Murrow, the radio and television commentator,
questions he could ask when interviewing Nehru.

'There Is a Twilight . . .'

In a 1976 letter to the Young Lawyers Section of the Washington State Bar
Association, he wrote that the Constitution and the Bill of Rights ''guarantee
to us all the rights to personal and spiritual self-fulfillment,'' and added:

''But the guarantee is not self-executing. As nightfall does not come at once,
neither does oppression. In both instances, there is a twilight when everything
remains seemingly unchanged.

''And it is in such twilight that we all must be most aware of change in the air
- however slight - lest we become unwitting victims of the darkness.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 29, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 886 words




$

     Week
        s
This   On
Week List Fiction

 1     3   WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
           (Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
           woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.

 2     4   GARDEN OF SHADOWS, by V. C. Andrews.
           (Pocket, $4.95.) The beginnings of the evil that
           beset the Dollanganger family in four previously
           published novels.

 3     5   WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Avon, $5.95.)
           Iran during the month following the Shah's
           departure.

 4     8   THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $4.95.)
           Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New
           York family begun in ''Evergreen.''

 5     3   THE PRINCESS, by Jude Devereaux. (Pocket,
           $3.95.) A European princess's passionate affair
           with a United States naval officer.

 6     7   FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen
           Coonts. (Pocket, $4.95.) Navy aviators in the
           Vietnam War.

 7     6   PAPER MONEY, by Ken Follett. (Signet/NAL,
           $3.95.) Crime, high finance and journalism form
           the threads of this newly reissued 1977 thriller.

 8 *  20   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley,
           $4.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
           World War III.

 9    15   IT, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)
           Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman
           who grew up in a small Maine town.

10     9   A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Warner,
           $4.95.) Comdr. Adam Dalgliesh investigates a
           brutal double murder.

11     3   ALL THAT GLITTERS, by Thomas Tryon. (Dell,
           $4.95.) Five Hollywood sex goddesses and the
           agent who helped their careers.

12 *   8   FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov.
           (Del Rey/Ballantine, $4.95.) The hero of the
           ''Foundation'' series searches for Earth.

13 *  81   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom
           Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
           brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

14     5   KENTUCKY! by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam
           $4.50.) The latest in the ''Wagons West'' series tells
           of a plot to assassinate President Grant.

15 *   3   ALL FOR THE LOVE OF DADDY, by Marcia
           Rose. (Ballantine, $4.95.) A family crisis after a
           tycoon decides to sell his business.

     Week
        s
This   On
Week List Nonfiction

 1     8   ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
           Wambaugh. (Bantam, $4.95.) A case involving the
           1979 murder of a high school teacher.

 2     3   DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland
           with Greg Lawrence. (Jove, $4.50.) The ballerina
           recalls her checkered career.

 3    214  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
           (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
           spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 4    31   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Berkley, $6.95.)
           Anecdotes and ruminations by the television star.

 5    56   WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.
           (North Point, $12.50.) The aviator's adventures.

 6 *  40   NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.
           (Fawcett, $4.95.) Confronting life's losses.

 7 *   4   WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney.
           (Berkley, $3.95.) Essays on contemporary life.

 8     4   PAT NIXON, by Julie Nixon Eisenhower. (Zebra,


$4.5
0.)
The
biog
raph
y of
the
form
er
Firs
t
Lady
.

 9    19   MAYFLOWER MADAM, by Sydney Biddle
           Barrows with William Novak. (Ivy/Ballantine,
           $4.95.) Stories of the world's oldest profession.

Q$10 JAME
18   S
     HERR
     IOT'
     S
     DOG
     STOR
     IES.
     (St.
           Martin's, $4.95.) A veterinarian's tales.

11 *   1   POOR LITTLE RICH GIRL, by C. David
           Heymann. (Pocket, $4.50.) The life of the
           Woolworth heiress Barbara Hutton.

12 *   6   ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John
           Madden with Dave Anderson. (Jove, $3.95.)
           Observations on football.

     Week
        s
This   On
Week List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1     5   THE FAR SIDE OBSERVER, by Gary Larson.
           (Andrews & McMeel, $5.95.) A new collection of
           cartoons.

 2     1   CATMOPOLITAN, by Ilene Hochberg. (Pocket,
           $9.95.) Humorous celebrations of the cat in the
           format of Cosmopolitan magazine.

 3    14   BILLY AND THE BOINGERS BOOTLEG, by
           Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $7.95.) More
           ''Bloom County'' cartoon strips.

 4    31   CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson.
           (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $6.95.) Cartoons
           about a boy, his toy tiger and his parents.

 5     4   GARFIELD SWALLOWS HIS PRIDE, by Jim
           Davis. (Ballantine, $5.95.) The 14th collection of
           cartoons about a fat cat.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Under Cover, or Out of Control?

BYLINE: By Stanley Hoffmann; Stanley Hoffmann is the C. Douglas Dillon Profesor
of the Civilization of France at Harvard University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1658 words



COVERT ACTION
The Limits of Intervention in the Postwar World.
By Gregory F. Treverton. 293 pp. New York: Basic Books. $19.95.

THE PERFECT FAILURE
Kennedy, Eisenhower, and the CIA at the Bay of Pigs.
By Trumbull Higgins. 224 pp. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. $17.95.

THE torrent of revelations about the Iran-contra affair during the summer's
televised hearings, and in the recently released report of the Congressional
committees that conducted the hearings, has made Americans aware both of the
importance of covert action in the foreign policy of their country and of its
risks and costs. These two books do nothing to rehabilitate its reputation or to
improve its image. Gregory F. Treverton teaches at the Kennedy School of
Government at Harvard University (though we are colleagues, we serve on
different faculties and our paths rarely cross) and will join the staff of the
Council on Foreign Relations in January. ''Covert Action'' is partly a memoir -
he worked on the staff of Senator Frank Church's Select Committee on
Intelligence and wrote a report documenting United States covert action in Chile
from 1963 to 1973 - and partly a history and evaluation of American covert
interventions since the end of World War II. ''The Perfect Failure'' by Trumbull
Higgins, a professor of history at the City University of New York who describes
himself as ''a specialist in military fiasco,'' is a case study of the ill-fated
Bay of Pigs operation. It reinforces Mr. Treverton's judgments.

Both men show how much euphoria about covert action was created by two early
successes of the C.I.A.: in Iran in 1953, when Kermit Roosevelt, with the help
of what Mr. Treverton calls a ''strange assemblage'' - a pro-Shah mob controlled
by one Iranian leader, ''complete with giant . . . weight-lifters recruited from
Teheran athletic clubs'' - overthrew Prime Minister Mohammed Mossadegh's
Government and consolidated the Shah's shaky power; and in Guatemala in 1954,
when the regime of Jacobo Arbenz Guzman was toppled by a small group of rebel
soldiers moving in from Honduras. The action in Guatemala led officials to
believe that such successes could be repeated elsewhere; it ''consolidated the
ascendancy of covert action over espionage, and of operations over intelligence
in the CIA,'' in Mr. Treverton's words - and it led directly to the Bay of Pigs
and to the later operations in Chile that toppled that country's Government.
Most of the men who planned these later activities had been involved in the
Guatemalan affair.

''Covert Action'' is valuable not only for its brief, sharp accounts of covert
enterprises (the one in Chile was undertaken even though none of the official
assessments had concluded that the election of Salvador Allende Gossens in 1970
threatened any vital United States interest), but above all for the lessons Mr.
Treverton draws from history, and for his own assessments. The lessons are
stark. As the targets of United States action became more formidable (Fidel
Castro learned from Arbenz's fate), the chances of success decreased. Success
requires bigger operations - and big operations can't remain secret (as the
Reagan arms sales to Iran demonstrated).

If the covert activities go on for a long time, as they have in Angola and,
since 1981, in Nicaragua, the purposes tend to expand, along with the commitment
and public knowledge. When the operations entail the manipulation of foreign
elements with their own agenda (the Cuban exiles mobilized for the Bay of Pigs
landing, or the Nicaraguan contras, or the anti-Allende factions in the Chilean
military), American ability to control them is often limited. In any case, the
fine-tuning of covert actions is difficult. In Chile, the United States
Government tried to maintain a barrier ''between supporting opposition forces
and funding groups trying to promote a military coup,'' but local realities made
this ''a distinction built of sand.'' As a result, whatever restrictions and
distinctions the United States may have tried to observe, in Chile and
elsewhere, it ended up, in the eyes of foreign observers, being seen as
responsible for the fall of Allende, or for the acts and fate of the Shah, or as
colluding with South Africa against the Marxist regime in Angola.

Mr. Treverton deals at length with the problems of control over covert action.
He shows that the enthusiasm shown for it by several Administrations resulted
not merely from the ''operational behavior'' of the C.I.A. - its bias for action
over mere espionage - but also, frequently, from Presidential pressures
(especially from Presidents Nixon and Reagan). But the need to keep operations
secret - and the need to protect Presidents by maintaining the possibility of
so-called plausible denial - meant that the activities would be discussed only
by a small number of people, that insufficient debate and criticism would lead
to grievous errors (such as the mistaken belief that the Cuban people would
support the invading exiles rather than Mr. Castro) and that only a small
proportion of covert-action projects would be reviewed by the National Security
Council system.

As for Congress, which went through a long period of complacency and complicity,
it tried to reverse course after the Watergate crisis. The Hughes-Ryan Act of
1974 put an end to plausible denial by requiring a Presidential finding that
each operation is important to national security, and the Intelligence Oversight
Act of 1980 required that Congress be notified of all covert operations. But
both laws are full of enough vague terms and escape hatches to allow the
executive branch to thwart their authors' intentions, as the Iran-contra affair
has shown. Indeed, the members of Congress are in a dilemma, highlighted by Mr.
Treverton: when they are informed, they are in no position to stop the action -
unless they leak its existence and thereby foreclose ''the option of
covertness.''

Thus, covert action raises formidable issues in an open society. Mr. Treverton
lists the realists' arguments on behalf of secret operations - especially the
need to meet, if not to match, Soviet covert activities and to help one's
friends in a harsh and dangerous world. But his own position is closer to that
of the idealists. He recognizes that covert operations may be necessary at
times. But he doubts they'll remain secret, warns about their unintended effects
and long-term costs and argues against having them run from the White House or
in contradiction of official policy (as in the case of Irangate). He also shows
that much that is done covertly by the C.I.A. could be done overtly by private
organizations (he notes the foundations established by West German political
parties that have aided democratic forces in such countries as Portugal), and,
above all, he concludes that most covert-action successes have been small,
ambiguous and transitory (Iran and Guatemala in the 1950's, for
example).''Covert Action'' is enlightening, thoughtful and wise.

Mr. Treverton, who writes elegantly, paints an often dirty scene in pastel
colors. Mr. Higgins, whose style is anything but graceful, uses strong primary
colors to paint the ''perfect failure'' of the Bay of Pigs. He makes no new
revelations, but his solid research -in memoirs, declassified documents and
interviews -leads to stark and damning conclusions. A reluctant President
Kennedy inherited a half-baked plan for the invasion of Cuba prepared by the
C.I.A. under President Eisenhower. Kennedy and his Secretary of Defense, Robert
McNamara, mistook for an approval the Joint Chiefs of Staff's mere acquiescence
to a plan that the military, deep down, deemed insufficient.

Even so, Kennedy's desire to make the American role in the operation as
invisible as possible forced the organizers to move the site of the landing from
the town of Trinidad (on Cuba's south coast, near mountains into which the
invaders could have retreated) to the swamp of the Bay of Pigs, 80 miles from
the nearest mountains, and led them to dilute and delay the air strikes that
were supposed to cover the operation. Even if the original plan for these
strikes had been followed, Mr. Higgins believes - rightly, in my opinion -that
Mr. Castro would have won, given his will to fight. The military requirement for
success was a large American participation in the invasion. The political
necessity of presenting the affair as an attempt by Cubans to liberate their
island, and of avoiding a wave of anti-Americanism in Latin America, excluded
such participation - and doomed the undertaking.

MR. HIGGINS praises Kennedy for having resisted strong pressures toward a more
open and considerable American military intervention, and he suggests that the
C.I.A. planners, Allen Dulles and Richard Bissell, had allowed a timid plan to
go into effect because they gambled that its very flaws would force the
President's hand. But the author also shows how shoddy the decision-making
process within the Administration had been; such dissenters as Under Secretary
of State Chester Bowles and Senator J. William Fulbright were not taken
seriously. Kennedy was the victim of his own lack of experience, of his
anti-Communism (or liberal imperialism), of his need to show toughness
(especially as he was resisting pressure to intervene in Laos) and of a time
bomb inherited from his predecessor: the Cuban exiles who were being trained in
Guatemala were increasingly unwelcome there, and as Mr. Treverton puts it,
''There seemed only one place to put [them] - Cuba.''

After the fiasco, an investigation within the C.I.A. concluded that the
operation had been ''too big to be a raid and too small to be an invasion.''
When one looks at President Reagan's far more overt action against Nicaragua,
one realizes that his Administration is determined not only to do away with the
so-called Vietnam syndrome but to ignore the lessons of the Bay of Pigs as well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Col Carlos Castillo Armas, leader of C.I.A. backed and trained
rebel forces which toppled Government of Pres. Jacobo Arbenz Guzman of Guatemala
in June 1954

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Pointing Toward Vietnam

BYLINE: By Rosemary Foot; Rosemary Foot, a lecturer in international relations
at the University of Sussex, is the author of ''The Wrong War: American Policy
and the Dimensions of the Korean Conflict, 1950-1953.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words



THE KOREAN WAR
By Max Hastings. Illustrated. 389 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $22.95.

RELATIVELY little attention has been given to the study of Korean politics and
society, or to the enduring bilateral relationship between the United States and
South Korea. Even more difficult to explain is the comparative lack of interest
among Americans in the Korean War. Some 1.3 million Americans served in the
Korean theater between 1950 and 1953; 33,629 died there and another 105,785 were
wounded. After the armistice, 3,597 returned from Communist prisoner-of-war
camps and 21 chose to stay behind (for a time at least). As Max Hastings reminds
us, American losses sustained in three years of war ''were only narrowly
outstripped by those suffered in Vietnam over more than ten.''

It is impossible to study the Korean conflict without thinking about Vietnam.
The links between the two wars are too close to ignore. The North Korean attack
on the South in June 1950 spurred the Truman Administration into more active
support of the French colonial struggle in Indochina. American concern with
international credibility was a powerful influence in both President Truman's
decision to intervene in 1950 and President Johnson's decision in 1965 to send
combat troops to Vietnam. Korea, like Vietnam, underwent saturation bombing,
including the bombing of the North's dams and irrigation channels; civilian
casualties were enormous.

Mr. Hastings, a military historian, the author of a number of acclaimed studies
of World War II and the editor of The Daily Telegraph of London, has sought in
''The Korean War'' to remind us of these parallels and to convey something of
the human dimension of the Korean conflict. This accessible and lively book is
not a comprehensive study of policy making - those searching for the fuller
explanation behind events will want to go beyond this work. But, through
archival research and, most notably, through some illuminating interviews with
American, British, South Korean and Chinese participants, Mr. Hastings does
provide sometimes distressing insight into what it meant to be caught up in this
war. He details, for example, the desperation of a confused infantryman fighting
a doomed rear-guard action in the chaotic first weeks of involvement on the
peninsula and the plight of members of a South Korean family, determined to flee
Seoul before the Communist armies arrived, who simply ''lost'' their grandfather
in their trek south and who were finally forced to separate, better to survive
the war. Nevertheless, despite much evidence of suffering, occasioned on behalf
of a dubious regime in South Korea, there is no doubt, according to Mr.
Hastings, about the wisdom of the Truman Administration in its decision to
intervene in the fighting.

If this conflict could be horribly tragic, it also had its full share of the
absurd and ironic. Those Mr. Hastings interviewed recall the use of Japanese
officers and merchant ships to ferry men to Inchon, only eight years after the
battle of Midway; the idiotic precision of one military order that instructed a
Marine commander to continue with a beachhead landing until his division had
suffered ''82.3% casualties''; the Marine division that stormed ashore to take
possession of Wonsan, only to find that Bob Hope had got there before it; and
the British officer who in response to cacophonous Chinese bugles ordered his
drum major to blast out with ''Reveille,'' ''Cookhouse,'' ''Defaulters'' and
''Officers Dress for Dinner.''

The war could be intensely brutalizing, especially during the winter of 1950-51,
after the Truman Administration took the fateful decision to cross the 38th
parallel into North Korea, thus provoking Chinese intervention and unfortunately
transforming the war altogether. Most American military men, Mr. Hastings
discovered, expected the Chinese to be ''submissive . . . dwarves''; instead,
they found themselves up against a disciplined and aggressive army. Having been
told that the war would shortly be over but, in December 1950, suddenly facing
defeat, many American soldiers experienced the overwhelming impulse to ''escape
not only from the enemy but from the terrible cold, the mountains, from Korea
itself.''

American and United Nations casualties were high over this period, and many were
taken prisoner, only to die at the hands of their captors. Those that made it to
the camps were to suffer from lack of food and medical attention. The Communist
treatment of prisoners became a dominant theme of press coverage in the United
States during the immediate postwar years. What is less well-known is the
similarly appalling conditions within the United Nations camps and the parallel
behavior of many United Nations soldiers. One medic describes the widespread
incidence of pneumonia, malaria, dysentery and tuberculosis among men held in
United Nations compounds. Many American officers and men interviewed for the
book ''admitted knowledge of, or participation in, the shooting of Communist
prisoners when it was inconvenient to keep them alive.'' One United States
infantryman revealed that he took no chances with Koreans and shot anyone
''wearing mustard-colored sneakers.''

MR. HASTINGS claims that ''under the UN, nothing remotely resembling the
indoctrination program carried out in the Yalu camps took place,'' but numerous
documents in American archives testify otherwise. He also refers to ''Communist
terrorization within the compounds,'' but does not describe the activities of
the hundreds of anti-Communist organizations that were set up in the United
Nations camps, which had links with the South Korean and Chinese Nationalist
Governments.

In those compounds where pro-Chiang Kai-shek trustees dominated, for example,
they exercised such complete control over the lives of inmates that, when they
finally had to choose whether to return home or to make a new life in South
Korea or Taiwan, they had no real choice. In that connection, the author
unfortunately neglects the diary of Adm. Turner Joy (the chief United Nations
Command negotiator during the first year of the armistice talks) which records a
mock screening that took place in a Chinese compound before the official polling
of prisoners. Those who announced their wish to return to the People's Republic
of China were horribly beaten or killed. Most were too terrified to express a
genuine opinion about their repatriation wishes. This policy of ''non-forcible
repatriation,'' as it was called, must rank alongside the decision to cross the
38th parallel as one of the most controversial of the war.

If, as Mr. Hastings contends, ''grass roots America had only the dimmest
perception of what was taking place in Korea,'' then this book is important for
its perspective on a war whose policies and conduct have long deserved a wider
debate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INVESTOR PROFILES: Yields Improve the Quality of Life;
Payouts For Social Concerns

BYLINE: By ROSALYN RETKWA

SECTION: Section 3; Part 2, Page 11, Column 1; Personal Investing Supplement
Desk

LENGTH: 914 words


RUTH SHEREFF, now 44 years old, bought stock on her own for the first time just
two years ago. Her father, who had been managing her money until then, said that
it would have been better had she lost money the first time out so she would
learn caution and humility. Instead, she made a killing.

'' 'The worst thing just happened to you; if you make money like that on your
first investment, you become a gambler,' '' she quoted her father as having
said. ''In fact, that's what happened,'' she added.

For that first purchase, she bought 100 shares of Genentech because it was a
''glamour stock,'' with ''all of the leading patents'' in the biotech field. She
paid $43 a share in October 1985. When she cashed out 13 months later, her money
had quadrupled to more than $16,000, for a net gain of $12,108 - almost as much
as she makes in a year of freelance writing and editing.

''Before the Genentech hit, I was going to buy good, solid stocks with
dividends, like the utility stocks my father bought for me,'' she said. But,
since then, ''all I want to do is buy stocks that have crashed, in the hopes
they'll go up again, and then sell them.'' She's done so well that since then
she's been able to supplement her freelance income by $10,000 to $12,000 a year
by buying good companies on bad news, when their stocks are going down, rather
than up.

SHE braved the waters for the first time at the age of 42 because, ''I just
decided to take my finances into my own hands,'' she said. She had been making
her own way in the world - and her own money - for 20 years. Although she had
studied finance and written about it, when it came to managing her money, she
''had almost a woman's thing, where it wasn't my concern, and also I had this
anti-materialist thing. I just decided to grow up, and that was it,'' she said.

Ms. Shereff earned a bachelor's degree in chemistry at Brown University in 1964
and worked as a research chemist for eight years. During the 1960's, she got
involved in the civil rights movement, and later became active in protests
against the Vietnam War. She began writing by working for antiwar journals and
the underground press, and she also worked for WBAI, a socially conscious New
York radio station.

Today, she still contributes to social concerns. On average, she's given about a
quarter of her market gains to neighborhood volunteer groups run by friends,
such as an after-school program for disadvantaged children in Newark, and
programs for the homeless.

In 1980 she decided to switch careers and earned a master's degree from Columbia
University's Graduate School of Journalism; the school is a short walk from the
West 122d Street apartment where she's lived for the last 20 years. Since
graduation, she's had one full-time staff reporter's job - at The Staten Island
Advance - and has freelanced for the last four years. Along the way, she found
she was being asked to write about business, so she went back to school once
more and took adult-education classes in business and finance.

Currently, she's writing for three dailies -The Dallas Morning News, The Detroit
News and The Journal of Commerce - and one monthly magazine, Chemical Business.
She's had to stay away from certain stocks because she was writing about the
company or felt she might be asked to, she said. For example, she liked LTV when
the company went into bankruptcy, but she was covering the proceedings for the
Dallas paper.

Although she learned all about market analysis, very often she pays it no mind.
''I feel that a lot of this is psychology,'' she said. She believes that much of
the information she needs to pick stocks can be found in the morning's papers.

For example, when the Ivan Boesky scandal broke, there was a widely reported
list of seven stocks he'd been trading in, and they suffered losses by way of
association, she noted. Of that group, ''American Brands was the cheapest, and I
didn't have a lot of money,'' she said. ''I didn't do the stock analysis. I just
picked up the phone and bought it.'' She made about $2,000 in three months, as
her 200 shares traded back up to 52 3/8 from 41 1/2. She's made some mistakes,
too.

''I've taken losses I didn't have to take because I didn't have a strong enough
stomach to stay in there, and I didn't have the courage of my convictions,'' she
said.

Notably, she bought I.B.M. after the stock had tumbled. But when it fell even
further, against her own instincts, she cut her losses and got out, on the
advice of friends and family. She lost $3,000. Had she stayed in, she would have
made $10,000. ''It absolutely killed me,'' she said.

When the market's record advance turned into a record decline on Oct. 19, she
decided to stick it out, and could afford to, because none of her purchases had
been made on margin. She acknowledged that ''if it keeps going down, I'm going
to lose a lot,'' but, she added, ''I can afford to hold on and not sell while
it's crashing,'' despite the paper losses.

That's because earlier in the month, when the market started ''wavering,'' she
sold out her one ''high-priced'' stock - Johnson & Johnson. She bought J.&J. a
year earlier at $63 a share and sold it for $95 to $96 a share. She put the
proceeds of that sale into a money market fund, so that only 30 percent of her
assets were still in stocks when the market plunged. The J.&J. sale guaranteed
that she had once again met her target of making $12,000 in extra income from
stock trading for the year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ruth Shereff (NYT/Alan Zale)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By DAVID MURRAY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 297 words



THE TWILIGHT OF THE PRESIDENCY: From Johnson to Reagan. By George E. Reedy.
(NAL, $17.95.) When George E. Reedy, who had been President Johnson's longtime
press secretary and special assistant, first published this book in 1970, it was
fairly hailed as a distinguished and thoughtful - and sometimes frightening -
essay on government. The Presidency, said Mr. Reedy then and says Mr. Reedy now,
is an institution designed to shield its occupant from reality, to isolate him
from the nation and to make sure that he responds, responsibly or not, to
impulse and personal doctrine. It is not, in Mr. Reedy's view, a great way to
run a country. By 1970, the White House had reduced Lyndon Johnson, a canny
politician by anyone's standard, to a political jelly and Richard Nixon remained
insulated from the continued popular demand for the end of the Vietnam war. In
this astute updated edition, with four more Presidents (including Mr. Nixon)
under our national belt, Mr. Reedy finds little to cheer him. Presidents Ford,
Carter and, curiously, Reagan he sees as ''caretaker'' Chief Executives, who
give the impression of being more dynamic than they actually are. Gerald Ford at
least had nothing up his sleeve; Jimmy Carter's background equipped him to be a
mover and shaker, but the country didn't want that. Ronald Reagan is ''the
epitome of the caretaker'' - someone who can keep various groups from organizing
to depose him while simultaneously creating ''the illusion of action when not
very much is actually going on.'' While Mr. Reedy sees no changes likely in the
institution of the Presidency itself, he does see America as resilient,
ultimately constructing ''counterbalancing forces that are bringing us back to
reality.'' Somehow, he believes, we will lurch along.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ON MY MIND;
For U.S. Intervention In Haiti

BYLINE: By A.M. Rosenthal

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 762 words


Once more the United States confronts a basic reality of international life:
intervention in the affairs of another country. The ethical and political
question about Haiti is not whether to intervene but when and how.

It is Haitians, not Americans, who are murdering other Haitians and trying to
shove the country back into the perpetual nightmare of terror and despotism. But
the involvement of the United States in the Haitian horror is so deep and long
that this country has a responsibility to try to stanch the country's blood and
quiet its screams.

Maybe we will get off easy. Maybe the U.S. can act within the framework of the
United Nations and get it to set up a peacekeeping force in Haiti.

A real problem, there. The precedent of a U.N. force that would include some
troops from outside the Americas operating in this hemisphere would be acutely
uncomfortable for Washington and other American capitals.

Maybe the Organization of American States can be used as the instrument of
intervention. Maybe; but the O.A.S. is traditionally reluctant to decide where
international action takes priority over national sovereignty. Maybe the United
States can put enough political and economic pressure on the ''military''
leaders of Haiti, whose wars are always against their own people. Washington
supported the military men. Now these heroes have permitted and encouraged the
slaughter of voters to prevent the election they fear.

But the military and the goons of the Duvalier regimes know that this time there
must be retribution for their crimes. They will not be keen to put down their
scepters - knives and guns.

So if there is no easy way out, the U.S. will have to decide whether to send in
its own troops. Perhaps we can do it ''surgically'' - that bit of jargon that
strangely implies relative painlessness, and no postoperative problems.

If the U.S. moves militarily to protect the people of Haiti from their
murderers, it may not be all that surgical. American troops will have to find
and root out gangs of street killers and torturers, many of whom have had the
advantage of American training themselves. It won't be Vietnam but it won't be
Grenada either.

It may come to that soon - a decision on whether to mount armed intervention to
pay our bill. On the bill are decades of support for the monstrous Duvalier
father and son. Then, failure to follow through on the overdue ouster of the
young despot with a planned American effort to make sure tyranny was followed by
freedom, not a turnover of the country to his killer squads.

Americans will support armed intervention in Haiti, I believe, despite their
wariness about using military power. Americans will see it as it will be - a
rescue operation painful to the sufferers and the saviors, but morally correct.

And perhaps Haiti will remove some hypocrisy and pretense about international
affairs. Intervention is supposedly abhorrent in itself. Diplo-mats denounce it
and nations never concede doing it. The truth of course is that it is carried
out constantly. President Roosevelt, happily for freedom's sake, intervened on
the Allied side long before Pearl Harbor. President Truman was able to get
United Nations backing for U.S. forces he had committed to the Korean War
because the Russians were stupid enough to boycott a crucial U.N. meeting.

The U.N. itself is often an instrument for direct intervention in the affairs of
a nation. The U.N., on orders of its members, intervened heavily in the Congo in
the 1960's with armed forces and civilian supervisors and administrators.

And of course, the Soviet Union seized all of Eastern Europe after World War II;
intervention without end.

Nations decide in their own interest when to intervene - and when it is safe to
oppose intervention. The U.S. quickly sent arms to Afghan freedom fighters, and
best wishes to Hungarian freedom fighters. The real ethical issue is not
intervention, but for whom and against whom. It would clear the national mind to
recognize that. American intervention in Latin America arouses particular
passion and particular hypocrisy. Americans who supported intervention against
the Somoza dictatorship in Nicaragua denounce intervention against the
Sandinista dictatorship as an international crime. And the Carter and Reagan
Administrations solemnly deny intervention ever took place. So it is worth
saying clearly: Using armed force against the Haitian military junta, under an
O.A.S. flag, or under our own, would be plainly an act of intervention, and
plainly an act of self-interest, and of honor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

James Baldwin, the Writer, Dies in France at 63

BYLINE: By Lee Daniels

SECTION: Section D; Page 27, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1179 words


James Baldwin, whose passionate, intensely personal essays in the 1950's and
60's on racial discrimination in America helped break down the nation's color
barrier, died of cancer last night at his home in southern France. He was 63
years old.

Mr. Baldwin's brother, David, was with him at his home in St. Paul de Vence when
he died, according to Cynthia Packard, a friend and former assistant to the
author, who said she talked with David by telephone last night. Mr. Baldwin died
at 6:15 P.M., New York time, according to Ms. Packard.

At least in the early years of his career, Mr. Baldwin saw himself primarily as
a novelist. But it is his essays that arguably constitute his most substantial
contribution to literature.

Collections of Essays

Mr. Baldwin published his three most important collections of essays - ''Notes
of a Native Son'' (1955), ''Nobody Knows My Name'' (1961) and ''The Fire Next
Time'' (1963) - during the years when the civil-rights movement was exploding
across the American South.

Some critics said his language was sometimes too elliptical, his indictments
sometimes too sweeping. But then, Mr. Baldwin's prose, ith its apocalyptic tone
- a legacy of his early exposure to religious fundamentalism - and its
passionate yet distanced sense of advocacy, seemed perfect for a period in which
blacks in the South lived under continual threat of racial violence and in which
civil-rights workers often faced brutal beatings and even death.

Mr. Baldwin had moved to France in the late 1940's to escape what he felt was
the stifling racial bigotry of America.

Nonethless, although France remained his permanent residence, Mr. Baldwin in
later years described himself as a ''commuter'' rather than an expatriate.

''Only white Americans can consider themselves to be expatriates,'' he said.
''Once I found myself on the other side of the ocean, I could see where I came
from very clearly, and I could see that I carried myself, which is my home, with
me. You can never escape that. I am the grandson of a slave, and I am a writer.
I must deal with both.''

Despite the prominent role he played in the civil-rights movement in the early
1960's - not only in writing about race relations but in organizing various
sorts of protest actions - Mr. Baldwin always rejected the labels of ''leader''
or ''spokesman.''

Instead, he described himself as one whose mission was to ''bear witness to the
truth.''

''A spokesman assumes that he is speaking for others,'' he told Julius Lester, a
faculty colleague at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, in an interview
in The New York Times Book Review in 1984. ''I never assumed that I could. What
I tried to do, or to interpret and make clear was that no society can smash the
social contract and be exempt from the consequences, and the consequences are
chaos for everybody in the society.''

Sense of Independence

This serene sense of independence was not simply a political stance, but an
intrinsic part of Mr. Baldwin's personality.

''I was a maverick, a maverick in the sense that I depended on neither the white
world nor the black world,'' he told Mr. Lester. ''That was the only way I
could've played it. I would've been broken otherwise. I had to say, 'A curse on
both your houses.' The fact that I went to Europe so early is probably what
saved me. It gave me another touchstone - myself.''

Mr. Baldwin did not limit his 'bearing witness' to racial matters. He opposed
American military involvement in Vietnam as early as 1963, and in the early
1960's he began to criticize discrimination against homosexuals.

Mr. Baldwin's literary achievements and his activism made him a world figure and
to the end of his life brought him many honors in this country and abroad. The
French Government made him a Commander of the Legion of Honor in 1986.

Yet, Mr. Baldwin was also clearly disappointed that, despite his undeniable
powers as an essayist, his novels and plays drew decidely mixed reviews.

Widely Praised Novel

''Go Tell It on the Mountain,'' his first book and first novel, published in
1953, was widely praised. Partly autobiographical, it tells of a poor boy
growing up in Harlem in the 1930's under the tyranny of his father, an
autocratic preacher who hated his son.

Mr. Baldwin said in 1985 that in many ways the book remained the keystone of his
career.

' 'Mountain' is the book I had to write if I was ever going to write anything
else,'' he remarked. ''I had to deal with what hurt me most. I had to deal,
above all, with my father. He was my model. I learned a lot from him. Nobody's
ever frightened me since.''

But the reception accorded his other works was at best lukewarm, and his frank
discussion of homosexuality in ''Giovanni's Room'' (1956) and in ''Another
Country'' (1962) drew criticism from within and outside the civil rights
movement.

In a celebrated polemic in the late 1960's, Eldridge Cleaver, then a member of
the Black Panther Party, asserted that the novel illustrated Mr. Baldwin's
''agonizing, total hatred of blacks.''

Another assessment of Mr. Baldwin was offered by Langston Hughes, the poet, who
observed, ''Few American writers handle words more effectively in the essay form
than James Baldwin. To my way of thinking, he is much better at provoking
thought in the essay than he is in arousing emotion in fiction.''

Mr. Baldwin's other works included the novel ''Tell Me How Long the Train's Been
Gone,'' the stage plays ''Blues For Mr. Charlie,'' and ''The Amen Corner,'' and
''The Evidence of Things Not Seen,'' a long essay on the murder of 28 black
children in Atlanta in 1980 and 1981.

Characteristically, Mr. Baldwin did not shrink from ackowledging the lesser view
of his works of fiction, nor that his fame had slipped since the early 1970's.

''I'm very vulnerable to all of that,'' he said in a 1985 interview, referring
to what he described in an early essay as the ''dangerous, unending and
unpredictable battle'' of being a writer.

''The rise and fall of one's reputation,'' he mused. ''What can you do about it?
I think that comes with the territory. Any real artist will never be judged in
the time of his time; whatever judgment is delivered in the time of his time
cannot be trusted.''

Born in Harlem

James Baldwin was born in 1924 in Harlem and attended Dewitt Clinton High School
in the Bronx. He was a precocious writer, and by his early twenties was
publishing reviews and essays in such publications as The New Leader, The
Nation, Commentary and Partisan Review, and socializing with the circle of New
York writers and intellectuals that included Randall Jarrell, Dwight Macdonald,
Lionel Trilling, Delmore Schwartz, Irving Howe and William Barrett, among
others.

Yet, Mr. Baldwin was among the last one would have initially marked for a
leadership role in a national movement. Soft-spoken, with a manner of speaking
that mirrored his complex writing style, and physically slight, he thought of
himself for many years as ugly, and wrote poignantly of his struggle to accept
the way he looked.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of James Baldwin (NYT/Ruby Washington)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Arthur H. Dean, Envoy to Korea Talks, Dies at 89

BYLINE: By ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section D; Page 28, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1397 words


Arthur H. Dean, the lawyer-diplomat who tried to arrange a post-Korean War peace
conference with the Chinese at the request of President Eisenhower in 1953, and
who served as a negotiator on disarmament and other matters for three other
Presidents, died of pneumonia yesterday at the Community Hospital at Glen Cove,
L. I. He was 89 years old and lived in Oyster Bay, L. I. Mr. Dean succeeded John
Foster Dulles as senior partner in the prestigious New York law firm of Sullivan
& Cromwell in 1949, when Mr. Dulles was elected a United States Senator. He had
joined the firm in 1923 after graduation from Cornell Law School.

While a young partner in 1933, Mr. Dean had his first taste of Government
service. At the request of President Roosevelt, he worked on the Department of
Commerce committee that recommended the creation of the Securities and Exchange
Commission and the passage of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. He later had
a hand in drafting the Bankruptcy Act of 1938, the Trust Indenture Act of 1939,
and the Investment Company Act of 1940.

Urged Johnson to End Bombing

Over more than three decades, Mr. Dean served as a negotiator and adviser to
Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson. He was credited with helping to
persuade Lyndon B. Johnson to stop the bombing of North Vietnam in 1968 and to
not seek re-election.

In the early 1960's, Mr. Dean served as chief of the delegation to the talks
that eventually produced a partial nuclear test-ban treaty in 1963, which was
worked out by W. Averell Harriman.

But the task that won Mr. Dean international renown as a stubbornly patient and
courageous negotiator was probably one of the dreariest, most vexing and
wearisome jobs in modern diplomatic history - that of negotiating with the
Chinese and North Koreans at Panmunjom, in the demilitarized zone of Korea, for
seven weeks in 1953.

President Eisenhower, at the behest of Mr. Dulles, Mr. Dean's old law firm
mentor and by then Secretary of State, had appointed Mr. Dean a Special Deputy
Secretary of State, with the rank of ambassador. He was given the difficult
assignment, on behalf of the United States and the 16 other nations whose troops
had formed the United Nations Command, of conducting post-armistice talks with
the Communist side at Panmunjom.

Chief Delegate at Panmunjom

Mr. Dean served as chief representative for the United Nations Command, which
had been formed to aid South Korea when it was invaded in 1950 by Communist
forces from North Korea, later to be joined by Chinese troops. He hoped to
negotiate the release of prisoners and to set up a political conference
envisaged by the cease-fire agreement.

On Sept. 15, 1953, in a tent placed across the 38th parallel of latitude in the
freezing mountains of the central Korean peninsula, the endless and, ultimately,
fruitless discussions began. Mr. Dean won instant admiration for his
characteristic optimism that success would be achieved. Against the stern-faced
Communists he was by turns reasonable, stormy, plaintive and cold.

''He was like pom-poms, firing off verbal rockets,'' a colleague at Panmunjom
said. ''He used every courtroom technique he knew.'' But for the most part, Mr.
Dean's verbal rockets failed to have any effect on the imperturbable negotiators
opposite him at the conference table. At one point, Mr. Dean cried out in
frustration: ''Don't you listen to me? Don't you hear what I say?''

Mr. Dean became convinced the Communist side did not, at that time, want a
permanent peace. After they rejected his offer that a political conference be
held within 48 days after the preliminary conference ended, the talks were
broken off and he returned to the United States.

In a report to the American people Mr. Dean said that the ''Chinese Communists
are determined to keep North Korea politically and economically integrated into
their own economy. They believe that at a long drawn-out conference the American
negotiators will be forced by public opinion to give in in order to have a
successful conference.''

Praise From Eisenhower

President Eisenhower, who lavishly praised him for his efforts at Panmunjom, was
to call on him for further service in years to come.

Arthur Hobson Dean, the son of William Cameron Dean, a Cornell Law School
professor, and the former Maud Egan, was born in Ithaca, N. Y. on Oct. 16, 1898.
He went to Ithaca High School and then to Cornell University, where he earned
expenses by working as a hotel night clerk and a bank bookkeeper. He left the
university in World War I and served in the Navy, then returned to Cornell to
complete his undergraduate studies in 1921. At Cornell Law School he was
managing editor of the Law Quarterly and received his law degree in 1923.
Admitted to the bar that same year, he joined Sullivan & Cromwell, a firm that
specialized in international law.

Work on Overseas Transactions

His skills as a negotiator developed from the start of his legal career, when he
was chosen by Mr. Dulles to assist in negotiations in Paris, Berlin, Rome, Milan
and London on the security issues and business transactions that followed the
Dawes Plan loans to alleviate Germany's financial plight. In 1927 and 1928 he
went to Japan to work out the first open-end mortgage in that country, a $9
billion bond issue of the Nippon Power Company, which was offered to the
American public.

That triumph won the young lawyer a full partnership in Sullivan & Cromwell in
1929. As an ''office lawyer,'' he advised public utilities, railroads,
hospitals, and private businesses on a wide variety of problems. As a trial
lawyer, Mr. Dean's best-known litigation was the Investment Bankers Act
antitrust case, U. S. vs. Morgan, in which he acted as lead counsel for the 17
defendants. For many years he was chief counsel to Standard Oil Company of New
Jersey, now Exxon.

Law of the Sea Delegate

Mr. Dean served President Eisenhower in 1958 and 1960 as chief of delegation at
an 88-nation conference on the Law of the Sea. He led the fight against an
effort by Soviet-bloc and other nations to establish what he considered an
excessive increase in the limit of the internationally recognized territorial
sea.

Although the United States compromise proposal of a six-mile limit failed to
gain approval, a number of agreements were reached on fisheries, the high seas,
the continental shelf, and the right of landlocked countries to have access to
the sea.

President Kennedy appointed Mr. Dean chief of the U. S. delegation to the
nuclear test ban negotiations and the 18-nation disarmament conference at Geneva
in 1961 and 1962. The test-ban negotiations led to the signing of a partial
nuclear test ban treaty in Moscow on Aug. 5, 1963.

Mr. Dean, a Republican, was called on by another Democrat, President Johnson, to
become founding co-chairman of the Lawyers Committee for Equal Rights Under the
Law, a watchdog body that oversaw compliance with the Civil Rights Act of 1965.
He also counseled President Johnson in his darkest days of agonizing over
Vietnam.

Philanthropist and Flower Lover

Mr. Dean, who sat on the boards of dozens of companies and philanthropic
organizations and was board chairman of Cornell University for 10 years, was
married in 1932 to the former Mary Talbott Clark Marden. The couple collected in
many areas, including Americana and rare books. They made it possible for
Cornell to obtain the Arthur H. and Mary Marden Dean Collection, a vast archive
of manunscripts and printed material dealing with the public career of the
Marquis de Lafayette, who served as one of Washington's generals in the
Revolutionary War.

An avid horticulturist and gardener, Mr. Dean made his estate in Oyster Bay a
flower-lover's showplace. At Siasconcet, on Nantucket, where the Deans
maintained a summer home, he created a wildlife sanctuary around Sesachacha
Pond. The Deans' book-lined Manhattan apartment abounded with plants and
flowers.

Mr. Dean, who was senior partner of Sullivan & Cromwell for 23 years, retired as
a partner in 1976.

In addition to his wife, he is survived by their son, Nicholas B.M. Dean, of
North Edgecomb, Me.; their daughter, Patricia D. Manolis, of Brookville, L. I.;
eight grandchildren and four great-grandchildren.

A memorial service will be held at 11 A.M. Thursday at St. John's Episcopal
Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L. I.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Arthur H. Dean (Blackstone-Shelbourne, 1953)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 2, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

James Baldwin, Eloquent Writer In Behalf of Civil Rights, Is Dead

BYLINE: By LEE A. DANIELS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1954 words


James Baldwin, whose passionate, intensely personal essays in the 1950's and
60's on racial discrimination in America made him an eloquent voice of the
civil-rights movement, died of stomach cancer early yesterday at his home in St.
Paul de Vence in southern France. He was 63 years old.

At least in the early years of his career, Mr. Baldwin saw himself primarily as
a novelist. But it is his essays that arguably constitute his most substantial
contribution to literature.

Mr. Baldwin published his three most important collections of essays -''Notes of
a Native Son'' (1955), ''Nobody Knows My Name'' (1961) and ''The Fire Next
Time'' (1963) - during the years when the civil-rights movement was exploding
across the American South.

Apocalyptic Tone in Prose

Some critics later said his language was sometimes too elliptical, his
indictments sometimes too sweeping. But then, Mr. Baldwin's prose, with its
apocalyptic tone - a legacy of his early exposure to religious fundamentalism -
and its passionate yet distanced sense of advocacy, seemed perfect for a period
in which blacks in the South lived under continual threat of racial violence and
in which civil-rights workers faced brutal beatings and even death.

In the preface to his 1964 play, ''Blues for Mister Charlie,'' noting that the
work had been inspired ''very distantly'' by the 1955 murder of a black youth,
Emmett Till, in Mississippi, Mr. Baldwin wrote:

''What is ghastly and really almost hopeless in our racial situation now is that
the crimes we have committed are so great and so unspeakable that the acceptance
of this knowledge would lead, literally, to madness. The human being, then, in
order to protect himself, closes his eyes, compulsively repeats his crimes, and
enters a spiritual darkness which no one can describe.''

The novelist Ralph Ellison said yesterday, ''America has lost one of its most
gifted writers'' and praised Mr. Baldwin as ''one of the most important American
essayists, black or white.''

''I would place him very high among writers,'' Benjamin DeMott, professor of
English at Amherst College, said yesterday, ''in part because his work showed a
powerful commitment to the right values and had a profound impact for good on
our culture.''

Mr. Baldwin had moved to France in the late 1940's to escape what he felt was
the stifling racial bigotry of America.

Nonetheless, although France remained his permanent residence, Mr. Baldwin in
later years described himself as a ''commuter'' rather than an expatriate.

''Only white Americans can consider themselves to be expatriates,'' he said.
''Once I found myself on the other side of the ocean, I could see where I came
from very clearly, and I could see that I carried myself, which is my home, with
me. You can never escape that. I am the grandson of a slave, and I am a writer.
I must deal with both.''

Henry Louis Gates, professor of English and Afro-American Literature at Cornell
University, said yesterday that Mr. Baldwin's death was ''a great loss not only
for black people, but to the country as a whole, for which he served as a
conscience.''

Mr. Gates said that Mr. Baldwin had ''educated an entire generation of Americans
about the civil-rights struggle and the sensibility of Afro-Americans as we
faced and conquered the final barriers in our long quest for civil rights.''

Avowed Mission: 'Bear Witness'

Despite the prominent role he played in the civil-rights movement in the early
1960's - not only in writing about race relations, but in organizing various
protest actions - Mr. Baldwin always rejected the labels of ''leader'' or
''spokesman.''

Instead, he described himself as one whose mission was to ''bear witness to the
truth.''

''A spokesman assumes that he is speaking for others,'' he told Julius Lester, a
faculty colleague at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, in an interview
in The New York Times Book Review in 1984. ''I never assumed that I could. What
I tried to do, or to interpret and make clear, was that no society can smash the
social contract and be exempt from the consequences, and the consequences are
chaos for everybody in the society.''

This serene sense of independence was not simply a political stance, but an
intrinsic part of Mr. Baldwin's personality.

''I was a maverick, a maverick in the sense that I depended on neither the white
world nor the black world,'' he told Mr. Lester. ''That was the only way I
could've played it. I would've been broken otherwise. I had to say, 'A curse on
both your houses.' The fact that I went to Europe so early is probably what
saved me. It gave me another touchstone - myself.''

Mr. Baldwin did not limit his ''bearing witness'' to racial matters. He opposed
American military involvement in Vietnam as early as 1963, and in the early
1960's he began to criticize discrimination against homosexuals.

Mr. Baldwin's literary achievements and his activism made him a world figure and
to the end of his life brought him many honors in this country and abroad. The
French Government made him a Commander of the Legion of Honor in 1986.

Yet Mr. Baldwin was also clearly disappointed that, despite his undeniable
powers as an essayist, his novels and plays drew decidely mixed reviews.

''Go Tell It on the Mountain,'' his first book and first novel, published in
1953, was widely praised. Partly autobiographical, since Mr. Baldwin himself was
the son of a minister, the book tells of a poor boy growing up in Harlem in the
1930's under the tyranny of his father, an autocratic preacher who hated his
son.

Mr. Baldwin said in 1985 that in many ways the book remained the keystone of his
career.

'' 'Mountain' is the book I had to write if I was ever going to write anything
else,'' he said. ''I had to deal with what hurt me most. I had to deal, above
all, with my father. He was my model. I learned a lot from him. Nobody's ever
frightened me since.''

But the reception accorded his other works was at best lukewarm, and his frank
discussion of homosexuality in ''Giovanni's Room'' (1956) and ''Another
Country'' (1962) drew criticism from within and outside the civil-rights
movement.

In a celebrated polemic in the late 1960's, Eldridge Cleaver, then a member of
the Black Panther Party, asserted that the novel illustrated Mr. Baldwin's
''agonizing, total hatred of blacks.''

Another assessment of Mr. Baldwin was offered by the poet Langston Hughes, who
observed, ''Few American writers handle words more effectively in the essay form
than James Baldwin. To my way of thinking, he is much better at provoking
thought in the essay than he is in arousing emotion in fiction.''

Mr. Baldwin's other works included the novel ''Tell Me How Long the Train's Been
Gone,'' the stage plays ''Blues For Mister Charlie,'' and ''The Amen Corner,''
and ''The Evidence of Things Not Seen,'' a long essay on the murder of 28 black
children in Atlanta in 1980 and 1981.

Characteristically, Mr. Baldwin did not shrink from acknowledging the lesser
view of his works of fiction, nor that his fame had slipped since the early
1970's.

''I'm very vulnerable to all of that,'' he said in a 1985 interview, referring
to what he described in an early essay as the ''dangerous, unending and
unpredictable battle'' of being a writer.

''The rise and fall of one's reputation,'' he mused. ''What can you do about it?
I think that comes with the territory.''

''Any real artist,'' he said, ''will never be judged in the time of his time;
whatever judgment is delivered in the time of his time cannot be trusted.''

James Baldwin was born in 1924 in Harlem and attended DeWitt Clinton High School
in the Bronx. He was a precocious writer, and by his early 20's was publishing
reviews and essays in such publications as The New Leader, The Nation,
Commentary and Partisan Review, and socializing with the circle of New York
writers and intellectuals that included Randall Jarrell, Dwight Macdonald,
Lionel Trilling, Delmore Schwartz, Irving Howe and William Barrett, among
others.

Yet, Mr. Baldwin was among the last one would have initially marked for a
leadership role in a national movement. Soft-spoken, with a manner of speaking
that mirrored his complex writing style, and physically slight, he thought of
himself for many years as ugly, and wrote poignantly of his struggle to accept
the way he looked.

He is survived by his mother, Berdis Baldwin; five sisters, Paula Whaley, Gloria
Smart and Barbara Jamison, all of New York City, Ruth Crum of Ossining, N.Y.,
and Elizabeth Dingle of Alexandria, Va., and three brothers, Wilmer, George and
David, all of New York City.

The funeral is to be held on Tuesday at noon at the Cathedral of St. John the
Divine, 112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.

BALDWIN'S BITTER FIRE

The idea of white supremacy rests simply on the fact that white men are the
creators of civilization (the present civilization, which is the only one that
matters; all previous civilizations are simply ''contributions'' to our own) and
are therefore civilization's guardians and defenders. Thus it was impossible for
Americans to accept the black man as one of themselves, for to do so was to
jeopardize their status as white men. But not so to accept him was to deny his
human reality, his human weight and complexity, and the strain of denying the
overwhelmingly undeniable forced Americans into rationalizations so fantastic
that they approached the pathological.
  -  ''Notes of a Native Son'' (1955)


People who shut their eyes to reality simply invite their own destruction, and
anyone who insists on remaining in a state of innocence long after that
innocence is dead turns himself into a monster.
  -  ''Notes of a Native Son''


I am very much concerned that American Negroes achieve their freedom here in the
United States. But I am also concerned for their dignity, for the health of
their souls, and must oppose any attempt that Negroes may make to do to others
what has been done to them. I think I know - we see it around us every day - the
spiritual wasteland to which that road leads.
  -  ''The Fire Next Time''


If one is continually surviving the worst that life can bring, one eventually
ceases to be controlled by a fear of what life can bring; whatever it brings
must be borne. And at this level of experience one's bitterness begins to be
palatable, and hatred becomes too heavy a sack to carry.
  -  ''The Fire Next Time''


Color is not a human or a personal reality; it is a political reality.
  -  ''The Fire Next Time'' (1963)


I do not wish to see Negroes become the equal of their murderers. I wish us to
become equal to ourselves. To become a people so free in themselves that they
will have no need to - fear - others - and have no need to murder others.
  -  Spoken by the character Meridian Henry in the play ''Blues for Mister
Charlie'' (1964)


For our father - how shall I describe our father? - was a ruined Barbados
peasant, exiled in a Harlem which he loathed, where he never saw the sun or the
sky he remembered, where life took place neither indoors nor without, and where
there was no joy. By which I mean, no joy that he remembered. Had it been
otherwise, had he been able to bring with him into the prison where he perished
any of the joy he had felt on that far-off island, then the air of the sea and
the impulse to dancing would sometimes have transfigured our dreadful rooms. Our
lives might have been very different. But no, he brought with him from Barbados
only black rum and a blacker pride, and magic incantations which neither healed
nor saved.
  -  ''Tell Me How Long the Train's Been Gone'' (1968)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of James Baldwin (Nancy Crampton); James Baldwin on a street in
Paris (pg. D27) (Magnum)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 3, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SIHANOUK MEETS CAMBODIA CHIEF

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 393 words

DATELINE: FERE-EN-TARDENOIS, France, Dec. 2


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian leader, met today with Prime
Minister Hun Sen of the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government in a first
tentative effort to negotiate an end to the guerrilla war in their country.

In a brief news conference after the six-hour meeting, Prince Ranariddh,
Prince's Sihanouk's son, said the meeting had been ''very warm but frank.'' He
added that meetings would take place Thursday and perhaps Friday to work out
details for a second round of negotiations, to be held in Pyongyang, North
Korea. He said no date had been set for the future talks.

Mr. Hun Sen told reporters that the discussion had been ''friendly'' and was
''an opening for a real solution'' to the guerrilla conflict. But the Cambodian
Prime Minister emphasized that no agreement had been reached.

The meeting marked the first time that Prince Sihanouk has entered into
negotiations with members of the Cambodian Government, which was installed after
Vietnam invaded in December 1978 to end the three-year reign of terror by the
Communist Khmer Rouge.

It took place in the small French village of Fere-en-Tardenois, about 60 miles
from Paris, at a hotel next to the crumbling ruins of a 16th-century chateau.

Prince Sihanouk has been the leader of a three-party guerrilla movement,
including the Khmer Rouge and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, that
is seeking to topple the Government. But the Prince is on what he calls a
one-year leave-of-absence as president of the coalition, a move that is widely
considered to be an effort to circumvent the Khmer Rouge's opposition to direct
talks with the Cambodian Government. The Khmer People's National Liberation
Front has given cautious approval to the talks.

Khek Sysoda, a spokesman for Prince Sihanouk, said the talks should be
considered only as ''private conversations'' between the Prince and the
Cambodian Government, rather than official negotiations.

Another member of the Prince Sihanouk's entourage, who asked not to be
identified, said, however, that the Prince is insisting that the next round of
talks in Pyongyang be labeled official negotiations. He also said Prince
Sihanouk would be willing to travel to Hanoi for direct talks with the
Vietnamese, but only if a Vietnamese official visits him here in France or in
North Korea to work out the details in advance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 167 words



U.N. Effort on Gulf Falters

Efforts to arrange a truce between Iran and Iraq appeared near collapse after
the head of the United Nations reportedly made no progress in talks with an
Iranian official. Page A13.

Panama Ousts U.S. Agency

The Panamanian Government has ordered the United States to close its Agency for
International Development operation in Panama. Page A3.

Vietnam Sentences 17

A court sentenced 17 people to prison on charges of trying to mount a guerrilla
invasion with American and Thai backing. Page A10.

Coliseum Project in Doubt

Salomon Brothers is backing away from a huge development planned for Columbus
Circle, officials say, jeopardizing the project. But New York City officials say
they are close to a deal to keep NBC headquarters in Rockefeller Center. Pages
B1 and B3.

For Drivers, Sounds of War

A toy that simulates war sounds has become an overnight sensation among drivers
who want to ''zap'' other drivers, retailers say. Page D1.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, DECEMBER 4, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words



International    A3-17


 Striving to stabilize the dollar and spur economic growth, West Germany's
central bank cut its key interest rate in a move that was soon followed by
interest rate cuts by six other European central banks.    Page A1


 News analysis: The coordinated cuts in European interest rates should stabilize
the dollar for a while. But great uncertainty surrounds the intentions of the
Reagan Administration, which is juggling conflicting aims.    D2


 Conservative critics do not know what the latest arms control agreement with
the Soviet Union would accomplish and have accepted the idea ''that war is
inevitable,'' President Reagan said.    A1


 Mikhail S. Gorbachev is a hit with Americans, winning twice as many favorable
opinions as negative ones, and has persuaded a majority that he is opening up
the Soviet system, a New York Times/CBS News Poll found.    A1


 The Gorbachev vision of America, dominated by a military-industrial complex and
ruling class, seems out of sync with the elightened views of a rising number of
Russians.    A1


 President Reagan, retreating from his previous statements, said the Iran-contra
affair was not a scandal
 The U.N. has made no progress in efforts to negotiate a cease-fire between Iran
and Iraq. Officials said the talks between Secretary General Javier Perez de
Cuellar and a senior Iranian official were snagged.    A13


 A court sentenced 17 Vietnamese to prison terms on charges of planning a
guerrilla invasion with United States and Thai backing after a three-day trial
conducted in Ho Chi Minh City with maximum publicity.    A10


 Panama oust U.S. aid agency

    A3


 Haiti's politicians doubt vote plan

    A3


 New Delhi journal: Newspaper opposed to Gandhi feels heat

    A4


 Sandinistas and contras open peace talks

    A8


 Kim Dae Jung has crowds, but does he have votes?

    A10


National    A18-32, B5-7


 Tax increases worth $9 billion that would most affect businesses and
higher-income Americans, but in relatively limited ways, effective Jan. 1, were
unanimously approved by the Senate Finance Committee.    A1


 A $587 billion spending bill for 1988 that requires $7.6 billion in cuts
accepted by Congress and the White House was approved in the House, but the bill
includes several key items opposed by the White House.    D6


 Stocks plummeted in a selling wave that accelerated in the last half-hour. The
Dow Jones industrial average lost 72.44 points, closing at 1,776.53, a decline
of 3.92 percent and the lowest point since the Oct. 19 crash.    D1


 Cuban inmates signed an agreement with the Government late Thursday night,
ending their 11-day uprising at the Federal prison in Atlanta and freeing 89
hostages.    A1


 The U.S. has halted low-level flights for the new B-1 bomber, whose main
mission is low-level bombing. A B-1 crashed on Sept. 28, killing three of six
crew members, after it ran into a flight of birds.    A1


 A Delta pilot taxied his jet onto a runway at Los Angeles as a United Airlines
plane was taking off, but the United jet was able to complete a normal takeoff.
A Government investigation was ordered.    A23


 The President praised George Bush, but Mr. Reagan said that as titular head of
the Republican Party, he could not endorse one aspirant for its Presidential
nomination.    A1


 Key views of chemical reactions have been achieved by American scientists. They
have invented a way to detect events that occur in ultra-fast reactions with
pulses of light lasting only one-millionth of one-billionth of a second.    A18


 Instant wedding chapels where the fact of the ceremony is kept private are
increasingly popular in California, where one in every three weddings is now
performed in the commercial facilities.    A18


 Thousand Oaks journal: Reagan Library plan comes to town

    A18


 Hispanic groups sue over Texas education

    A18


 Deaver prosecution rests case

    A26


 States mandating AIDS education triple in 6 months

    B5


Washington Talk    A32


 Liberal groups are warily silent on Kennedy nomination
 A Congressional trivia quiz
Regional    B1-5


 The U.S. will head the inquiry into suspected false arrests by officers of the
New York City Transit Police Department, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the United States
Attorney in Manhattan, announced.    A1


 A high-ranking state police officer was charged with extortion in a scheme to
sell false Vermont birth certificates to people seeking American passports. He
is responsible for investigating assertions of corruption and misconduct in the
force.    B2


 A corrections officer denied in testimony that he or any of his associates at
the Bronx House of Detention had ever willfully allowed another inmate to attack
Larry Davis, a 21-year-old murder defendant.    B5


 A scheme to resell 1,000 handguns ordered by mail with the use of a valid
Federal license was described by prosecutors as a Bronx man was indicted in the
c.o.d. shipments of the guns to his apartment.    B4


 Salomon Brothers has withdrawn as a co-owner and principal tenant of a huge
commercial and residential development planned for Columbus Circle, putting the
future of the project in doubt, several officials said.    B1


 An accord on a plan to keep NBC from leaving its headquarters at Rockefeller
Center may be near, according to Mayor Koch and other New York City officials.
    B3


 News analysis: the Cuomo effort to force the airing of unfavorable rumors about
him is seen by some as a strategy to halt the rumors and dramatically punish
people the Governor believes spread them.    B3


 Report says erosion caused bridge collapse

    B1


 Inquiry started into allegations against judge

    B1


 From Lake Woebegon to the edge of the Hudson

    B1


 Street woman pleas for freedom

    B2


 Transit officers criticize halting of decoy squad's operations

    B4


 Neediest Cases    B24


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Jails 17 for Attempted Guerrilla Invasion

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 839 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Dec. 3


A Vietnamese tribunal sentenced 17 people to prison today on charges of trying
to stage a guerrilla invasion with American and Thai backing.

The three-day trial, conducted with maximum publicity on the stage of the
municipal theater here, turned into an unexpected, sustained attack on the
United States and Thailand at a time when Hanoi is trying to improve relations
with both nations.

Uncharacteristically, China - usually portrayed here as the third partner in an
anti-Vietnamese clique - was not mentioned as a supporter of the rebel
organization, identified by the Vietnamese as the Armed Forces of Resistance.
The group was said to have infiltrated Laos from Thailand in July, planning to
enter Vietnam to commit sabotage and foment an uprising.

The leader of the guerrillas was reported to be a former South Vietnamese
admiral, Hoang Co Minh, who became an American citizen a few years ago. Hanoi
says Mr. Minh was killed in Laos in August with more than 100 other members of
the group.

Picture of a U.S. General

''Obviously, the U.S. imperialists are the mastermind, the inciter and supporter
of Hoang Co Minh and his followers,'' the 16-page indictment said. The only
evidence offered was a picture of Mr. Minh meeting an American general,
identified as Paul Weigand, in Tokyo, possibly in 1982. [In Washington,
officials of the Army, Air Force and Marine Corps said they could find no record
of a Gen. Paul Weigand.] At the trial today, the presiding judge, Tran Tuan Sy,
called the Thais ''the implementing agents of the American reactionaries.'' The
indictment and court testimony held that Thailand had armed, trained and
recruited resistance fighters from refugee camps where Vietnamese exiles were
''starved and beaten.''

Reporters here for the trial could not recall such charges of abuse from
Vietnamese refugees, who are visited regularly in Thai camps.

The United States and Vietnam do not have diplomatic relations. No American
officials are reachable from here for comment.

Dinh Van Be, charged with being one of the commanders, received a term of life
imprisonment. Sixteen other defendants were given terms ranging from 3 to 19
years, and another defendant was put on probation.

All the defendants had pleaded guilty after extensive confessions.

Judge Sy demanded the deportation from the United States of what he called the
remaining rebel ringleader, identified as Nguyen Kim. He also said the Thai and
American Governments should dissolve such resistance groups now or ''bear the
responsibility for the destabilization of Southeast Asia.''

New York Group Mentioned

Among the groups mentioned was a New York City committee reported to have been
set up in 1984 and based in the Murry Bergtraum High School at 411 Pearl Street
near Chinatown. Other groups were reported to be found in California. Ethnic
Chinese defendants in this trial have been so identified in the indictments.

The trial proceedings were broadcast live through loudspeakers in the street
outside the municipal theater, where a crowd gathered this afternoon for the
sentencing.

An exhibition of evidence was mounted in the galleries around the main
auditorium. In one exhibit, an organizational chart of the resistance army had
an American flag at its apex. The indictment said American intelligence agents
worked with the group.

Those Vietnamese who will talk about this trial and foreign diplomats in the
region who have been following events since the attempted invasion of central
Vietnam say Hanoi may intend to send a variety of messages.

Message to Young Dissenters

Internally, the proceedings and the sentences meted out to the young men, most
in their 20's, tells the country's restive youth that this kind of dissent will
be dealt with harshly. The sentences also make clear that in an era of some
economic liberalization under a new party leadership, political opposition will
not be tolerated.

The Government may have also wanted to deter Vietnamese from fleeing to Thailand
by repeatedly describing refugee camps there as places of terror and hard labor.
More boat people are fleeing Vietnam this year than at any time since the early
1980's.

Some diplomats suggest that in the point-counterpoint politics of Vietnam these
treason cases, which reached trial unusually quickly, may show the determination
of the Interior Ministry or other security organizations not to appear soft
toward the West or Vietnam's non-Communist neighbors.

Foreign Ministry officials have been playing down the American angle in
discussions with reporters this week.

Finally, the trial coincides, many diplomats think deliberately, with a
much-publicized Vietnamese troop withdrawal from Cambodia and the opening of
talks between the Hanoi-backed Phnom Penh Government and the Cambodian
resistance movement under Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

In the trial, prosecutors referred again and again to the case as a
demonstration of the need for ''Vietnam-Laos-Kampuchean solidarity.'' Two
defendants were Cambodians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of defendants in court (NYT/Fred R. Conrad)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Sihanouk Gets Pledge on Vietnam's Troops

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 196 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Dec. 3


Prince Norodom Sihanouk met again today with Prime Minister Hun Sen of the
Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government and said Hanoi pledged to pull its
occupation troops from the country next year if the two could reach an agreement
to settle their differences.

Previously Hanoi had said it would stay in Cambodia until 1990. Some 140,000
Vietnamese are occupying Cambodia, opposed by a guerrilla force composed of the
Khmer Rouge and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front.

The talks, held in a luxury hotel at the village of Fere-en-Tardenois, about 60
miles from Paris, began Wednesday. They were the first negotiations between the
warring factions since the Cambodian Government was installed after Vietnam
invaded the country in December 1978 to end the three-year reign of terror by
the Khmer Rouge.

The talks are to resume Friday, when an agreement is expected to be reached for
formal negotiations in Pyongyang, North Korea, in April.

In Washington, the State Department spokesman, Charles E. Redman, said the
United States would not support any deal unless its provided for free elections
and included the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 5, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HOPES RAISED FOR CAMBODIA PACT

BYLINE: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 342 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Dec. 4


Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia and its exiled former ruler, Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, expressed joint hopes today for a political reconciliation that could
lead to the withdrawal of Vietnamese occupation forces and the installment of a
government of national unity.

Their vaguely worded communique was issued here after three days of talks
between the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh and Cambodian resistance
forces represented by Prince Sihanouk.

A coalition of the Khmer Rouge and non-Communist guerrillas has been fighting
Vietnamese troops since 1978, when they invaded Cambodia to liberate it from the
brutal rule of the Khmer Rouge Government that seized power three years earlier.


'Victory of Reconciliation'

The talks were the first that Prince Sihanouk, a leader of the Cambodian
resistance, has held with the pro-Vietnamese Government, which has been kept in
power by an estimated 140,000 Vietnamese troops.

''This historic encounter between Prince Sihanouk and myself has ended with
success,'' Mr. Hun Sen, a former guerrilla fighter, said at a news conference at
the village of Fere-en-Tardenois, where the two men met. ''It is a victory of
the policy of national reconciliation of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and also that
of the national policy of reconciliation of the Popular Republic of Kampuchea.''

The four-point communique did not appear to go significantly beyond a statement
of good intentions and did not mention an early withdrawal of Vietnamese troops
from Cambodia.

But Mr. Hun Sen said Thursday that if an agreement were reached, Vietnamese
forces would leave the country earlier than the 1990 date they had set for their
departure. He indicated this could happen as early as next year.

The accord reached today called for expanded talks to resume in
Fere-en-Tardenois in January and, at a later date, in Pyongyang, where Prince
Sihanouk maintains a residence in exile. It invited ''other Cambodian parties,''
an allusion to other groups opposed to the Vietnamese presence in Cambodia, to
join in.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Disillusioned Brazil Awakes From a Dream of Prosperity

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1832 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, Dec. 5


When Mario Saleiro, a young Brazilian architect, was offered a job in Portugal
this year, he jumped at the chance. ''I hope to return here one day,'' he
explained while packing, ''but everything has become so difficult.''

Alda Barreto, a secretary for a Swiss company, came to Brazil with her
Portuguese parents as a child. Now 41 years old, she also plans to move to
Lisbon. ''Everyone seems to be so fed up,'' she said. ''People are so
disillusioned by the lack of political change.''

For a country that has traditionally received poor migrants searching for a new
life, the phenomenon of middle-class Brazilians wanting to leave is a
particularly painful symptom of a pessimism that grips Brazil today.

Only three years ago, this nation of 140 million people was filled with hope as
two decades of military rule drew to a close. As recently as last year, a brief
consumer boom kept spirits high. Yet now, amid raging inflation, political
confusion and social tensions, Brazil seems to have lost its way.

'No Longer an Easy Answer'

Through the 1970's and early 1980's, rapid economic growth persuaded many
Brazilians that their country was predestined to be a great power. Today, it is
as if that future has been snatched away from them.

''What gets people down is that there is no longer an easy answer,'' an
industrialist said. ''Every country goes through bad periods. The United States
went through the Vietnam War. Well, it's now Brazil's turn to be tested.''

The exact number of Brazilians who prefer to opt out of this challenge is hard
to measure because many leave as tourists. But Portugal, Italy, Australia and
Canada report a sharp increase in requests for work permits and residence visas.
One recent public-opinion poll indicated that two-thirds of urban middle-class
Brazilians dream of living abroad.

The complaints heard from those leaving are also voiced by those staying. ''This
is a country with no rules, no responsibility, no shame,'' said Antonio Jose de
Andrade, a businessman. ''We're living the end of an illusion.'' Disappointed in
Civilian Rule Behind this reaction is the disenchantment and almost personal
sense of betrayal felt by many Brazilians who, in their optimism, believed that
the return of civilian rule in early 1985 would resolve the many social and
economic problems.

Instead, it has been a disappointment. Along with record inflation, there has
been a deterioration of public services and living standards. Urban violence has
risen to the point where many middle-class women leave home only by car. Poverty
is more visible than ever and corruption is widely believed to be on the rise.

At the same time, the political vacuum left by the generals has been filled with
such disorder that many Brazilians have already tired of civilian politicians.
Many of those still in positions of influence, including President Jose Sarney,
were formerly allied to the military and now represent continuity rather than a
much-desired break with the past.

Even now, Brazilians do not have a president of their choice. Their first
frustration came when the generals insisted that Brazil's first civilian
president since 1964 be picked by an electoral college and not by direct popular
vote. Then, after the opposition candidate, Tancredo Neves, was elected amid
much enthusiasm, he died without taking office and was succeeded by his running
mate, Mr. Sarney.

'Never Voted for President'

''I'm in my 40's and, can you imagine, I have never voted for president,'' a
lawyer said, recalling that the last direct presidential election was in 1960.

Much of the bitterness toward Mr. Sarney stems from the perception that, though
he has proved to be a weak and indecisive leader and unable to control inflation
or promote social change, he has dedicated his energies to backroom maneuvers
intended to prolong his power and delay new elections.

Yet the present crisis runs deeper than the power struggles of any transition
from dictatorship to democracy. In economics and politics, models that worked
for more than 20 years have collapsed and no consensus has emerged over what
should replace them.

For example, a development strategy long sustained by easy foreign borrowing
must now make way for one that can survive on domestic savings and minimal
credit from abroad. Similarly, despite the end of military rule, Brazil has weak
and inexperienced democratic institutions. Political parties, for example, still
represent regional, economic or personal interests, not clear ideological
options.

Drafting a New Constitution

Looking for a new course, some Brazilians turned expectantly to a Constitutional
Assembly that convened in February to write a constitution. But though its work
is not over, its chaotic debates have stirred fears that it will produce an
unworkable document.

The current hope is that early elections can bring a legitimate and credible
government. Although Mr. Sarney fought with all the resources at his disposal
for an extra year in office, a 93-member drafting commission voted last month
for elections in November 1988, a recommendation that the full 559-member
Constitutional Assembly is expected to endorse.

But even this course is not without perils. The Constitutional Assembly plans to
introduce a parliamentary system of government as of next March, but this could
spawn endless confrontations between president and prime minister. Further,
unless general elections are also called next year, the president chosen in 1988
will be forced to govern with a legislature elected in 1986, a more optimistic
time.

Perhaps, inevitably, in a country accustomed to viewing the armed forces as a
solution of last resort, the recent political paralysis has fed speculation
about a return to military rule.

A recent poll published by a Sao Paulo newspaper showed that, although a
majority of those questioned favored early general elections, a surprising 32
percent said only a military takeover could end the crisis.

The Military and Politics

So far, top military commanders have displayed little nostalgia for government,
but they have remained enormously influential and have not renounced their right
to maintain order.

''Military interventions have never been provoked by the nature of regimes but
rather by the incompetence of those in government,'' the Army Minister, Gen.
Leonidas Pires Goncalves, warned recently.

Ominously, there has already been a resurgence of the kind of rightist civilian
groups that promoted the 1964 coup. The new Association for the Defense of
Democracy, which includes prominent conservatives and retired army officers, has
recently held several highly publicized debates at which the Government and the
left have been equally assailed.

With the generals no longer around to defend business interests, private-sector
groups have also begun flexing their muscles, denouncing Mr. Sarney for failing
to control the budget deficit and attacking the antibusiness tone of the latest
draft constitution.

A Crisis of Confidence

''Brazil faces an unprecedented crisis of confidence,'' Antonio Oliveira Santos,
the president of the National Confederation of Commerce, warned this month.
''The country's traditions are being challenged by the political action of a
well-organized and activist radical minority that obeys a Marxist dialectic.''

The left that conservatives fear, however, is not that of the Communist Party,
the Workers' Party or many other small groups that won a minuscule share of the
vote in midterm elections last November and that have since seen two general
strikes fail for lack of grass-roots support.

Rather, the nemesis of the right, including the armed forces, is the
left-leaning populist Leonel Brizola, now 66 years old, who was a major figure
in the Government ousted in 1964. As the only political leader to place himself
firmly in opposition from the day Mr. Sarney took office, his popularity has
grown in tandem with the disillusionment over the Government.

Yet, oddly, even with tensions building among this country's political, business
and military elites, the lives of most people here are still barely touched by
politics.

''Brazilians are by nature passive and apolitical,'' a foreign diplomat said.
''In any other Latin American country, we'd have riots in the streets by now,
but that's not Brazil.''

Making Ends Meet

Instead, seeming to accept that they have no influence over events, most
Brazilians view the Government exclusively through the prism of their own
struggle to make ends meet. Today, their verdict is uniformly negative. Those
who have neither the option nor the desire to go abroad must simply tighten
their belts.

The chief culprit, inflation, is decades old but, until a price freeze was
instituted in February 1986, wages were indexed to follow prices. When the price
freeze ended, wages were no longer protected by automatic indexation and
triple-digit inflation returned, slashing purchasing power.

For the 60 percent of Brazilian workers who earn less than $100 a month,
inflation averaging more than 10 percent each month has brought acute hardship.
In Rio de Janeiro, peddlers, beggars and muggers have spilled onto the streets,
many sleeping on sidewalks or in parks.

No More Aerobics Classes

Middle-class parents have been trapped between the falling quality of public
schools and the rising fees of private schools, although most appear to prefer
sacrificing luxuries to provide children with a better education. Even Miss
Barreto, the secretary who plans to move and whose $500 a month salary puts her
in the top 10 percent income group, has changed her style of living. ''I can't
afford my aerobics class and I don't use my car in the week any more,'' she
said.

Inflation is merely another symptom of the demise of the model of government-led
economic growth. Throughout the 1970's, when foreign banks were pouring money
into Brazil, the Government could afford to subsidize agriculture,
transportation and exports as well as to finance big public projects.

After the Latin American debt crisis began in 1982, however, new credits dried
up. Needing to service a foreign debt that exceeded $100 billion, Brazil became
a net exporter of capital until hard currency reserves almost ran out. Early
this year, the Government suspended interest payments on its $68 billion debt
and halted major investments.

Today, most economists believe the Government must look to private capital -
both domestic and foreign - to lead the economic recovery, yet the Government
seems reluctant to do so.

It has done nothing to slim the bloated bureaucracy or to sell off state
companies. Still worse, Brazil's debt moratorium, protection of local industry
and proposed labor laws have put off business people.

The lack of investment is so serious that some economists warn that Brazil,
having grown into the eighth-largest economy in the West, may now be entering a
period of stagnation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo beggars camping out in a park near the Modern Art Museum in Rio
de Janeiro (Agencia JB) (pg. 28)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Aid to College Students Up, But Costs Rise Faster

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 3, Page 75, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 453 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 4


College students borrowed $10.1 billion last year, received $9.7 billion in
grants and earned $662 million on subsidized campus jobs, according to the
College Board.

In all, students received a total $20.5 billion in aid from state and local
governments and the institutions themselves, or $535 million more than was
available in 1985-86.

The College Board said Monday that the pool of available student aid has grown
by nearly 21 percent since 1980-81, when students received $17 billion in
assistance. After rising to $17.9 billion in 1981-82, it fell the next year to
$16.6 billion but has climbed each year since then.

College costs, however, have been climbing at twice the general rate of
inflation in the 1980's.

Taking inflation into account, the pool of student aid has shrunk by 6.1 percent
over the past seven school years, the College Board said.

In 1982 dollars, the pool of aid fell from a high of almost $19 billion in
1980-81 to $16.3 billion in 1982-83, then began rebounding. It is currently at
$17.8 billion in 1982 dollars.

One major reason for the steep drop in 1982-83 was that Congress and the Reagan
Administration phased out $2 billion in Social Security benefits for college
students. Also, as Vietnam veterans exhausted their eligibility for college aid,
veterans' educational aid has shrunk from $1.9 billion to $448 million a year.

President Reagan has been unable to persuade Congress to impose other major cuts
in student aid.

Statistics for 1986-87

The College Board reported these statistics about student aid in 1986-87:

* 2.6 million students received Federal Pell Grants, which are based on need,
averaging $1,330 apiece.

* 3.5 million students borrowed an average of $2,381 through the Guaranteed
Student Loan program. Students and 281,000 parents borrowed $9.1 billion through
that program and the Parent Loans for Undergraduate Students program; students
also took out $829 million in Perkins Loans, which once were called National
Direct Student Loans.

* 753,000 students earned an average of $879 each through College Work Study
jobs.

* 1.6 million students received state grants averaging $983.

* 689,000 students received Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grants
averaging $550.

The College Board said 49.4 percent of the aid in 1986-87 was in the form of
loans, 47.4 percent in grants and 3.2 percent in subsidized jobs.

The College Board figures do not count money students earned working
unsubsidized jobs on or off campus.

Over the seven years reviewed in the College Board study, Federal aid rose 8
percent to $15.3 billion, state grant programs rose 88 percent to $1.5 billion
and institutional aid rose 81.3 percent to $3.7 billion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Campus Debate on C.I.A. Reverses 60's Roles

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 3, Page 69, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 624 words

DATELINE: WATERVILLE, Me., Dec. 4


Students at a liberal arts college here are battling for the chance to meet with
Central Intelligence Agency recruiters on campus, something college teachers and
students across the country are trying to ban.

The debate at Colby College has been called a reversal of 1960's activism, with
liberal professors reliving their days as anti-war activists and conservative
students taking the establishment role. And since it erupted, the issue has
elicited comment from many of the state's newspapers, drawn national attention
and polarized the campus. At issue is a faculty motion passed Nov. 11 by a vote
of 5 to 2 to ban C.I.A. recruiters from the campus because of the agency's
''illegal incursions into Nicaragua, its role in illegal arms sales, its illegal
investigations into the lives of private citizens.''

To become effective, it needs the approval of the college president, William R.
Cotter, and the board, which is to consider it at their April meeting.

But the outcry from students against the faculty's position was immediate and
vocal.

''It's very pedantic of the professors to try and decide for us, to become our
conscience as it were,'' said John Whitacre, a senior government major who is
chairman of Colby Republicans. ''It's a very dangerous precedent.'' Mr.
Whitacre, who was one of about a dozen students who interviewed with C.I.A.
recruiters on campus Oct. 21, added, ''There's no telling where it would go
after this.''

Freedom of Choice

The students say they also believe the motion denies them the right to free
speech and freedom of choice, which they note that many of the professors at
Colby fought for while college students in the 1960's and 70's.

''I think it's everybody's right to come here and open opportunities to other
people,'' said Norman Hugo, a senior English major who also interviewed for a
C.I.A. job. ''It's our choice as Americans to take them up on it or not,
especially at a school like this.''

But the professors who passed the motion insist they are not limiting the
C.I.A.'s right to speak on the campus. In fact, they say they support a planned
campus appearance by a C.I.A. representative for an informational talk Wednesday
night.

''It's not a matter of freedom of information or speech,'' said Ira Sadhoff, an
associate professor of English and sponsor of the faculty motion. ''But Colby
College isn't required to allow anyone and everyone to sell their wares on
campus. I don't think we'd have any problem not allowing the Irish Republican
Army or Government of South Africa to recruit.''

Not all faculty members agree, and some have called the motion repressive and
paternalistic.

A Conniption Fit

''If the students were to start passing resolutions saying we shouldn't teach
this or we should teach that, I believe we'd have something in the neighborhood
of a conniption fit,'' said Richard Moss, an associate professor who is chairman
of the history department.

A handful of students at Colby support the faculty. Nineteen students, most of
them members of the newly organized Colby Coalition for Political Action, staged
a protest when the two C.I.A. recruiters arrived on campus, a move similar to
demonstrations held on other campuses.

Roger Bowen, chairman of the government department and the author of a recent
book on illegal activities of the C.I.A. and Federal Bureau of Investigation,
said that as a member of the college community he has a right to express his
views, just as students do.

''If I don't speak out against the C.I.A, I'm not doing my job,'' said Professor
Bowen, who was active in the anti-Vietnam War movement in the United States and
Canada. ''Faculty see themselves as the guardians of liberal values. It is our
job to profess.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
Kabul, Thinking of a Soviet Exit, Seeks Friends at Home

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


THE Red Star is gone from atop the seal of Afghanistan.

It is no longer the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, just the Republic of
Afghanistan. And President Najibullah, the burly former chief of secret police
that Moscow has put in charge of this wild country, is rarely referred to in the
official press these days as ''rafik''or comrade. Something more traditional
than the Marxist salutation, such as ''brother,'' is fine with the head of
state, who now makes a point of being seen in the first row at Islamic Friday
prayers.

All these cosmetic changes last week were an effort to make the Soviet-sponsored
regime here palatable - less Communist and more Moslem - to the Islamic
fundamentalist guerrillas who now dominate much of the country after eight
stubborn years of resistance.

General Najibullah (who has only one name, in the tradition of the Pushtun, the
major ethnic group) convened a traditional Afghan gathering, called a loya
jergah, held in times of national crisis. This meeting of tribal chieftains and
other influential people ratified a new constitution and also acclaimed him as
President, a new, powerful post. The general had been installed by the Soviet
forces as the Communist Party chief on May 4, 1986. He replaced Babrak Karmal,
who had been Moscow's first choice as national leader, after Soviet troops
killed Hafizullah Amin, the Marxist ruler who had taken power in September 1979.

But last week's elaborate charade made little difference in the political
reality: an isolated Government propped up by 115,000 Soviet troops, facing what
one Western diplomat described as ''a whole countryside in revolt.'' Fifteen
minutes into the new President's welcoming address, four rapid rocket blasts
from the Mujahedeen guerrillas landed on a nearby hillside, shaking the meeting
room and sending the florid-faced new Soviet ambassador, Pavel P. Mozhayev,
scurrying to his limousine at the first opportunity.

The theatrics seemed to cloak a mounting desperation on the part of Mikhail S.
Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, to extract his country from the Afghan quagmire. A
proposal for a 12-month withdrawal timetable, if only the United States will cut
off aid to the rebels, particularly the supply of the devastatingly effective
Stinger missiles, is expected to arise at this week's summit meeting between Mr.
Gorbachev and President Reagan in Washington. President Najibullah himself made
the proposal, saying it had been ''negotiated with the Soviet side.''

Mr. Gorbachev said that ''if the American Administration really does sincerely
want that problem to be resolved . . . it could be done very quickly,'' an
apparent allusion to the demand that the United States stop supplying the
anti-Communist rebels. But President Reagan refers to the Afghan guerrillas as
''freedom fighters,'' and support for them in Washington is widespread and
vigorous.

The maneuverings in Afghanistan last week were complicated. On one level, the
convening of the loya jergah was presented by the Afghan regime as a chance for
a broad-based coalition government to supplant the Communist Government after or
during a Soviet withdrawal. There were few who believed that was possible.

More likely, Western diplomats said, Moscow could use the pretense of a
non-Communist government to cut itself loose from the Najibullah regime. ''The
Soviets are looking for a fig leaf, a decent interval if you will, to get
out,''. said a diplomat in Moscow. ''Of course, when they leave, the whole thing
will collapse.''

At the same time, some Western diplomats saw President Najibullah's offer of a
Soviet withdrawal in less than 12 months if the rebels agreed to a cease-fire -
a proposal certain to be rejected - as a devious way of locking Moscow into
supporting him for another year. ''If this is a puppet, they have pretty weak
strings,'' said a diplomat here. Another added: ''Najibullah is very tough. The
Soviets get upset with the facts he creates.''

Blunders and Ferocity

The Afghan experience has been bad for the Soviet Union. American diplomats
insist, perhaps disingenuously, that they hate to apply the Vietnam analogy.
Then they segue into almost gleeful comparisons of enclave strategies and
visions of the Soviet troops leaving with their supporters clinging to the
helicopter runners.

The Soviet Union was drawn directly into Afghanistan through the blunders and
ferocity of its local ideological proxies. The Communists here, known as the
Peoples Democratic Party of Aghanistan, is divided into two hostile factions.

Khalq, more doctrinaire, is largely rural and primarily Pushtun in ethnic
origin. Parcham is the faction of the urban intellectuals who speak Dari, a form
of Persian.

Despite the massive presence of the Soviet troops, the tide of battle has
changed drastically in the last year because the Stinger missiles have cut the
crucial Soviet helicopter advantage. The Russians have completely abandoned 12
of 30 provinces and, even with winter coming, the Mujahedeen are continuing to
fight, keeping open their supply lines to Pakistan.

Finally, this may simply be an ungovernable country, all the more so under
Communist doctrine. ''The Soviets,'' a Western diplomat said, ''are asking
Najibullah to dig his own grave.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Soviet-backed Afghan Pres. Najibullah (Abbas); Islamic
mujahedeen (Magnum/Steve McCurry)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
Secrets of the Summit

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 4; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 771 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


My old interlocutor Georgi Arbatov, shunted aside as Head Flack by Valentin
Falin (the Ethnic Bomber) and his Novosti aide, Gennadi Gerasimov (my
look-alike), probably has some summit questions on his mind that I am free to
answer.

1. Why did Defense Secretary Weinberger choose this moment to quit?

Because Ronald Reagan sided with George Shultz and Howard Baker in their
acquiescence to Senator Sam Nunn's demand to interpret narrowly the ABM treaty
through October 1988.

Cap was aware that the seemingly innocuous promise (not to test space defense
techniques before we have any to test) is also the key concession to the
Russians: by injecting the central decision to prevent ''Star Wars'' testing
into the final stages of our Presidential campaign, Mr. Reagan has all but
guaranteed the continuance of the restrictions that Mr. Gorbachev seeks so
eagerly. Front-runner George Bush has already announced that ''peace'' will be
his theme, and Bob Dole might go with the prevailing breeze; only long shot Jack
Kemp would join the space-defense issue.

2. Why was Frank Gaffney, Last of the Hard-line Mohicans at the Pentagon, forced
out so abruptly?

Because he was Weinberger's man on George Shultz's most recent mission to
Moscow, and sent a red-hot secret communication to his boss at Defense
criticizing the meekness first shown in our reaction to Soviet demands that the
summit meeting include a limitation on S.D.I. testing. Our Big Ear alerted Frank
Carlucci, Cap's successor at Defense, who showed Mr. Gaffney the door. Senators
will soon ask to see the critical cable.

3. Why did the Russians appear to drop the demand for resolution of the testing
issue at this summit?

Surely you know, Georgi - because Anatoly Dobrynin learned that Sam Nunn's lust
to put Senate institutional power ahead of everything would combine with the
likelihood of Mr. Bush's nomination to do the test-restricting for him. While
watching the strained emphasis on support for S.D.I. at the farewell ceremony,
the Russians realized the reason for the Weinberger surrender. They now
understand the way to handle Mr. Reagan: Never murder a man who is committing
suicide.

4. Does the hullabaloo on the right threaten Senate ratification of this week's
treaty?

Treaty opponents can count on only 15 votes, and it was assumed they would
settle for reservations on verification and progress on conventional reductions.
But Mr. Reagan's blunderbuss accusation that treaty opponents were obsessed by
the inevitability of war has made a war on the treaty inevitable.

The opposition strategy will be to take as a precedent Sam Nunn's unprecedented
examination of all the files on the ABM treaty, and to require the
Administration to submit to the Senate the entire seven-year I.N.F. treaty
negotiation record. What is sauce for the ABM-limiting goose is sauce for the
I.N.F.-opposing gander; the voluminous record could then be examined for a year
or two.

To counter this (and to reinstate himself in Republican ranks after his Bork
defection), Senator Arlen Specter is preparing a resolution calling for the
Senate to stop tying the President's hands with narrow interpretations of old
treaties. The Senator supports Judge Abraham Sofaer's legal argument that the
understanding reached between governments - not internal discussions within each
government - should be controlling.

The Specter resolution will join the lonely hard right to the soft right in
support of S.D.I. testing; that may diminish the Nunn pressure, confound the
Dobrynin expectation, and wipe the big grin off the face of Ronald Reagan's new
bedfellow, anti-S.D.I. Democratic whip Alan Cranston.

5. What surprise do pundits expect from Mr. Gorbachev to upstage Mr. Reagan?

At the first Ron-Gorby summit meeting in Geneva, much last-minute teasing was
done on withdrawal from Afghanistan. Because the Stinger-supplied Afghan
patriots are defeating the 115,000 Soviet invaders, we can expect the teasing to
intensify. A summiteer admits that Soviet battle deaths reached 12,000 three
years ago; we can assume that the number has doubled by now, and that the
admitted figure is half the real body count. That takes Soviet losses into the
range of American dead in Vietnam.

Mr. Gorbachev will offer a timetable for withdrawal if we will promise to cut
off support to the freedom fighters two months after the retreat begins. Mr.
Reagan should counter-offer to end military aid to the Afghan resistance on the
day the last Russian leaves, and when no Soviet arms are being sent into
Afghanistan or Iran or Nicaragua. That would be a good surprise.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: DECEMBER 6, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 90, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 904 words

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     4    WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
            (Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
            woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.

 2     5    GARDEN OF SHADOWS, by V. C. Andrews.
            (Pocket, $4.95.) The beginnings of the evil that
            beset the Dollanganger family in four previously
            published novels.

 3     1    SECRET FIRE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon,
            $4.50.) An Englishwoman, abducted by a Russian
            prince, makes her captor her romantic slave.

 4     6    WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Avon, $5.95.)
            Iran during the month following the Shah's
            departure.

 5     1    CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $4.50.) A
            mystery writer dreams up a multimillion-dollar
            jewel heist that becomes horribly real.

 6     1    THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.
            (Bantam, $4.95.) Complex family relationships in
            South Carolina's low country and New York City.

 7     1    PATIENCE OF A SAINT, by Andrew M. Greeley.
            (Warner, $4.95.) A hard-bitten newspaperman on
            the trail of a wily politician.

 8     1    SECRET FOR A NIGHTINGALE, by Victoria
            Holt. (Fawcett, $4.95.) An English nurse discovers
            the truth about her husband's tragedy.

 9     1    THE DINNER PARTY, by Howard Fast. (Dell,
            $4.95.) The feelings of family and friends surface
            at a Washington get-together.

10     4    THE PRINCESS, by Jude Devereaux. (Pocket,
            $3.95.) A European princess's passionate affair
            with a United States naval officer.

11     21   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley,
            $4.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
            World War III.

12     8    FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen
            Coonts. (Pocket, $4.95.) Navy aviators in the
            Vietnam War.

13     16   IT, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)
            Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman
            who grew up in a small Maine town.

14     1    NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Pocket,
            $4.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans from being
            discovered by the Germans.

15 *   7    PAPER MONEY, by Ken Follett. (Signet/NAL,
            $3.95.) Crime, high finance and journalism form
            the threads of this newly reissued 1977 thriller.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction

 1     9    ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Bantam,
           $4.95.) A case involving the
            1979 murder of a high school teacher and the
            disappearance of her two children.

 2     4    DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland
            with Greg Lawrence. (Jove, $4.50.) The ballerina
            recalls her checkered career.

 3     2    POOR LITTLE RICH GIRL, by C. David
            Heymann. (Pocket, $4.50.) The life of the
            Woolworth heiress Barbara Hutton.

 4    215   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
            (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
            spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 5     32   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Berkley, $6.95.)
            Anecdotes and ruminations by the television star
            and father of five.

 6     57   WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.
            (North Point, $12.50.) A woman's adventures
            flying in Africa and across the Atlantic in the 30's.

 7     41   NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.
            (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
            author says, and we must confront them to grow.

 8     5    WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney.
            (Berkley, $3.95.) Essays on contemporary life by
            the journalist and television commentator.

 9     5    PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon
            Eisenhower. (Zebra, $4.50.) The biography of the
            former First Lady, written by her daughter.

10     20   MAYFLOWER MADAM, by Sydney Biddle
            Barrows with William Novak. (Ivy/Ballantine,
            $4.95.) A member of one of America's oldest
            families tells of the world's oldest profession.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1     6    THE FAR SIDE OBSERVER, by Gary Larson.
            (Andrews & McMeel, $5.95.) A new collection of
            cartoons.

 2     2    CATMOPOLITAN, by Ilene Hochberg. (Pocket,
            $9.95.) Humorous celebrations of the cat in the
            format of Cosmopolitan magazine.

 3     15   BILLY AND THE BOINGERS BOOTLEG, by
            Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $7.95.) More
            ''Bloom County'' cartoon strips.

 4     32   CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson.
            (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $6.95.) Cartoons
            about a boy, his toy tiger and his parents.

 5     5    GARFIELD SWALLOWS HIS PRIDE, by Jim
            Davis. (Ballantine, $5.95.) The 14th collection of
            cartoons about a fat cat.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States.

* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PHOTOGRAPHY

BYLINE: By ANDY GRUNDBERG; Andy Grundberg is a photography critic for The New
York Times and the co-author with Kathleen McCarthy Gauss of ''Photography and
Art: Interactions Since 1946.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2625 words


IT sometimes seems that photographers and commercial publishers are incompatible
species, destined endlessly to malign each other. Photographers complain that
publishers don't understand that pictures have their own merits; publishers
counter that picture books don't sell unless they have a ''hook.'' Still,
somehow, good books of good photography manage to find their way into print.
This is providential, for as the influence of magazine photography continues to
decline, books have become an increasingly important outlet for pictures that
look better on the page than on gallery walls. The audience for books is far
smaller than that of the old Life magazine, but it is better than none.

There seem to be a number of small presses willing to take chances, especially
in the realm of photojournalism. Recent examples include Charles Harbutt's
''Progresso'' (Archive) and Bill Burke's ''Portraits'' (Ecco Press) and ''I Want
to Take Picture'' (Nexus Press). Picture books also have appeared from
unexpected places, such as the Atlantic Monthly Press (Tony Mendoza's amusing
''Stories'') and Doubleday (John Ranard and Joyce Carol Oates's jewel-like
volume ''On Boxing''). Together with the major houses for photog-raphy -
Abbeville, Harry N. Abrams, Aperture, et al. - they make for a lively publishing
scene.

And what about the state of photography itself? Judged by its covers, it is
lively, too. Travel photography is this year's newest retro fashion. Of the
scores of books devoted to pictures of foreign lands, though, only a few stand
out: Mitch Epstein's ''In Pursuit of India'' (Aperture), Jill Freedman's Irish
soliloquy ''A Time That Was'' (Friendly Press) and, in a less lyric vein, Tim
Page's ''Ten Years After: Vietnam Today'' (Knopf). There also are magnificent
new monograph-style catalogues devoted to some of the tried-and-true masters of
20th-century photography: ''Andre Kertesz: Diary of Light, 1912-1985,'' from
Aperture, and ''Henri Cartier-Bresson: The Early Work'' and ''Eliot Porter,''
both from the New York Graphic Society/Little, Brown. The Kertesz and Porter
books are coffee-table size, appreciative collections of oft-published work; the
Cartier-Bresson volume is more slim and surprising. And then, of course, there
are books that can be grouped only by the pleasures they provide.

STOPPING TIME: The Photographs of Harold Edgerton. Edited by Gus Kayafas. Text
by Estelle Jussim. 168 pp. (Abrams, $35.) Harold (Doc) Edgerton, the scientist
and engineer who brought electronic flash photography into the world in 1931,
did not confine his inventiveness to jolts of electrons. He wanted to
demonstrate the manifold uses of his action-stopping ''strobe'' device, so he
proceeded, over the course of 50 years, to take pictures with it. These pictures
- of golf swings broken into infinitesimal segments, of bullets piercing
balloons and playing cards, of bats frozen in mid-flight - are surprising,
beautiful and surrealistic. ''Stopping Time'' reproduces more than 100 of these
remarkable photographs, as well as supplying us with the story of the remarkable
man who made them.

''A good experiment is simply one that reveals something previously unknown,''
the M.I.T. Institute Professor remarks in his brief foreword, and part of the
fun of looking at his pictures is trying to decipher their original purpose.
Why, for example, did he bring a football kicker into his studio to get a shot
of the moment the ball leaves the tee? Why did he seek, for 25 years, to capture
the instant in which a fallen drop of milk forms a perfect ''crown'' on a flat
surface? Perhaps it was the same driving curiosity that led him to help in a
futile search for the Loch Ness monster. Or perhaps it was a quest to bring
visual order to the chaotic flux of the world. Most likely it was a bit of both.

An essay by Estelle Jussim, a photo historian, traces Mr. Edgerton's career,
including his association with his friend Jacques-Yves Cousteau and his wartime
contributions to aerial reconaissance. (A picture of Stonehenge at night, taken
in 1944 with light supplied by a plane 1,500 feet in the air, convinced the
Allied forces of the feasibility of aerial flash photography.) Ms. Jussim also
compares his fascination with motion studies to the earlier photographs of
Eadweard Muybridge, Thomas Eakins and Etienne-Jules Marey. Like them, Mr.
Edgerton hoped to find meaning in the interstices of visual experience; from the
evidence gathered here he did.

LEGACY OF LIGHT. Edited by Constance Sullivan. Introduction by Peter Schjeldahl.
Essays by Gretel Ehrlich, Robert Stone, Richard Howard, and Diane Johnson. 255
pp. (A Polaroid Book/Knopf, $50.) This handsome, exquisitely reproduced book
brings together 205 Polaroid photographs taken in the last 30 years by 58
artists. The book's contention, made explicit by Peter Schjeldahl in his
introduction, is that while ''instant photography'' is commonly thought of as a
uniformly amateur production, such photography, thanks in large part to the
Polaroid Corporation's tradition of supporting artists, is neither uniform nor
exclusively the stuff of amateurs. The realist painter Chuck Close's 1984
triptych ''Carter'' is an example of how far from snapshots Polaroid images can
get; it consists of three 40-by-80-inch vertical panels which, hung together,
form a larger-than-life nude torso. Other well-known contributors include Ansel
Adams, Imogen Cunningham, Robert Frank, David Hockney, Lucas Samaras and Andy
Warhol. The book is divided into four sections, each preceded by an essay
addressing a traditional photographic genre: landscapes, portraits, nudes and
still lifes. There are beautiful pictures to be found in each section, but the
still lifes are the strongest over all. Meditative and idiosyncratic, they seem
to be what the Polaroid palette was made for.

PICTURE WINDOWS. By John Pfahl. Introduction by Edward Bryant. Unpaged. (New
York Graphic Society/Little, Brown, $40.) John Pfahl is an exemplary
post-modernist landscape photographer. He is in love with the sensuous qualities
of unspoiled vistas, and with the detailed transcription of them that a
traditional view camera provides. But he is too self-conscious and historically
aware an artist to give in to what tempts him, so he puts a conceptual frame
around every picture he takes. In the mid-70's, in a series called ''Altered
Landscapes,'' he intervened in the scene with an inventive string of perceptual
and photographic puns. In the work collected here, taken over the last 10 years,
he is less intrusive but no less irreverent. Every one of the 49 pictures shows
a landscape as seen through a window, suggesting that even the most virginal
scenery comes to us already framed. (One remembers that the word ''camera''
means room - in this case, a room with a view.) The window frames and mullions
divide the panoramas into gridlike sections, mimicking the pictorial strategies
of much Minimalist art. Nevertheless, what ultimately empowers these pictures is
not the artistic gamesmanship, but the sweetness of the land itself. Once again,
John Pfahl reinvigorates the traditional landscape by challenging it.

PARIS BY NIGHT. By Brassai. Introduction by Paul Morand. 62 pp. (Pantheon,
$39.95.) When it was originally published in 1933 in France and England,
Brassai's ''Paris de Nuit'' helped popularize a simultaneously frank and lyrical
style of candid picture-taking. Brassai recorded not only the gas-lit boulevards
and empty gardens of picturesque Paris but also the city's seamier side: a
stylized orgy, a homeless beggarwoman, the grim walls of a prison. The pictures
are not as explicit as those in his 1976 book, ''The Secret Paris of the 30's,''
but they were considered daring in their day. By reproducing 62 of the original
64 plates, and by introducing a new design, ''Paris by Night'' qualifies as an
evocation of ''Paris de Nuit'' rather than as a facsimile. But it is
sufficiently faithful to show us that Brassai's earliest photographs were much
more atmospheric, even sentimental, than those for which he is now best known.
There is more than a hint of Andre Kertesz's sensibility to be seen here, not
surprising given that Kertesz was Brassai's early mentor. The heliogravure
process used to print the book is the same as was used for the original, and its
rich, warm tones give the pictures a deluxe, albeit Pictorialist, feel.

FABRICATIONS: Staged, Altered, and Appropriated Photographs. By Anne H. Hoy. 207
pp. (Abbeville, $45.) Since photography was embraced by museums and the art
marketplace in the 1970's, its traditional documentary practice has been under
attack by a growing number of nondocumentary practices. ''Fabrications'' is the
most comprehensive compendium to date of these alternatives to our conventional
notions of what constitutes art in photography. The 58 American and European
photographers discussed by the author, a curator at the International Center of
Photography, are a diverse lot, but they are all enchanted by the medium's
fictional possibilities. Anne Hoy divides them broadly into two groups: the late
moderns, who mine their own subjective responses, and the post-moderns, who
''survey the imagery of public life.'' In chapters devoted to tableau,
portraiture, still life, appropriation and manipulation, we encounter such
stalwarts of vanguard photography as Sherrie Levine, Duane Michals and Cindy
Sherman. Some of the critical responses in the text are indebted to uncited
critical theory, it is true, but Miss Hoy has done her homework by interviewing
many of the artists. As a marker for one wing of today's photography,
''Fabrications'' does its job well.

A DAY IN THE LIFE OF THE SOVIET UNION. 240 pp. (Collins, $39.95.) On May 15 of
this year, 50 Western magazine and newspaper photographers joined with 50 of
their Soviet-bloc counterparts to ''cover'' the Soviet Union in the span of a
single day. The results, edited by a team of Western and Soviet picture editors,
appear in this volume of mostly color photographs -the sequel to last year's
wildly successful ''A Day in the Life of America'' and the sixth in the series
of ''A Day in the Life'' books. Glasnost notwithstanding, the formula is
familiar. One sees babies being born in hospitals, senior citizens exercising,
farmers and fishermen toiling, teen-age youths rebelling in rock-and-roll
fashion and exotic subcultures performing folk rituals. There is humor (the
newborn babies are across the page from a picture of trays of bread dough,
wittily captioned ''Buns in the oven'') and there is at least a pretense of
looking seriously at the country's internal problems.

Precious little differentiates the Soviet version of ''A Day in the Life'' from
the American one - there are fewer broad landscapes, more pictures showing us
men in uniform and certainly more portraits of Lenin lurking in the background -
but then, that may be the point. In this moment of conciliation, ''A Day in the
Life of the Soviet Union'' functions like an update of ''The Family of Man.''
One could not expect much more from a book supported by Eastman Kodak, Pan Am,
Nikon, Sony and Intourist.

STEAM, STEEL & STARS: America's Last Steam Railroad. Photographs by O. Winston
Link. Text by Tim Hensley. 144 pp. (Abrams, $35.) A speeding steam engine
appears in virtually all of the 90 black-and-white photographs reproduced here,
but one does not have to love or even like railroading to enjoy this book. What
makes O. Winston Link's pictures fascinating is their incredible, unlikely
exactitude. Mr. Link, a New York commercial photographer who started documenting
the Norfolk & Western Railway in 1955, used all the tricks of the trade and then
some. He and his assistants spent days scouting locations, stringing miles of
electric wires for flashbulbs and readying the camera; when the train came
along, he blitzed it with enough light to rival a drive-in movie projector. To
give the images some human interest, he enlisted townspeople as models. We see
teen-agers frolicking beside a pool as a train roars by, and village scenes so
quaint Grandma Moses could have painted them. Every detail in the pictures is
sharp and bright and begs to be believed, yet the compositions are so
overdetermined they are patently unreal. The result is hilarious and
paradoxical, although the book's design might have better served Mr. Link's
pictures.

WEIGHING THE PLANETS. By Olivia Parker. 88 pp. (New York Graphic Society/Little,
Brown, $40.) The title picture of this disquieting collection of some 50 still
life photographs is typical: it depicts an old engraving of an orrery - one of
those clocklike mechanisms designed to duplicate the orbits of our solar system
-overlaid with the shadows of two vaguely human shapes. The image is virtually
empty of the kind of three-dimensional, physical objects we are used to finding
in photographs, yet it is full of potential meaning. With the exception of one
anomalous portrait, the pictures here all pit real objects against
representations, substance against shadows, words against shapes. It is a
delicate game of balance, much indebted to the Surrealists, but Olivia Parker
plays it flawlessly.

TROPISM. By Ralph Gibson. 150 pp. (Aperture, $39.50.) This midcareer
retrospective survey spans 25 years and disproves the idea that the 48-year-old
photographer's style suddenly changed from a surreal romanticism to a formalist
classicism sometime between 1975 and 1980. According to the mostly
black-and-white evidence gathered here, the world began emptying out of Mr.
Gibson's pictures much earlier, not long after he mastered an impressionistic
style of street photography indebted to Robert Frank. What is left today is
mostly a matter of light and shadow, in the form of architectural details or
female torsos. But between these two extremes - in the early 70's, when he
produced a trio of books called ''The Somnambulist,'' ''Deja-Vu'' and ''Days at
Sea'' - Mr. Gibson's photographs were vitalized by the tensions between life and
art. These enigmatic images give ''Tropism'' its bite.

TAKE TWO MEDIA, MIX WELL When Robert Rauschenberg and Andy Warhol incorporated
photographs into their paintings in the 1960's, the boundaries between the arts
began to crumble; a decade later, it could be hard to tell where painting
stopped and photography began. In PHOTOGRAPHY AND ART: Interactions Since 1946
(272 pp., Abbeville, $45), a companion volume to a touring exhibition of the
same name, Andy Grundberg, a photography critic for The New York Times, and
Kathleen McCarthy Gauss, curator of photography at the Los Angeles County Museum
of Art, argue convincingly that interactions between art and photography have
been intrinsic to the course of photography since the Second World War. The
authors suggest that critics, curators and photographers themselves unwittingly
kept the medium in second place by denying its ties to mainstream art. This
revisionist text, sometimes well-written, sometimes a bit academic, takes to
task John Szarkowski of the Museum of Modern Art for an outmoded modernist
belief that photography becomes art only by exploiting its own unique qualities.
Mr. Grundberg and Ms. Gauss endorse diversity: the book includes a greater
number of women and West Coast artists than are commonly put forward in large
photography exhibitions, with illustrations ranging from Ruth Thorne-Thomsen's
melancholy landscape to Ellen Brooks's miniature soap opera, from Hans Haacke's
political invective to Lucas Samaras's mad dreams. Unhappily, the design of this
volume does not live up to its contents, which offer plenty of challenge to the
eye and mind.

 - Vicki Goldberg, author of ''Margaret Bourke-White,'' a biography

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos from ''A Day in the Life of the Soviet Union''; ''Fabrications''
(pg. 20); ''Stopping Time''; ''Parts by Night'' (pg. 21)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EASY STREET BLUES

BYLINE: By MARK CHILDRESS; Mark Childress is the author of ''A World Made of
Fire.'' His new novel, ''V for Victor,'' will be published next year.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 395 words



A BOAT OFF THE COAST
By Stephen Dobyns. 260 pp. New York: Viking. $16.95.

THE plastic-wrapped kilo of cocaine is to the modern suspense novel what the
cache of gold in the Wells Fargo stagecoach was to the western - a small cargo
of breathtaking value, a target for all sorts of baddies, an all but
indispensable plot device. In Stephen Dobyns's eighth novel, nobody ever snorts
any coke, but nearly everybody in and around the Maine town of Belfast wants to
get his hands on a shipment.

This is a hard coast, land of lobstermen and rope factories and
chicken-processing plants, the kind of place where the Beans of Egypt, Maine,
might go on vacation. The ''Volvo and quiche crowd'' runs up against people like
Lowell Perry, a dockworker who peddles information on drug traffickers to the
Feds for the down payment on a new red Corvette. Lowell knows there is cocaine
coming up on those salt boats from Brazil, but it keeps disappearing before it
reaches the docks.

Tucker Morgan, the novel's hero, is a Vietnam veteran who can't get over the
war, can't keep a job, lives in an unfinished wreck of a house. His wife has
split with their 2-year-old son. If Tucker can arrange a coke-courier deal for
big money, maybe he can finish the house, patch things up with his wife or take
the kid out west to a ghost town, where there are finished houses already.

Trouble is, Tucker needs a boat. He runs into his old high school chum Brian, a
decent, hardworking employee of the chicken plant who moonlights as a
lobsterman. Tucker gradually insinuates himself into Brian's life. The deal is
set. Easy street is in sight.

But Tucker has an unnerving disregard for the rules of criminal behavior, and
Lowell Perry is on to his scheme. Brian is caught in the middle, wanting to help
his old buddy but afraid of the consequences. With good reason. Not only are
customs agents looking for the coke, so are its violent owners.

The stage is set for a taut, exciting collision. On that score, Mr. Dobyns, the
author of several mystery novels as well as six books of poetry, does not
disappoint. Although there are small touches of implausible actions - most
people don't let dogs lick them in the face 20 times, for instance - the author
delves into his scene, and cares about his characters. His tale of friendships,
betrayal and greed has a dark and complex undercurrent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOTABLE BOOKS OF THE YEAR

SECTION: Section 7; Page 54, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 9260 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas issue of
December 1986. It only suggests high points in the main fields of reader
interest, and it does not include the titles chosen by the editors of The Book
Review as the Best Books of the Year. Books are arranged alphabetically under
subject headings. The quoted comments are from The Book Review.

Autobiography & Biography

AN AMERICAN CHILDHOOD. By Annie Dillard. (Harper & Row, $17.95.) ''Overwriting
and all,'' this autobiography ''remains a remarkable work'' by a ''stunning
observer.''

AND A VOICE TO SING WITH: A Memoir. By Joan Baez. (Summit, $19.95.) ''One can't
always like the Joan Baez of this autobiography. Ultimately, however, her
honesty and ideals are appealing.''

BECOMING A DOCTOR: A Journey of Initiation in Medical School. By Melvin Konner.
(Elisabeth Sifton/ Viking, $19.95.) This anthropologist's memoir of medical
school is marked by ''a keen mind and a sharp ear.''

BERLIN DIARIES, 1940-1945. By Marie Vassiltchikov. (Knopf, $19.95.) ''In
addition to providing the best eyewitness account we have of the bombing of
Berlin'' during World War II, this diary by ''a White Russian princess who left
Russia . . . and grew up in Germany . . . throws some interesting light on the
plot'' to overthrow Hitler.

THE CHILDREN AT SANTA CLARA. By Elizabeth Marek. (Elizabeth Sifton/Viking,
$16.95.) This account of working with disturbed adolescents is the ''celebration
by a gentle and unworldly young woman of the terror and the head-clearing shock
of standing close to the uncontrolled flame of the real world.''

CHUCK BERRY: The Autobiography. By Chuck Berry. (Harmony, $17.95.) ''The tone of
the writing -generally playful, occasionally exasperating, more often
confessional than evasive - tells as much about the [rock singer] as the facts
he has chosen to relate.''

A CLIENT CALLED NOAH: A Family Journey Continued. By Josh Greenfeld. (Holt,
$18.95.) This third volume chronicling the life of the author's brain-damaged
son has ''some of the best qualities of fiction'' as it depicts a family that
more than endures, it prevails.

CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE: The Secret Life of Anthony Blunt. By Barrie Penrose and
Simon Freeman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) ''A valuable book, to be read
by anyone under the [British spy] scandal's spell.'' DON'T TREAD ON ME: The
Selected Letters of S. J. Perelman. Edited by Prudence Crowther. (Viking,
$19.95.) The humorist's letters ''are interesting, charming, sometimes
beautifully written, but they are also evasive.''

EARLY REAGAN. By Anne Edwards. (Morrow, $21.95.) ''Rich in detail about the
social milieu of [President Reagan's] early years . . . and in the portraits of
his family and his marriages.''

EVERYTHING TO GAIN: Making the Most of the Rest of Your Life. By Jimmy and
Rosalynn Carter. (Random House, $16.95.) ''An inspiring account of the creation
of a meaningful life - at home and in the larger world.''

FAITH, SEX, MYSTERY: A Memoir. By Richard Gilman. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
''The story of a Jewish atheist's conversion to Roman Catholicism, and his
leaving the church after eight years'' is ''deserving of all honor for its dark
honesty, its fierce reflective intellectuality.''

FIERCE ATTACHMENTS: A Memoir. By Vivian Gornick. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$15.95.) ''A fine, unflinchingly honest book'' about the author's relationship
with her mother.

THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS. By Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
$22.95.) This biography of the Kennedy family by an author with a ''strong and
canny'' voice ''provides genuine surprises.''

GEORGE C. MARSHALL: Statesman 1945-1959. By Forrest C. Pogue. (Viking, $29.95.)
''This fourth and final volume'' of the author's ''monumental study'' is
''thoughtful'' and ''balanced.''

HARDBALL: The Education of a Baseball Commissioner. By Bowie Kuhn. (Times Books,
$19.95.) ''A much worthier, more interesting and better-written book than the
autobiographies we're used to getting from baseball's usual memoirists.''

HEMINGWAY. By Kenneth S. Lynn. (Simon & Schuster, $24.95.) This biography
''helps us recover a view of [Hemingway's] life as having been, despite its end,
a success.''

HOW I GREW. By Mary McCarthy. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $16.95.) ''Harsh but
bracing self-judgment'' mark this memoir that takes the author ''up to her early
20's.''

IN MY OWN FASHION. By Oleg Cassini. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The author ''has
loved every minute of [life] and has been able turn it [into a] literary account
with more introspection than one is accustomed to finding in the genre.''

INCIDENTS IN THE LIFE OF A SLAVE GIRL: Written by Herself. By Harriet A. Jacobs.
Edited by L. Maria Child. New edition edited by Jean Fagan Yellin. (Harvard,
Cloth, $37.50; Paper, $9.95.) Of female slave narratives, this ''superbly
researched edition'' of one from 1861 is ''a crowning achievement.''

INVENTED LIVES: Narratives of Black Women 1860-1960. By Mary Helen Washington.
(Anchor/Doubleday, Paper, $7.95.) This ''gracefully executed'' anthology
''consists of carefully selected sections of the prose of 10 [black] women
writers [and] several separate chapters and an extended introduction that
analyzes in great detail the tradition being defined.''

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF MENACHEM BEGIN. By Amos Perlmutter. (Doubleday, $21.95.)
''An interesting, breathless study of Menachem Begin rich in information that
will be new to most American readers.''

LITTLE WILSON AND BIG GOD. By Anthony Burgess. (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $22.50.)
This first of a projected two-volume autobiography of the novelist provides
''unfailing literary pleasure . . . many hearty guffaws [and] many illuminations
of wit.''

MAN OF THE HOUSE: The Life and Political Memoirs of Speaker Tip O'Neill. With
William Novak. (Random House, $19.95.) ''For its evocation of the early Boston
days alone,'' this book ''deserves to be a hit.''

MEMOIRS OF A FORTUNATE JEW: An Italian Story. By Dan Vittorio Segre. (Adler &
Adler, $16.95.) In 1939 the author ''abandoned Mussolini's Italy for Palestine.
How and why he came to make this move and what awaited him in its aftermath form
the heart of this engaging narrative.''

A MIND OF HER OWN: The Life of Karen Horney. By Susan Quinn. (Summit, $22.95.)
An ''excellent, sympathetic but not adulatory'' biography.

NIXON: The Education of a Politician 1913-1962. By Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &
Schuster, $22.95.) A ''very thorough and richly detailed account of Mr. Nixon's
first 50 years, up to his unsuccessful bid for the governorship of California.''

ORPHANS: Real and Imaginary. By Eileen Simpson. (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $16.95.)
This ''recounting of [the author's] early life and . . . exploration of the
nature, and fate, of orphans in history, literature and the imagination''
contains ''passages of uncommon beauty.''

THE ORTON DIARIES. Edited by John Lahr. (Harper & Row, $19.95.) Joe Orton's
diaries show ''how the plays reflected the man, and how both plays and man
excited jealousies that turned lethal.''

OUT OF STEP: An Unquiet Life in the 20th Century. By Sidney Hook. (Harper & Row,
$29.95.) A ''full and vigorously written'' record ''of an intense, embattled but
entirely honorable life.''

PRIVATE DOMAIN. By Paul Taylor. (Knopf, $22.95.) ''One of the world's great
modern dancers and choreographers'' has written an autobiography that ''should
rank among the definitive accounts of what it means to be a creative artist in
America.''

REAGAN'S AMERICA: Innocents at Home. By Garry Wills. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A
''remarkable and evenhanded study of Ronald Reagan.''

THE RUSSIAN ALBUM. By Michael Ignatieff. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $18.95.) ''A
vivid, fascinating account by a gifted writer who sweeps back the curtain from
the past, revealing it full of color and life.''

SARTRE: A Life. By Annie Cohen-Solal. Edited by Norman MacAfee. Translated by
Anna Cancogni. (Pantheon, $24.95.) This book ''helps us understand the man's
complexity better, and brings him to life in a startlingly touching way.''

SARTRE: A Life. By Ronald Hayman. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) The author
''successfully counterpoints the public and the private man and highlights the
frequent contradictions that mark Sartre's actions and writings.''

SECRECY AND POWER: The Life of J. Edgar Hoover. By Richard Gid Powers. (Free
Press, $27.95.) ''The best biography of Hoover so far.''

SONG IN A WEARY THROAT: An American Pilgrimage. By Pauli Murray. (Harper & Row,
$23.95.) A posthumously published autobiography that provides ''a detailed
chronicle of the mid-20th-century effort to set the civil rights movement in
motion.''

STRAIGHT ON TILL MORNING: The Biography of Beryl Markham. By Mary S. Lovell.
(St. Martin's, $16.95.) This ''superbly researched biography is likely to be
definitive.''

TIMEBENDS. By Arthur Miller. (Grove, $24.95.) The ''lengthy autobiography'' of
the playwright is ''a work of genuine literary craftsmanship and social
exploration.''

WILBUR AND ORVILLE: A Biography of the Wright Brothers. By Fred Howard. (Knopf,
$24.95.) ''Less the history of aeronautical technology than of the exploitation
of a commercial invention,'' this account ''is a suspense story, bearable only
because we know how it came out.''

WILLA CATHER: The Emerging Years. By Sharon O'Brien. (Oxford, $24.95.) ''Without
anger or defensiveness,'' the author has written a female artist's life,
''seldom if ever re-created so imaginatively and, therefore, so accurately.''

Children's Books

THE BOOK OF ADAM TO MOSES. By Lore Segal. Illustrated by Leonard Baskin. (Knopf,
$13.95.) The first five books of the Bible have been translated by a
distinguished novelist and given ''mysterious and brooding'' black-and-white
illustrations by an equally distinguished artist. (All ages.) FOX'S DREAM. By
Tejima. Illustrated by the author. (Philomel, $13.95.) A fox went out on a snowy
night, and in ''striking, often dazzling'' woodcuts his adventures are recounted
in this ''astonishing'' picture book. (Ages 3 and up.) THE GOATS. By Brock Cole.
Illustrated by the author. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $11.95.) Other campers
abandon Howie Mitchell and Laura Golden on Goat Island. They escape and ''in the
few days they're on the run together acquire years of learning about cooperation
and respect.'' A beautifully written and persuasive first novel. (Ages 12 and
up.) THE GOLD CADILLAC. By Mildred D. Taylor. Illustrated by Michael Hays.
(Dial, $11.95.) A ''personal, poignant look at a black child's first experience
with institutional racism.'' Young 'lois describes the gold Cadillac her father
bought in the 1950's and what happened when the family drove south from Ohio to
Mississippi. (Ages 8 to 12.) IN COAL COUNTRY. By Judith Hendershot. Illustrated
by Thomas B. Allen. (Knopf, $13.95.) A poignant memoir of an Appalachian coal
mining company town at a time not so long ago, with illustrations that are both
''honest and beautiful.'' (Ages 5 to 10.) ISAAC CAMPION. By Janni Howker.
(Greenwillow, $10.25.) A short, powerful novel in which an old man remembers the
death of his brother in Lancashire at the turn of the century. (Ages 10 to 14.)
THE MOUNTAINS OF TIBET. By Mordicai Gerstein. Illustrated by the author. (Harper
& Row, $11.95.) This simple story is really a brilliant adaptation of ''The
Tibetan Book of the Dead.'' It tells of a woodcutter who, having lived and died
in a remote Tibetan valley, is given a choice and decides to live another life.
The delicate illustrations are ''in the classic mold.'' (Ages 7 and up.) THE
RIDICULOUS STORY OF GAMMER GURTON'S NEEDLE. Adapted by David Lloyd. Illustrated
by Charlotte Voake. (Clarkson N. Potter/Crown, $13.95.) A faithful, imaginative
and droll adaptation of a famous, but essentially unread, 16th-century English
farce. The text is amusing; the illustrations are witty and beautiful. (Ages 3
and up.) THE SHADOWMAKER. By Ron Hansen. Illustrated by Margot Tomes. (Harper &
Row, $10.95.) A delightful fable about a wizard who comes to a happy town and
convinces people that their old shadows are dull and that they need fabulous new
ones. (Ages 7 to 11.) THE TRICKSTERS. By Margaret Mahy. (Margaret K. McElderry,
$12.95.) A sparkling, stylishly written novel of adolescent awakening, Christmas
holidays in New Zealand and, perhaps, ghosts. (Ages 14 and up.) Crime DIPLOMACY.
By Miles Donald. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $17.95.) A Polish prince and his uncle
confront a wild American colonel, cannibalistic children, a mysterious
millionaire and a series of murders. The author's ''strong, original mind is
present on every page.''

IN LA-LA LAND WE TRUST. By Robert Campbell. (Mysterious Press, $15.95.)
Whistler, a private eye in Los Angeles, investigates a police cover-up in this
occasionally bizarre, often gritty novel by ''one of the most stylish crime
writers in the business.''

THE INCURSION. By Dirk Hanson. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Mr. Hanson has written a
thriller about the new terrorism: computer terrorism. ''His novel is an exciting
and, in some sections, mesmerizing look at the geniuses, nerds, eccentrics and
hackers of Silicon Valley.''

LAST JUDGMENT. By Richard Hugo. (Stein & Day, $16.95.) In a ''complicated
story,'' a terrorist armed with a fearsome weapon threatens England. ''This
riveting book should not be ignored.''

LOVER MAN. By Dallas Murphy. (Scribners, $14.95.) This first novel of ''unusual
skill'' combines a ''potpourri of elements'' - a murder mystery, World War II
fighter pilots, missing persons and organized crime, as well as humor, satire
and even a bit of farce.

MOONSPENDER. By Jonathan Gash. (St. Martin's, $14.95.) The scruffy antiques
dealer Lovejoy is back, and he's getting into all kinds of trouble. Mr. Gash
''fleshes out the character in an easygoing, affectionate manner.''

QUEST. By Richard Ben Sapir. (Dutton, $18.95.) The search for a priceless object
involves the royal family of England and the diamond merchants of Manhattan's
West 47th Street. ''It may be that 'Quest' is a shade too slick, but that won't
stop you from greedily devouring every page. Mr. Sapir is a brilliant
professional.''

RED ICE. By Nicholas Barker and Anthony Masters. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $16.95.)
There's a Russian agent in the upper reaches of the British Admiralty. The
authors ''have written an absorbing, exciting and realistic sea adventure with
an espionage background.''

UNDER CONTRACT. By Liza Cody. (Scribners, $16.95.) Anna Lee, a private
investigator, is hired to protect a spoiled and often stoned rock star. ''The
writing is assured and coherent, with never a strain for effect.''

Current Affairs & Social Comment

AND THE BAND PLAYED ON: Politics, People, and the AIDS Epidemic. By Randy
Shilts. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) ''A passionate indictment'' that ''takes us . .
. through the first five years of the unfolding epidemic and the responses -
confusion and fear, denial and indifference, courage and determination.''

AND WE ARE NOT SAVED: The Elusive Quest for Racial Justice. By Derrick Bell.
(Basic Books, $19.95.) This ''fascinating and provocative'' book engages the
''harsh realities of the black struggle for justice in America through the use
of a storytelling technique filled with imagination, fantasy and unabashed
spirituality.''

BEYOND AMERICAN HEGEMONY: The Future of the Western Alliance. By David P.
Calleo. (Twentieth Century Fund/Basic Books, $20.95.) A ''stimulating and
intelligent'' examination of ''the evolution of United States-NATO relations
since the late 1940's.''

BEYOND OUR MEANS: How America's Long Years of Debt, Deficits and Reckless
Borrowing Now Threaten to Overwhelm Us. By Alfred L. Malabre Jr. (Random House,
$17.95.) ''A sober account of our fiscal and monetary sins that is scarier than
anything by Stephen King.''

THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND: How Higher Education Has Failed Democracy and
Impoverished the Souls of Today's Students. By Allan Bloom. (Simon & Schuster,
$18.95.) This ''extraordinary meditation on the fate of liberal education'' has
proved controversial.

COVERT ACTION: The Limits of Intervention in the Postwar World. By Gregory F.
Treverton. (Basic, $19.95.) ''Valuable not only for its brief, sharp accounts of
covert enterprises . . . but above all for the lessons [the author] draws from
history.''

COYOTES: A Journey Through the Secret World of America's Illegal Aliens. By Ted
Conover. (Vintage, Paper, $6.95.) ''There is grace in this book, even more
wisdom [and] not a stock figure, Hispanic or Anglo.''

CULTURAL LITERACY: What Every American Needs to Know. By E. D. Hirsch Jr.
(Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) This ''delightful'' book contains ''a list of 63
pages of what we should know'' and attributes our ''ignorance of cultural
history to the progressive movement in education.''

DEEP BLACK: Space Espionage and National Security. By William E. Burrows.
(Random House, $19.95.) The ''very revealing'' story of ''how the United States
keeps track of the size and nature of the threat from the other nuclear
superpower.''

ECONOMICS IN PERSPECTIVE: A Critical History. By John Kenneth Galbraith.
(Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A ''serious effort to restore economics to its
literary, moral, historic and political roots.''

ENEMY IN THE PROMISED LAND: An Egyptian Woman's Journey Into Israel. By Sana
Hasan. (Pantheon, $18.95.) ''A fine, provocative study of the Israelis'' that is
also a ''painful personal drama.''

EUROPE: A Tapestry of Nations. By Flora Lewis. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A New
York Times columnist probes ''how the states of Western and Eastern Europe
resemble and differ from one another.''

FAST FORWARD: Hollywood, the Japanese, and the Onslaught of the VCR. By James
Lardner. (Norton, $18.95.) ''A complicated but swift account'' of ''a successful
adult toy,'' the video-cassette recorder.

THE FOUR DAYS OF COURAGE: The Untold Story of the People Who Brought Marcos
Down. By Bryan Johnson. (Free Press, $19.95.) ''Relying on his own campaign
reportage'' from the Philippines for The Toronto Globe and Mail, interviews and
memoirs, the author ''clarifies one of the most myth-ridden events of recent
times.''

GOING TO MIAMI: Exiles, Tourists, and Refugees in the New America. By David
Rieff. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) ''With a sophistication belying his
first-time-author status, David Rieff gives Miami the treatment it deserves: an
anti-travelogue that tours states of mind and basks in projected images.''

A GOOD ENOUGH PARENT: A Book on Child-Rearing. By Bruno Bettelheim. (Knopf,
$18.95.) In this ''leisurely, humanistic approach'' to raising children, the
author ''brings to his task more than 50 years' experience as a child
psychologist and a surprising fund of memories of what it is like to be an
actual child.''

IRON & SILK. By Mark Salzman. (Random House, $16.95.) A collection of
''compelling'' anecdotes, ''each intended to give a glimpse of a circumstance of
life in China or a trait of the Chinese'' by a young man who spent two years
teaching English to Chinese doctors.

MIAMI. By Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) ''A compassionate tale of
Washington's 'seduction and betrayal' of the Cuban exiles'' living in Miami.

THE NATIONAL DEBT. By Lawrence Malkin. (Holt, $17.95.) A ''thoughtful''
treatment of a ''subject that for too long has been addressed too little and too
late.''

OIL & HONOR: The Texaco-Pennzoil Wars. By Thomas Petzinger Jr. (Putnam, $19.95.)
This story of an epic corporate battle ''should make anyone who claims that
business is boring . . . wake up and read.''

ON BOXING. By Joyce Carol Oates. (Dolphin/ Doubleday, $14.95.) This
''interesting'' book is ''better than its subject''; the author is ''truer to
the sport than most boxers are.''

ON GLORY ROADS: A Pilgrim's Book About Pilgrimage. By Eleanor Munro. (Thames &
Hudson, $17.95.) ''By actually making these [religious] journeys,'' the author
''made herself a genuine pilgrim, an outside member of the religions that still
prevail throughout most of the world.''

RAPE. Edited by Sylvanna Tomaselli and Roy Porter. (Basil Blackwell, $24.95.)
The editors invited scholars to discuss rape ''from the perspective of their own
fields. The result of this laudable enterprise is an informative, if sometimes
frustrating, mix of ideas from law, psychoanalysis, anthropology, classics, art
history, philosophy, sociobiology and popular culture.''

ROCK OF AGES: The Rolling Stone History of Rock & Roll. By Ed Ward, Geoffrey
Stokes and Ken Tucker. (Rolling Stone/ Summit, Cloth, $24.95; Paper, $14.95.)
Each of the book's authors ''demonstrates a deep affection and affinity for the
subject.''

SETTING LIMITS: Medical Goals in an Aging Society. By Daniel Callahan. (Simon &
Schuster, $18.95.) This study ''promises to be the benchmark for future moral,
medical and policy discussions of aging.''

STORMING THE MAGIC KINGDOM: Wall Street, the Raiders, and the Battle for Disney.
By John Taylor. (Knopf, $18.95.) This ''tale of raw corporate power . . .
portrays well the diverse cultures and styles of the people and institutions
that govern contemporary show business.''

THE TAKEOVER GAME. By John Brooks. (Twentieth Century Fund/Truman Talley/Dutton,
$19.95.) ''Of all the books dealing with this eventful era'' of corporate
takeovers, this work ''is one of the most interesting.''

VISIONS AND NIGHTMARES: America After Reagan. By Robert Lekachman. (Macmillan,
$19.95.) ''A somber realism is the strength'' of this ''provocative,
thoughtful'' book.

WHERE IS NICARAGUA? By Peter Davis. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The ''simple,
shrewd point'' of this book ''is that we cannot understand the bloody war for
Nicaragua without first understanding the war for Nicaragua going on in our
heads.''

A WORLD BEYOND HEALING: The Prologue and Aftermath of Nuclear War. By Nicholas
Wade. (Norton, $15.95.) The author, a member of the editorial board of The New
York Times, ''carefully considers the evolution of the concept of nuclear
deterrence and the strategic objectives of the United States and the Soviet
Union.''

Essays & Criticism

FILM FLAM: Essays on Hollywood. By Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
''Most of these pieces were originally published in American Film magazine in
the 1970's and they are very well written, witty and, on the whole, vastly
entertaining.''

GARDENING FOR LOVE: The Market Bulletins. By Elizabeth Lawrence. Edited by Allen
Lacy. (Duke University, $15.95.) The posthumous publication of ''an enchanting
work . . . representing the unfinished labor of some 16 years, between 1962 and
1978,'' of the garden columnist for The Charlotte (N.C.) Observer.

NOBODY BETTER, BETTER THAN NOBODY. By Ian Frazier. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$14.95.) Five essays from The New Yorker offer ''some wonderfully dry and droll
reporting.''

THE PERPETUAL ORGY: Flaubert and Madame Bovary. By Mario Vargas Llosa.
Translated by Helen Lane. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) An
''unconventional, shiningly intelligent and fiercely sensible homage to
Flaubert.''

THE PHILOSOPHICAL DISENFRANCHISEMENT OF ART. By Arthur C. Danto. (Columbia
University, $25.) Along with the author's other writings on the philosophy of
art, these essays open ''a new round in the struggle for an integrated theory of
form and meaning in art.''

READING AMERICA: Essays on American Literature. By Denis Donoghue. (Knopf,
$22.95.) These 10 essays and 17 book reviews ''are long, sinewy, often brilliant
meditations on quite different subjects and contexts.''

THE SHIFTING POINT: 1946-1987. By Peter Brook. (Cornelia and Michael Bessie/
Harper & Row, $22.50.) Essays by the contemporary theater's ''most original and
creative theoretician.''

SINGERS AND THE SONG. By Gene Lees. (Oxford, $18.95.) These essays ''about the
ebullience and uplift of song,'' are written with ''rare exactness and
sensitivity.''

A SONG OF LOVE AND DEATH: The Meaning of Opera. By Peter Conrad. (Poseidon,
$19.95.) ''An astonishing book . . . tossed off with . . . exuberant verbal
virtuosity . . . a constant stream of hyperbole, simile, metaphor, aphorism,
epigram, paradox.''

SPILLVILLE. By Patricia Hampl. Illustrated by Steven Sorman. (Milkweed Editions,
Cloth, $25; Paper, $9.95.) The author and Steven Sorman ''traveled to the small
Iowa town of Spillville, where Anton Dvorak . . . had lived one summer.'' The
''well-wrought'' result is ''a collection of short reflective pieces, many of
them about Dvorak and many, including the best of them, about Miss Hampl
herself.''

Fiction

AEGYPT. By John Crowley. (Bantam, $17.95.) This fantasy is ''a dizzying
experience, achieved with unerring security of technique.''

THE AGE OF GRIEF: A Novella and Stories. By Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $15.95.) The
five stories ''are fine; the novella is splendid.''

ALL WE NEED OF HELL. By Harry Crews. (Harper & Row, $14.95.) An ''excellent,
edgy'' novel about the ''Sunbelt version'' of ''a familiar world, rotten with
greed, sloth, materialism and mendacity.''

THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR. By Ward Just. (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) The author
has done ''his best work, and given us a splendid book that is both thoughtful
and fast-moving.''

ANYWHERE BUT HERE. By Mona Simpson. (Knopf, $18.95.) A ''challenging'' and
''unique'' first novel about ''the most exas-perating, insupportable and
credible mother-daughter duo to make their presence felt in recent fiction.''

BALTASAR AND BLIMUNDA. By Jose Saramago. Translated by Giovanni Pontiero.
(Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.) ''Set in early 18th-century Portugal,''
this ''is a work of harsh realism, picturing the abomination of absolute power
and Inquisitorial fanaticism; but weaving around the realistic pages is a fable
about the flight into the marvelous.''

THE BOYS OF WINTER. By Wilfrid Sheed. (Knopf, $16.95.) This ''funny'' novel
''does the satirist's good work of demolition, but it also, alas, tells much of
the truth about literary politicking.''

THE CENTURY'S DAUGHTER. By Pat Barker. (Putnam, $16.95.) ''A detailed assault on
the policies of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher,'' this novel ''deals with what
commercial fiction used to be about - real lives.''

THE CHILD IN TIME. By Ian McEwan. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) The author is
''something of a master at representing misery'' even in this ''almost playful
meditation on the nature and possibilities of time.''

THE CHINESE EMPEROR. By Jean Levi. Translated by Barbara Bray. (Helen and Kurt
Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $18.95.) This ''ambitious and at times
extremely powerful'' novel tells the story of the ruler who in 221 B.C. unified
China into a single empire.

COLLECTED STORIES 1948-1986. By Wright Morris. (Harper & Row, $24.95.) In these
stories ''the writer's unique voice . . . belongs to the Middle Western farm
people among whom he spent his early years.''

THE COLOR OF BLOOD. By Brian Moore. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $16.95.) A
''gripping study of the subtle interplay of church and state in an unnamed Iron
Curtain country.''

THE COMPLETE YES MINISTER: The Diaries of a Cabinet Minister. By the Right
Honorable James Hacker M.P. Edited by Jonathan Lynn and Antony Jay. (Salem
House, $19.95.) ''The funniest, wittiest and truest piece of political satire to
be published on either side of the Atlantic in the post-Evelyn Waugh era.''

CROSSING TO SAFETY. By Wallace Stegner. (Random House, $18.95.) ''A superb book
. . . heartening proof that the novelist,'' who is in his late 70's, ''has
continued to grow [and] has added to his accomplishments a sympathy for his
contemporaries' condition.''

THE CURIOUS CASE OF SIDD FINCH. By George Plimpton. (Macmillan, $14.95.) ''A
funny, knowing and poignant first novel'' about a Buddhist baseball pitcher.

CUTS. By Malcolm Bradbury. (Harper & Row, $10.95.) ''There is so much fun, fury
and intelligence'' in this ''depiction of man as historical performer, this time
in a satirical romp through Thatcher England,'' that ''one can forgive its
insistent cartoonishness.''

THE ELIZABETH STORIES. By Isabel Huggan. (Viking, $15.95.) ''Calm and alarming''
stories give this book ''life and heft that twists and rings in the mind like a
particularly satisfying and disruptive novel.''

ELLEN FOSTER. By Kaye Gibbons. (Algonquin Books, $11.95.) This ''accomplished''
first novel tells ''the story of an orphan's harrowing life . . . in a direct,
engaging first-perosn narration.''

EMPIRE. By Gore Vidal. (Random House, $22.50.) In the fifth of the author's
''continuing cycle of novels about American history, politics and high
society,'' he displays ''political imagination and insider's sagacity.''

THE EXILE. By William Kotzwinkle. (Seymour Lawrence/ Dutton, $17.95.) The author
''has broken into a new category -Hollywood satirist - but with a topspin all
his own, including stylish shadings of black humor, fantasy and psychological
conjecture.''

FAST LANES. By Jayne Anne Phillips. (Seymour Lawrence/ Delacorte, $15.95.) ''A
heterogeneous collection'' of stories that ''moves backward in time and gains
authority as it does so.''

FIASCO. By Stanislaw Lem. Translated by Michael Kandel. (Helen and Kurt
Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.) This ''cautionary tale for our present
condition'' transcends ''the science fiction genre and reinforces Mr. Lem's
claim to be one of the major writers of our time.''

FIVE HUNDRED SCORPIONS. By Shelby Hearon. (Atheneum, $18.95.) This ''bittersweet
domestic comedy about a marriage threatened with dissolution'' is ''thoroughly
realistic . . . yet includes the magical and fantastic.''

FLORRY OF WASHINGTON HEIGHTS. By Steve Katz. (Sun & Moon Press, Cloth, $15.95;
Paper, $10.95.) ''A talented, stylistically accomplished, conventional example
of the genre whose grandfather is 'Studs Lonigan.' ''

FOE. By J. M. Coetzee. (Viking, $15.95.) The author ''has written a superb novel
by reconsidering the events of 'Robinson Crusoe' and presenting them from a new
point of view.''

FREEDOM. By William Safire. (Doubleday, $24.95.) In an ''engrossing tale well
told,'' the reader follows Lincoln ''in the first 21 months of the Civil War.''

HIGH GROUND. By John McGahern. (Viking, $15.95.) With this collection of short
stories, the author ''joins a charmed circle of contemporary Irish writers that
includes Edna O'Brien, Seamus Heaney and Thomas Kinsella.''

THE HOTTENTOT ROOM. By Christopher Hope. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $16.95.) The
author's ''targets include the third world, generically, as well as the West,
Nazism as well as Boerland Communism as well as chic vegetarianism and the
jogging craze, in brilliant screeds reiterated with unslaked anger.''

THE IDEAL BAKERY. By Donald Hall. (North Point, $14.95.) A dozen stories,
''three resonantly brilliant and enormously moving. Most of the other nine are
almost as good, always admirably wrought, pleasures to read.''

ILLUMINATION NIGHT. By Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $18.95.) ''Subtle touches . . .
make this intelligent novel,'' set on Martha's Vineyard, ''shine.''

IMAGINING ARGENTINA. By Lawrence Thornton. (Doubleday, $16.95.) ''One of the
real strengths'' of this ''powerful'' first novel ''is that, despite the pain
and horror it evokes, it builds from the beginning, and with great intensity,
toward the triumphant vision of romance.''

INDIAN COUNTRY. By Philip Caputo. (Bantam, $18.95.) ''A fine traditional novel
that handles a difficult theme'' - the effects of the Vietnam War on American
veterans - ''both cleverly and artfully.''

AN INSULAR POSSESSION. By Timothy Mo. (Random House, $19.95.) This ''fine''
novel ''fascinates much as a great, highly illustrated encyclopedia will
fascinate, with odd bits of information competing with long, sustained passages
of action, description and pure narrative.''

THE LAST OF HOW IT WAS. By T. R. Pearson. (Linden/ Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) In
this the completion of the author's trilogy ''set in the 1950's in the fictional
town of Neely, N.C., . . . the language, earthy and elaborate, creates a world
the reader will long to return to.''

LAZAR MALKIN ENTERS HEAVEN. By Steve Stern. (Viking, $16.95.) ''A startling''
collection of stories, all but one set in a mythic Jewish neighborhood in
Memphis, by ''a prodigiously talented writer.''

LIFE, A USER'S MANUAL. By Georges Perec. Translated by David Bellos. (Godine,
$24.95.) ''Constructed in the manner of a vast jigsaw puzzle,'' this novel
''takes a single apartment building in Paris [and] uses 99 short chapters . . .
to give a meticulous description of each and every room as well as the life
stories of all the inhabitants.''

LOVINGKINDNESS. By Anne Roiphe. (Summit, $17.95.) In a novel ''that binds the
author's entire work, familiar Roiphian themes are revisited'' -''the pendulum
of generations; . . . the immigrant's culture shock; . . . contemporary
religion's decay.''

MAMA. By Terry McMillan. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) This first novel, ''a
chronicle of a poor black family's gritty passage through the 60's into the 70's
. . . distinguishes itself by its exuberant comic sensibility.''

THE MESSIAH OF STOCKHOLM. By Cynthia Ozick. (Knopf, $15.95.) ''A complex and
fascinating meditation on the nature of writing and the responsibilities of
those who choose to create - or judge - tales.''

MOSCOW 2042. By Vladimir Voinovich. Translated by Richard Lourie. (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, $16.95.) A satire that ''captures a sense not only of
historical anxiety but great comic freedom, and mixes social vision with a very
modern view of the game of fiction.''

THE NEWTON LETTER. By John Banville. (Godine, $12.95.) In his ''most impressive
work to date,'' the author ''uses the implications of the science he describes
to turn biography back on itself.''

A NIGHT AT THE MOVIES: Or, You Must Remember This. By Robert Coover. (Linden/
Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) In these short fictions, the author ''has made
literary art out of total immersion in the movies,'' and enlarged ''his literary
technique by forcing it to approximate filmic style.''

NO COUNTRY FOR YOUNG MEN. By Julia O'Faolain. (Carroll & Graf, $19.50.)
''Bitter, comprehensive realism'' about the Irish ''national question'' marks
this ''stunning performance.''

THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION. By Stephen McCauley. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A
''funny, exceptionally vivid first novel . . . about what it is like to be young
in these crazy times.''

THE OLD DEVILS. By Kingsley Amis. (Summit, $16.95.) This ''wonderfully comic
presentation of life's awfulness'' won England's 1986 Booker Prize.

OVERHEAD IN A BALLOON: Twelve Stories of Paris. By Mavis Gallant. (Random House,
$16.95.) ''In the taut, high-wire literary performances in this volume, Mavis
Gallant is at the top of her form.''

PAST PERFECT. By Yaakov Shabtai. Translated by Dalya Bilu. (Viking, $18.95.)
''The writing gives abundant evidence'' of Yaakov Shabtai, who died in 1981 at
the age of 47, ''as a prose master, and there are sections of haunting power,
but the novel is not a masterpiece like 'Past Continuous.' ''

PERSIAN NIGHTS. By Diane Johnson. (Knopf, $17.95.) A ''funny, incisive,
frightening and eminently skillful'' novel that ''investigates the question of
moral responsibility against the backdrop of Iran shortly before the 1979
revolution.''

PRESUMED INNOCENT. By Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) The author
''combines immense writing talent and considerable legal experience to create an
impressive and unusual fiction debut.''

THE PROPHETEERS. By Max Apple. (Harper & Row, Cloth, $16.95; Perennial Library,
Paper, $7.95.) In this fable, ''an oddly saintly satirist'' reinvents the
destinies of the likes of Walt Disney and Howard Johnson. ''Call the novel a
joy.''

THE RAT. By Gunter Grass. Translated by Ralph Manheim. (Helen and Kurt
Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.) ''This exhilarating, maddening,
brilliant, funny and profoundly disturbing novel is about the end of mankind,
the end of plot, the end of syntax, the end of language.''

THE RED WHITE AND BLUE. By John Gregory Dunne. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The
''real story'' of this ''slice of America on a plate'' is ''history's habit of
ensnaring us in its meshes.''

RICH IN LOVE. By Josephine Humphreys. (Viking, $16.95.) An ''engaging second
novel . . . in which self-knowledge is not only an end in itself, but also a
motivation for future acts.''

ROCK SPRINGS. By Richard Ford. (Atlantic Monthly, $17.95.) The best of these
short stories ''achieve luminous moments, moments with the potential to change
how the reader sees and thinks.''

A SCRAP OF TIME: And Other Stories. By Ida Fink. Translated by Madeline Levine
and Francine Prose. (Pantheon, $15.95.) ''Winner of the first Anne Frank Prize
for Literature,'' this collection of stories ''raises poignant, truculent
ghosts, and their bewildered, echoing voices . . . allow us powerful imaginative
passage into an unimaginably infernal world.''

SEASON OF THE JEW. By Maurice Shadbolt. (Norton, $16.95.) ''An excellent
historical novel'' that is ''based on an actual Maori revolt against the British
in New Zealand in 1868-69.''

THE SONGLINES. By Bruce Chatwin. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $18.95.) By ''one of
our clearest, most vibrant writers,'' this work ''engages the full range of the
author's passions: his obsession with travel; his love of nomads and the nomadic
way of life; . . . his hunger to understand man's origins and essential
nature.''

A SOUTHERN FAMILY. By Gail Godwin. (Morrow, $18.95.) A ''rich, complex'' novel
that ''may be [the author's] most satisfying book since 'Dream Children.' ''

A SPORT OF NATURE. By Nadine Gordimer. (Knopf, $18.95.) ''A powerful novel of
awakening, emergence, and, in so far as fiction can make it possible, a call for
a new order'' in South Africa.

STALIN IN THE BRONX: And Other Stories. By Suzanne Ruta. (Grove, $16.95.) The
author demonstrates ''she is a sharp, witty internationalist in whom social
conscience and imagination incite, inflame and inspire each other.''

STORIES FROM THE WARM ZONE AND SYDNEY STORIES. By Jessica Anderson. (Viking,
$15.95.) Jessica Anderson ''invariably seduces us with the honesty of her
characters and the distilled, multilayered pleasure of her prose.''

TEMPORARY SHELTER. By Mary Gordon. (Random House, $16.95.) This collection of 20
stories contains some ''that are touching, and some that are memorable.''

TENDING TO VIRGINIA. By Jill McCorkle. (Algonquin Books, $15.95.) An
''exuberant'' novel about three generations of Southern women.

THE THANATOS SYNDROME. By Walker Percy. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.)
''Though the novel's surface action spins along at a brisk thriller pace . . .
the real plot . . . chronicles the continuing battle between good and evil in .
. . modern society.''

THAT NIGHT. By Alice McDermott. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) ''This brief,
lyrical novel is a kind of elegy, to both childhood in suburbia and the
childhood of suburbia.''

THE THIRTIETH YEAR. By Ingeborg Bachmann. Translated by Michael Bullock. (Holmes
& Meier, $19.95.) Bachmann, who died in 1973, was ''a writer of genius''; ''in
the beauty of her images, in her belief in a merciful natural order . . . there
is tremendous affirmation of the world.''

THREE CONTINENTS. By Ruth Prawer Jhabvala. (Morrow, $18.95.) ''As a meditation
on the twin themes of inheritance and family,'' this novel ''is a significant
achievement.''

TONGUES OF FLAME. By Tim Parks. (Grove, $14.95.) Last year, this first novel,
''a hilarious and original portrait of a young boy grappling with good and
evil,'' won England's Somerset Maugham Award for writers under 35.

TOWN SMOKES. By Pinckney Benedict. (Ontario Review/Persea, Paper, $9.95.) ''This
slender collection of stories by a 23-year-old West Virginian . . . is an often
heart-stopping literary performance.''

TRUST ME. By John Updike. (Knopf, $17.95.) ''The best of these stories are
luminous with compassion, and full of the deep humor very sad tales have when
their burden is that we are all frail creatures in a mysterious and perilous
world.''

THE WEB. By Andrew Harvey. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) If, in reading this
''epistolary novel . . . you are patient and step carefully, you will find
yourself in a web of glittering prose.''

WHATEVER HAPPENED TO GLOOMY GUS OF THE CHICAGO BEARS? By Robert Coover. (Linden/
Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The author ''seems to be able to do anything, and
this funny, bitter, human book is fair proof of it.''

THE WHITE TIGER. By Robert Stuart Nathan. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) This
''dynamic novel . . . combines murder and espionage with the search for the
remains of Peking man.''

A WOMAN NAMED DROWN. By Padgett Powell. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) ''A
potent, funny, one-of-a-kind sort of book . . . rich in character and
observation, by turns outrageous and deadly serious in its satire.''

THE YEAR OF SILENCE. By Madison Smartt Bell. (Ticknor & Fields, $15.95.) The
author ''captures vividly and poignantly that chancy dance of life from [the]
various points of view'' of characters ''who are loners [and] live on [New
York's] seamy underside.''

A YELLOW RAFT IN BLUE WATER. By Michael Dorris. (Holt, $16.95.) A
''three-generation'' first novel that ''realizes one of the dreams of
anthropology - to describe a dying culture almost as if you were dying with
it.''

YOU MUST REMEMBER THIS. By Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $19.95.)
The author's 18th novel ''has much to recommend it. The press of action is in
places relentless. And Ms. Oates has . . . sharpened her feel for gritty urban
settings and the passions and despairs that flame up there.''

ZERO DB: And Other Stories. By Madison Smartt Bell. (Ticknor & Fields, $15.95.)
In ''astonishing'' stories, the author shows that he ''loves things and people
the way they are while simultaneously expressing outrage that they are not
better, wiser, kinder.''

ZERO GRAVITY. By Richard Lourie. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $16.95.) This
espionage thriller ''caresses the cerebrum as it tickles the funny bone.''

History

ANOTHER DAY OF LIFE. By Ryszard Kapuscinski. Translated by William R. Brand and
Katarzyna Mroczkowska-Brand. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$14.95.) A Polish journalist's ''fragmentary, anecdotal and impressionistic
account'' of the end of Portuguese rule in Angola in 1974.

ARMED TRUCE: The Beginnings of the Cold War, 1945-46. By Hugh Thomas. (Atheneum,
$27.50.) ''The value'' of this first in a multivolume series on the cold war
''is that it stirs in us an awareness of how the broad and primitive notions
forged at that time continue to dominate our reactions and cloud our
understanding even today.''

THE CARE OF STRANGERS: The Rise of America's Hospital System. By Charles E.
Rosenberg. (Basic Books, $22.95.) ''A splendid history of the hospital in
America'' that is ''timely,'' ''very well written and rich with
interpretation.''

CHINESE LIVES: An Oral History of Contemporary China. By Zhang Xinxin and Sang
Ye. Edited by W. J. F. Jenner and Delia Davin. Translated by the editors and
Cheng Lingang, Gladys Yang, Judy Burrows, Jeffrey C. Kinkley, Carole Murray and
Geremie Barme. (Pantheon, $18.95.) ''Vividly rendered by some of the best
translators of Chinese literature into English,'' this book is ''a complex
portrait of a people undergoing confusing, exhilarating and often uneven
transformation.''

CLOAK & GOWN: Scholars in the Secret War, 1939-1961. By Robin W. Winks. (Morrow,
$22.95.) Although this story of the relationship of Yale University and the
espionage community ''could have done with some checking as well as some pruning
. . . it is a delight.''

COMMANDER IN CHIEF: Franklin Delano Roosevelt, His Lieutenants, and Their War.
By Eric Larrabee. (Cornelia & Michael Bessie/Harper & Row, $25.) ''Eric Larrabee
writes with skill and spirit about the men Roosevelt chose to lead the American
forces in World War II.''

''DEMOCRACY IS IN THE STREETS'': From Port Huron to the Siege of Chicago. By
James Miller. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) ''An excellent account of the early
student New Left.''

ENEMIES OF THE PEOPLE. By Anne F. Thurston. (Knopf, $19.95.) An ''important''
oral history of the ordeal of China's intellectuals during the Cultural
Revolution.

GALILEO HERETIC. By Pietro Redondi. Translated by Raymond Rosenthal. (Princeton,
$29.95.) A theory, ''brilliantly told,'' which maintains that Galileo agreed to
a charge of Copernicanism rather than risk a trial on more serious charges that
might have meant the stake.

A HISTORY OF THE JEWS. By Paul Johnson. (Harper & Row, $25.) The author's
''continuing self-education in Jewish history keeps moving [him] away from
seeing Jewish experience as a function of Christianity and toward understanding
Jews in their own terms'' - ''a remarkable achievement.''

THE ITALIANS AND THE HOLOCAUST: Persecution, Rescue, and Survival. By Susan
Zuccotti. (Basic Books, $19.95.) This ''careful historical account linked to
personal narratives . . . will be regarded as a definitive work.''

MALE FANTASIES. Volume One: Women, Floods, Bodies, History. By Klaus Theweleit.
Translated by Stephen Conway in collaboration with Erica Carter and Chris
Turner. (University of Minnesota, Cloth, $25; Paper, $14.95.) ''Depending on
your taste,'' this study of the German Freikorps movement - ''paramilitary
groups . . . who fought against the . . . Weimar Republic'' - ''might be judged
exceptionally rich or just plain disorderly.''

A MORE PERFECT UNION. By William Peters. (Crown, $22.50.) This ''week-by week
review'' of the Constitutional Convention is ''balanced'' and ''reliable.''

NEW YORK 1930: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Two World Wars. By Robert
A. M. Stern, Gregory Gilmartin and Thomas Mellins. (Rizzoli, $75.) This history
''elevates the art of assemblage to a degree of sophistication well above the
bulk of current writing on American architecture and urbanism.''

THE OTHER NUREMBERG: The Untold Story of the Tokyo War Crimes Trials. By Arnold
C. Brackman. (Morrow, $19.95.) ''Indelible portraits'' of the defendants mark
this ''first full account'' of the 1946 trial of Japanese war criminals.

PAGANS AND CHRISTIANS. By Robin Lane Fox. (Knopf, $35.) In ''the most ambitious
recent work'' on early Christian history, the author ''describes in fastidious
detail the forms of the pagan cults and their accompanying piety in the second
and third centuries.''

THE PALACE FILE. By Nguyen Tien Hung and Jerrold L. Schecter. (Harper & Row,
$22.95.) ''Written largely from a Saigon perspective, this book provides
significant new data on United States relations with South Vietnam from 1968 to
1975.''

PERON AND THE ENIGMAS OF ARGENTINA. By Robert D. Crassweller. (Norton, $22.95.)
''Perhaps the best single-volume history of 20th-century Argentina: sensitive,
urbane, deeply comprehending.''

THE SECOND OLDEST PROFESSION: Spies and Spying in the Twentieth Century. By
Philip Knightley. (Norton, $19.95.) ''A short, sharp and stylish account of the
contemporary Anglo-Saxon intelligence world.''

THE SIXTIES: Years of Hope, Days of Rage. By Todd Gitlin. (Bantam, $19.95.)
''One of the best books yet on the left-wing politics and culture of the
1960's.''

WALTZING WITH A DICTATOR: The Marcoses and the Making of American Policy. By
Raymond Bonner. (Times Books, $19.95.) An ''impressive study of the relationship
between five American Presidents and Ferdinand Marcos, who ruled the Philippines
from 1965 until 1986.''

WHO WROTE THE BIBLE? By Richard Elliott Friedman. (Summit, $18.95.) ''An
enjoyable and thought-provoking book - of interest to scholars [and] to anyone
who . . . seeks a sympathetic and perceptive guide.''

Poetry

BEYOND THE LIMIT. By Irina Ratushinskaya. Translated by Frances Padorr Brent and
Carol J. Avins. (Northwestern University, $22.95.) Imprisoned for several years
for simply circulating her poems in the Soviet Union, Irina Ratushinskaya ''is
heir to the line that stems from Pushkin'' through Akhmatova, Mandelstam,
Pasternak and Tsvetayeva. ''Her poems dig deep into the Russian tradition [and]
she intensely appreciates life and freedom as only a person who has risked both
can do.''

THE COLLECTED POEMS OF WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS. Volume One: 1909-1939. Edited by
A. Walton Litz and Christopher MacGowan. (New Directions, $35.) This
''beautifully edited collection'' traces ''the development of an indigenous
American avant-garde style, a unique modernist accomplishment that embraces all
of the poet's intelligence along with all of his American experience.''

THE NEARNESS OF YOU. By Carolyn Kizer. (Copper Canyon, $15.) ''A deeply engaging
poetry and prose meditation on the poet's father'' is ''the emotional center of
this collection,'' in which the author ''plays with the forms of poems and her
memories of men.'' She depicts ''romantic love by embedding it in the world'' -
a world sometimes ''cruel,'' sometimes ''elegantly transformed.''

NEW AND COLLECTED POEMS 1970-1985. By David Ignatow. (Wesleyan, $30.) In ''these
poems -written between David Ignatow's 55th and 72d birthdays'' - we see the
poet ''at the top of his form, writing beautifully clear and quiet poems
seemingly without effort.'' Each of the 26 new poems here is ''as good as any
Mr. Ignatow has written in his entire career.''

RECKONER. By James Tate. (Wesleyan, $17.) The author ''is an elegant and
anarchic clown, a lord of poetic misrule with serious, subversive purpose. . . .
In his vision both the hilarity and the menace of the world become . . .
extreme.''

SELECTED POEMS 1957-1987. By W. D. Snodgrass. (Soho Press, $19.95.) ''W. D.
Snodgrass is one of the six best poets now writing in English. . . . It is a
measure of [his] traditionalism and accessibility that his quality can often be
defined by comparing him with poets of the past,'' among them John Donne, A. E.
Housman, Andrew Marvell. He has ''a pleasant kind of mind, great originality and
a terrific talent.''

SELECTED POEMS OF MARINA TSVETAYEVA. Translated by Elaine Feinstein. (Dutton,
$12.95.) Elaine Feinstein's versions are ''the best translations available'' of
this poet, who is ''on fire with poetry,'' and in whose work ''nothing is put in
perspective, everything is immediate, emotional in the best sense. . . . Poetry
was her existence, and she was simply a natural, with a musician's feel for
rhythms and gifts for innovation which appear to have come from within.''

THE SUNSET MAKER: Poems / Stories / A Memoir. By Donald Justice. (Atheneum,
$16). In this book ''Donald Justice establishes himself as an elegiac poet of
the first order. He may be, concomitantly, the resident genius of nostalgia in
the ever-expanding house of American poetry. . . . In at least two of his
elegies . . . he counters our inevitable human losses with an unforgettable and
permanent music.''

Science Fiction

THE FOLK OF THE AIR. By Peter S. Beagle. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $16.95.) ''A
fantasy novel set in contemporary California mixes science and the supernatural
so seamlessly that the bedazzled reader soon ceases to care which is which.''

THE JAGUAR HUNTER. By Lucius Shepard. (Arkham House, $21.95.) These 11 short
stories ''exhibit a dazzling surface of hallucinogenic special effects.''

LITTLE HEROES. By Norman Spinrad. (Bantam, $18.95.) The author addresses ''the
question of whether computer-driven technology can become an artistic medium in
its own right'' in a novel that takes ''admirable risks'' and is set in a
near-future America where ''virtually all popular music is controlled by a
conglomerate.''

MIRRORSHADES: The Cyberpunk Anthology. Edited by Bruce Sterling. (Arbor House,
$16.95.) These 12 stories present ''a science fiction that takes the runaway
power of science and technology for granted, that plays paranoia straight and
finds comic relief in anarchy.''

THE TIME WANDERERS. By Arkady and Boris Strugatsky. Translated by Antonina W.
Bouis. (Richardson & Steirman, $16.95.) The Russian authors ''confirm their
standing in the first rank of contemporary science fiction writers'' in this
novel that ''seems to be about aliens.''

WYRMS. By Orson Scott Card. (Arbor House, $16.95.) The author ''remains in
complete control of his material'' as he ''writes about biology as destiny and
about the search for individual freedom within evolutionary constraints.''

Science & Social Science

COASTING. By Jonathan Raban. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Jonathan Raban's
''meandering up and down [England's] coastline'' has resulted in ''a lively,
intensely personal recounting of a voyage into a gifted writer's country and
self.''

FEARFUL SYMMETRY: The Search for Beauty in Modern Physics. By A. Zee.
(Macmillan, $25.) ''A very good summary of the spiritual motivations and the
actual content of modern fundamental physics.''

INVISIBLE FRONTIERS: The Race to Synthesize a Human Gene. By Stephen S. Hall.
(Morgan Entrekin/ Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) ''A spirited account of the race to
achieve not only the synthesis of the human insulin gene, but also the
genetically engineered production of human insulin itself.'' MEDITATIONS AT
SUNSET: A Scientist Looks at the Sky. By James Trefil. (Scribners, $16.95.) In a
''strolling series of essays,'' the ''third and last volume of what Mr. Trefil
calls his 'Natural Philosopher' trilogy . . . he talks of the physics of air.''

MOLECULES OF THE MIND: The Brave New Science of Molecular Psychology. By Jon
Franklin. (Atheneum, $18.95.) The author ''carefully illustrates our ambivalence
toward mental illness, whose victims most of us ultimately find somewhat
repulsive and morally weak.''

THE SOCIETY OF MIND. By Marvin Minsky. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) An
''ingenious and stimulating'' exploration of the ''means of explaining the world
to a computer.''

THEY ALL LAUGHED AT CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS: Tales of Medicine and the Art of
Discovery. By Gerald Weissmann. (Times Books, $17.95.) A ''graceful, feisty''
collection of essays on modern medicine.

THURSDAY'S UNIVERSE. By Marcia Bartusiak. (Times Books, $19.95.) ''For a few
years at least this will be a book that can render the arcana of astrophysical
research understandable to the public.''

TIME'S ARROW, TIME'S CYCLE: Myth and Metaphor in the Discovery of Geologic Time.
By Stephen Jay Gould. (Harvard, $17.50.) A ''lively, scholarly'' examination of
theories of geological time.

TWICE AS LESS: Black English and the Performance of Black Students in
Mathematics and Science. By Eleanor Wilson Orr. (Norton, $15.95.) In this
''useful'' book, a high school teacher attempts ''to trace how differences
between black English vernacular . . . and standard English affect a student's
concepts of quantitative relationships.''

WHO GOES FIRST? The Story of Self-Experimentation in Medicine. By Lawrence K.
Altman. (Random House, $22.50.) ''Dr. Altman, a medical reporter for The New
York Times, draws knowledgeably on medical history and biography, as well as
interviews, [to chronicle] the deaths of several investigators through
experimental miscalculation.''

WHO GOT EINSTEIN'S OFFICE? Eccentricity and Genius at the Institute for Advanced
Studies. By Ed Regis. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) An ''entertaining, mixed review
of [the Institute's] progress.''

WINSTON CHURCHILL'S AFTERNOON NAP: A Wide-Awake Inquiry Into the Human Nature of
Time. By Jeremy Campbell. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) This ''informative essay
on the human experience of time . . . proceeds without much regard for sophistry
or scholastic cavils.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MARCH BY 200,000 IN CAPITAL PRESSES SOVIET ON RIGHTS

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1596 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


On the eve of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's arrival in the United States, about 200,000
marchers streamed down Constitution Avenue to Capitol Hill today to send the
message that Jewish emigration and human rights should figure prominently in the
Soviet leader's meeting this week with President Reagan.

''Let our people go!'' was the message of speakers and placards at the rally,
which was mostly planned by Jewish organizations but included non-Jewish
organizations like the National Council of Churches.

Talks Begin on Tuesday

Mr. Gorbachev, accompanied by his wife, Raisa, is to arrive at Andrews Air Force
Base outside Washington at 4:40 P.M. Monday and begin talks with Mr. Reagan
Tuesday. He is to leave the capital at 8 P.M. Thursday.

In a letter read to the crowd today, Mr. Reagan, referring to those who have
tried in vain to leave the Soviet Union, said he would press Mr. Gorbachev ''for
the release of all refuseniks and for complete freedom of religious and cultural
expression.'' He added, ''We will not be satisfied with less.''

The letter, read by Morris B. Abram, chairman of the National Conference on
Soviet Jewry, continued: ''If freedom is achieved through faith, dedication and
perseverance, I have no doubt that freedom will ultimately prevail. God bless
you all.'' Wide Variety of Participants The United States Park Police said
200,000 people took part in the rally, which drew Jews and non-Jews, the
politically active and the apolitical, the elderly and the very young, from all
over the United States and Canada. The participants included labor unionists and
people favoring the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.

The rally was largely orderly and peaceful, with only one arrest for disorderly
conduct reported. It was an emotional collage of religion and politics, street
theater and pop culture, rivaling in size a Washington demonstration last
October in support of gay rights that also attracted 200,000 people.

The marchers, singing ''God Bless America'' and ''Hatikva,'' the Israeli
national anthem, gathered on the Ellipse south of the White House and then,
behind placards that read like a road map of the United States, poured down
Constitution Avenue.

About two miles away, at the foot of Capitol Hill, they gathered on the grass of
the Mall and heard speeches by human rights advocates, leaders of American
Jewish and Christian groups and three of the Republican Presidential aspirants:
Vice President Bush, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas and Representative Jack F. Kemp
of New York. Other contenders whose campaigns announced their presence included
Senator Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee, a Democrat, and Alexander M. Haig Jr., a
Republican.

''We all heard that it would be impossible to make American Jews come to
Washington in the winter,'' said an initiator of the rally, Natan Sharansky, a
Soviet emigre to Israel, speaking from the platform in the crisp, sunny weather.
''Here you come and it is winter.''

Mr. Sharansky, referring to a protest today by some Jewish demonstrators in
Moscow that plainclothesmen disrupted, added: ''The Soviets have to know that no
missiles and tanks, no camps and prisons, can extinguish the light of the candle
of freedom.''

Mr. Bush told the crowd: ''It would be easier, safer, more diplomatic to remain
silent - to negotiate our treaties and never raise the question of human rights.
But that would be untrue to ourselves, and it would break our promise to the
past.''

Referring to a visit he had made to the Auschwitz concentration camp memorial in
Poland, Mr. Bush said, ''I came away from Auschwitz determined not just to
remember the Holocaust, but determined to renew our commitment to human rights
around the world.''

'One Fundamental Issue'

Mr. Dole, referring to the summit meeting, said, ''There is really only one
fundamental issue on the agenda -freedom.

''Whatever glasnost is, it is not freedom.''

Mr. Kemp reiterated his opposition to the treaty on medium-range nuclear weapons
that Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev are expected to sign on Tuesday. ''We should
not sign a new treaty with the Soviet Union until the Soviet Union complies with
the Helsinki Final Act'' on human rights, he said.

Although many of those who marched said they did not believe that Mr. Gorbachev
would reverse Soviet emigration policy simply on the strength of their show of
commitment, many said they hoped to be heard in the Kremlin.

Soviet television crews filmed the event for transmission back to Moscow, but it
was not known if any Soviet officials who were in Washington for the summit
meeting attended the rally.

Gennadi I. Gerasimov, the chief spokesman for the Soviet delegation to the
summit meeting, did not see the march. ''There are many demonstrations from
different angles,'' he said when asked for comment.

'Grievances, Real or Imagined'

''The point is that everybody wants to air their grievances, real or imagined,''
he said. ''I could say what about Mexican immigration to this country, what
about the wetbacks? When the United States wants Jewish emigration from our
country, it's for the brain power. But what about the wetbacks? You don't want
to let them in.'' Yevgeny Grigoryev, the deputy chief editor of Pravda, the
Soviet Communist Party newspaper, said the march ''must be costing the Reagan
Administration a lot.'' He said he believed that the protesters were bused in by
the Government, as happens in the Soviet Union.

B. Jay Cooper, a spokesman for the White House, said: ''We didn't help organize
the protest. They notified us it was happening and made a request for the
President to come.''

Some of those who helped organize the march feared that it would give the
impression they were protesting the summit meeting itself. That led to the
demonstration being scheduled for the day before Mr. Gorbachev actually was to
arrive in Washington, and organizers repeatedly stressed that they supported the
meeting.

The march focused almost exclusively on the issue of Jewish emigration from the
Soviet Union, as well as conditions for Jews who elect not to emigrate. A
separate demonstration in Lafayette Park opposite the White House drew about 200
people who said the United States should not negotiate with the Soviet
Government until it withdraws its soldiers from Afghanistan. Some of these
protesters joined the larger rally later.

Tightly Organized

The demonstrators were tightly organized, and many walked in groups identified
by signs with the names of states from Maine to California.

''New Yorkers Demand Freedom for Soviet Jews,'' read one sign, held by a
protester on the steps of the National Archives. ''Akron for Soviet Jews,'' read
another.

Rabbi Shaul Osadchey from Houston was sporting a Stetson, cowboy boots and a
leather jacket and led 150 Houstonites, including a half-dozen children who held
an 8-foot-wide banner saying ''Houston Stands Tall for Soviet Jewry.''

Speaking with lips stained by grape Kool-Aid, Mark Zeidman, a 7-year-old from
Houston, declared, ''They better let those Jews out or they'll have to deal with
me.''

Laura Fish, 16, of Toronto, said she was one of about 500 Canadians who flew
here for the protest. ''We're trying to show our support for our brothers in the
Soviet Union,'' she said. ''The issue is not over until everybody is free.''

There was a little bit of American politics in signs that read: ''New Hampshire
says Human Rights are Primary.'' And there was a little bit of pop culture, as
some marchers carried stylish shopping bags that said ''Free Soviet Jews.''

For Lenore Weinstein of Milwaukee, the march was a reminder of protests against
the bombing of Cambodia.

''We came here for the weekend to give our children an education,'' she said,
walking with her husband, Stanley, and their two children. ''I feel much more
strongly about this than I did during the war in Vietnam. Then I felt very
American, but now I feel very American and very Jewish.''

Specific Causes to Press

Some of the marchers had specific causes to press, such as those who marched
with yellow balloons printed with words ''Free Meiman,'' referring to a
76-year-old mathematician, Naum Meiman, who has been refused permission to
emigrate for 14 years.

And a recurring theme was that Soviet Jews are not allowed to practice their
religion freely.

''It is very important for me to see that they speak not only about emigration,
but for improvement of the lives of those Jews who stay there,'' said Alex
Goldfarb, a Soviet emigre.

Gregori Steshenko, 26, of Manhattan, who came from Dniepropetrovsk, in the
Ukraine, was skeptical about the protest. ''The majority of Soviet Jews don't
want to leave the Soviet Union,'' he said. ''The impression of the American
public is different from reality. They think Jews starve and live in the
streets. It's not true.''

The marchers repeatedly expressed the hope that their words would be heard by
Mr. Gorbachev.

''After all that we've done, he should listen,'' said Renee Vasilevsky, 10, of
Potomac, Md., whose father, Michael, emigrated 13 years ago.

Jill Pupa, 22, of Cleveland, said she believed Mr. Gorbachev ''has to take
notice of this - there's just so much publicity and such a strong show of
faith.''

But Albert Schwartz, 77, of Philadelphia, explained as he walked hand-in-hand
with his 77-year-old wife, Ann, that he was addressing someone else.

''Gorbachev may be listening, but I'm not so sure about Reagan,'' he said. ''We
want him to hear us and to tell Gorbachev in the strongest terms what the
American people believe.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of demonstrators, including emigres and Eli Wiesel, Nobel Peace
Prize recipient (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee) (Pp. 1 and 20)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE SUMMIT;
OTHER FACES, OTHER PACTS: THREE DECADES OF DIPLOMACY - VISITS BY SOVIET LEADERS
TO THE UNITED STATES

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 209 words




September 1959:   In the first visit to the U.S. by a Soviet leader, Nikita S.
Khrushchev and President Eisenhower have Khrushchev and President Eisenhower
have a summit meeting at Camp David, Md. No ends with an understanding that the
world must disarm and that cultural and scientific exchanges would be good.

September 1960:   Khrushchev arrives in New York to address the Unted Nations
General Assembly and call for the resignation of Secretary General Dag
Hammarskjold. He interrupts a delegate's speech by banging his shoe on his desk.
As a result of tensions over the downing of an American spy plane in May, he was
not invited to meet with Eisenhower.

June 1967:    President Johnson and Aleksei N. Kosygin, who is visiting the
United States for a United Nations session on the Arab-Israeli war, meet in
Glassboro, N.J., to discuss nuclear arms, the Middle East and the Vietnam War.
In two days of discussions they lay the groundwork for future talks, but there
are no concrete agreements.

June 1973:   President Nixon and Leonid I. Brezhnev meet in Washington, at Camp
David and in San Clemente, Calif. They agree to try to finish a new arms treaty
by 1974, and agree on several other practical issues.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of former Soviet leaders

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTONT TALK: SENATE FOREIGN RELATIONS COMMITTEE;
Some Political Chasms That Await the Arms Treaty

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FUERBRINGER

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1341 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


After Mikhail S. Gorbachev and President Reagan sign their arms control treaty
Tuesday, the focus here will shift to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and
its patrician chairman, Claiborne Pell.

The Rhode Island Democrat and his committee will take the lead role in the
difficult battle to win Senate approval of the treaty by a two-thirds vote. But
the challenge arrives at a time of doubt about the panel's effectiveness as well
as Mr. Pell's leadership.

Many Democrats and some Republicans, while loath to criticize Mr. Pell on the
record, question whether he has the stature to carry the debate, and their
concerns have already led other Senate leaders to step in to help him.

Vacuum of Leadership

In a decline that began after the Vietnam War, the once prestigious Foreign
Relations Committee has been eroded by a number of weak chairmen and eclipsed on
key issues in recent years by the Senate Armed Services Committee.

The vacuum of leadership, except for the two-year term of Senator Richard G.
Lugar, Republican of Indiana, in 1985-86, has left the panel unproductive and
sometimes reduced it to more of a confrontational debating society than a
legislative shaper of foreign policy.

Mr. Pell himself has little presence in the Senate and a deferential style that
Democrats worry will assure that the ranking Republican on the committee,
Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, will run roughshod over him in the treaty
debate.

A Loss of Initiative

The committee ''lost the initiative somewhere along the line, but I'm not sure
why,'' said Senator Dale Bumpers, Democrat of Arkansas.

Although he is not on the committee, Mr. Bumpers has become a key participant in
debate on several foreign policy issues. Interestingly, he came to the Senate
after defeating a former committee chairman, J. William Fulbright, in a 1974
primary. Two other committee chairman, Charles H. Percy and Frank Church, also
lost re-election bids in recent years.

One committee member, Larry Pressler, Republican of South Dakota, said at a
committee meeting last month: ''I am concerned about the fundamental direction
of the Foreign Relations Committee. As I see these other committees nibbling
away at our jurisdiction - the Intelligence Committee, the Armed Services
Committee plus observer groups - I think we are at a low ebb.'' The 20-member
panel has been split by sharp conservative-liberal policy disputes that have
made bipartisan compromises difficult. This year that split intensified as the
Democrats took control of the Senate and the Republicans chose Mr. Helms over
the more cooperative Mr. Lugar as the ranking Republican on the committee.

Mr. Helms has used his position to attack the State Department and demand tough
anti-Communist policies, positions out of step with many committee members.

Moreover, Mr. Helms is one of the best parliamentary fighters in the Senate and
could, if he chose, cause much trouble on the arms treaty.

''The fact that I am the ranking member has just paralyzed the State
Department,'' Senator Helms said recently with some satisfaction. In his
estimate, he said, the Foreign Relations Committee ''lost favor in past years
because the committee was totally liberal, and that did not reflect the American
people.''

Another member, Senator Daniel J. Evans, Republican of Washington, sees the
shift to Mr. Helms differently.

''It has changed the dynamics of the whole committee,'' the Senator said.
''Politically he is tougher,'' Mr. Evans said of Mr. Helms. ''Pell doesn't stand
up to that.''

Even Mr. Lugar's two-year record of success, including his key role in the
transfer of power in the Philippines and the approval of sanctions against South
Africa despite White House opposition, did not stem the declining interest among
bright and ambitious senators in joining the committee.

Three Vacancies and No Takers

There were three vacancies on the panel last January when the Senate Democratic
leadership was filling its committee memberships at the beginning of the 100th
Congress -and almost no takers.

Senator Christoper J. Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat who is a committee member,
said he had to talk two freshmen Democrats into joining: Terry Sanford of North
Carolina and Brock Adams of Washington.

To fill the third opening, the Democrats waived a rule preventing senators from
sitting on more than one major committee and added Senator Daniel Patrick
Moynihan of New York.

Another vacancy occurred when Senator Edward Zorinsky, Democrat of Nebraska,
died unexpectedly last March, and it has yet to be filled.

''The action is just not there,'' Mr. Dodd said, marveling that 20 to 30 years
ago Senators like Jacob K. Javits of New York and Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts had to wait years to get on the committee.

''I don't believe that it's that helpful to your own constituency,'' said
Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, an Ohio Democrat who decided not to join the
committee this year. ''I don't think they understand it that well.''

''And of course we all know the history of the chairmen,'' Mr. Metzenbaum added,
referring to the three chairmen who were defeated in re-election bids.

The perception of the committee's weakness has already set off scrambling by
other Democrats to be ready to fill the void if Mr. Pell falters as the
consideration of the arms treaty begins next year.

Recognizing the threats, Mr. Pell has moved quickly to try to secure his
position, tapping the second-ranking Democrat on the panel, Senator Joseph R.
Biden Jr., to travel to Europe to get Allied input into the hearings and, some
members say, to counter Mr. Helms. The Democratic leader of the Senate, Robert
C. Byrd of West Virginia, has already said he will play a key role in the
strategy for winning approval of the treaty. Mr. Bryd has also sought to defuse
any jurisdictional disputes among the Foreign Relations, Armed Services and
Intelligence Committees over the handling of the treaty.

On Friday, Mr. Byrd, along with Mr. Pell and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, the
chairman of the Armed Services Committee, and Senator David L. Boren of
Oklahoma, the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, announced a coordinated
effort to handle the ratification process, giving Mr. Pell the lead role.

But Armed Services and Intelligence will hold their own hearings and will
concentrate on the two issues that Mr. Byrd said the Senate will be concerned
with: adequate verification of the treaty and the effectiveness of NATO after
some missiles are destroyed according to the terms of the pact.

Hearings Start Jan. 19

Mr. Pell had already moved to fend off any encroachment by the other committees
by setting a quick date, Jan. 19, for the start of his hearings and formally
requesting the Armed Services and Intelligence panels to participate by
reporting to his committee.

''If Claiborne has any weakness, he is too much a gentleman,'' said Mr. Biden, a
former Presidential contender. ''He doesn't like confrontation and he tends to
accommodate people, and around here sometimes you have to be confrontational.''

''There is a feeling on the committee that it has to be more assertive in
protecting its jurisdiction,'' Mr. Biden added.

'I Am Not Confrontational'

Mr. Pell acknowledged his own weakness, which is accentuated in the modern
Senate where television and the desire for impact have made his deferential
style a handicap.

''I am not confrontational by nature,'' he said. ''I've never enjoyed
confrontation.''

Mr. Lugar is surprisingly critical of Mr. Pell.

''Senator Pell has not indicated this year where he wants to come out and how to
get there,'' Mr. Lugar said. Although he said he and Mr. Pell agreed on some key
issues, he said that ''when it comes to a game plan of how to enact that, it
seems Senator Pell has not had a strategy and is not well equipped to take on
his adversaries.''

Just as surprisingly, Mr. Pell agreed.

''I've got no particular strategy to try to out-maneuver my colleagues and
probably I should have,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Claiborne Pell and Jesse Helms (NYT/George Thames)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Seeking a Hopeful Symbol To Match the Soaring Mood

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 7


Now that the Evil Empire notion is out of vogue, the capital has been looking
for the perfect symbol for this week's symbiosis between East and West.

Gift shops are selling lapel pins with Soviet and American flags intertwined. A
pair of 11-year-old schoolgirls, one American and one Russian, planned joint
appearances. The Marriott Hotel renamed its coffee shop Cafe Glasnost, and the
Ritz-Carlton Hotel began leaving special summit cookies with conciliatory quotes
from President Reagan on guests' pillows instead of the usual mints.

Joe and Mo's, a popular downtown restaurant that poured its Stolichnaya vodka
into the gutter eight years ago when the Russians swept into Afghanistan, began
mixing very cold and very dry ''Stoly'' martinis once more.

But perhaps the spirit of the summit was best captured by the sculpture that
Edwina Sandys, an artist who is Winston Churchill's granddaughter, presented at
a State Department ceremony today. To the Soviet Ambassador, Yuri V. Dubinin,
and Deputy Secretary of State John C. Whitehead, Ms. Sandys gave aluminum
sculptures depicting a dove flying in a fighter aircraft that the State
Department spokeswoman, Phyllis Oakley, said resembled an F-15. The work is
titled ''War and Peace.''

''I hope,'' Ambassador Dubinin remarked about the feathered aviator, ''that the
dove can get bigger.''

U.S. Movies for the Gorbachevs

Detente-redux was evident today at the Soviet Embassy as well. At the Iceland
summit meeting last year, the Russians so loudly protested the presence of a
large ''Top Gun'' movie poster across from the hotel where their delegation was
staying that it was taken down. This time around, the Soviet Embassy asked Jack
Valenti, the president of the Motion Picture Association, if he could send over
a copy of the Tom Cruise film glorifying Navy fliers for the Gorbachevs to
watch.

The embassy also asked for heavier fare: ''Platoon,'' a gritty Vietnam War
movie, and ''Cry Freedom,'' a film about the human rights struggle in South
Africa. Mr. Valenti happily obliged.

Score One for the Russians

In this town obsessed with winning and losing, the first joint Soviet-American
news conference was naturally viewed as a competitive, rather than a collegial,
event.

The smooth, witty Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman, Gennadi I. Gerasimov, ''won
on points,'' as one seasoned Washington reporter put it, over the subdued White
House press secretary, Marlin Fitzwater.

''I can't believe I put money on this guy,'' grumbled the ABC News correspondent
Sam Donaldson, who had bet $1 on Mr. Fitzwater at 7-to-5 odds to outshine his
Soviet counterpart. ''So far my horse has come up lame.'' Mr. Gerasimov, who
speaks fluent English, got off to a fast start today when he appeared on the ABC
program ''Good Morning America'' and quipped that the President's S.D.I.
program, short for Strategic Defense Initiative, now stood for ''Save the
Defense Industry.''

As part of the Soviet charm offensive, Mr. Gerasimov appeared Sunday night on a
C-SPAN call-in show and fielded calls from American citizens.

When Bob Clark, the host, told one caller from Spar, Fla., that his question -
about cable companies influencing local zoning ordinances to ban satellite
antennas in residential neighborhoods - was ''too domestic,'' Mr. Gerasimov
objected, marveling at American freedom of speech.

''No, no, I like this,'' he said. ''You just call in from different places with
any question?''

Nancy Reagan Explains

Round 2 of the battle of wills between the two first ladies came today when
Nancy Reagan, wearing the bright green coat she takes out of her closet every
Christmas, conceded that she had been irritated by Raisa Gorbachev's long delay
in letting her know if she would come to tea at the White House.

''I did say I had to know,'' Mrs. Reagan told reporters at a photo session for
the arrival of the White House Christmas tree, adding that it got to the point
where she had to ''fill in the schedule.''

She hedged when asked if she liked her Soviet counterpart, saying she did not
know her very well, but finally allowed as how she ''seems very nice.''

She hedged again when asked about a section of a book by Larry Speakes, the
former Presidential press secretary, in which he said that Mrs. Reagan did not
care for Mrs. Gorbachev and thought she was ''a dogmatic Marxist'' who had
''used'' her by not letting her know in time that she would attend the Iceland
summit meeting until Mrs. Reagan's schedule was locked in. ''I didn't read it
that way,'' Mrs. Reagan said, finally.

The Gorbachevs caused more last-minute schedule juggling for Mrs. Reagan's
office when they asked that the formal state dinner be curtailed so that they
could get to bed early. The White House cut out the private time the couples
were to have spent before the dinner and their ritual entrance down the grand
staircase, as well as the post-dinner ''mix and mingle.''

The White House did not, however, ask the pianist Van Cliburn, who will
entertain at the dinner, to play faster.

A Women's Get-Together

Mrs. Gorbachev will get a chance to meet other high-powered Washington women at
what the Russians are calling ''a meeting with a cup of tea'' late Thursday
morning at the Georgetown home of Pamela Harriman, a prominent Democratic
fund-raiser.

Mrs. Harriman, the widow of Averell Harriman, who served as Ambassador to the
Soviet Union during World War II and later was a prominent figure in
Soviet-American relations, was asked by the Russians to be host at the tea and
was even given a list of those invited: Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum,
Republican of Kansas; Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland; Supreme
Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor; Hanna Gray, president of the University of
Chicago, and Katharine Graham, chairman of the Washington Post Company. All have
accepted.

Capitalists' Pleasures

The scene around town often resembles the classic Greta Garbo movie
''Ninotchka,'' in which a group of Russian officials learned to love
capitalistic pleasures on an official trip to Paris. Russians are seen happily
being interviewed in the plush, tapestried surroundings at the Madison Hotel,
where many are staying, and feted at Washington's finest homes.

Esther Coopersmith and Ina Ginsburg, two of the city's leading hostesses, teamed
up Sunday night to give a large dinner party for some of the Soviet officials at
Mrs. Coopersmith's Potomac estate.

The mood was jolly, full of glasnost jibes. When one of the Russians complained
jokingly that only the Americans were being allowed to make speeches, Leonid
Zolotorevsky of Soviet television riposted: ''That's because when Americans
talk, it's a speech. When Russians talk, it's propaganda.''

At the end of the evening, Mrs. Coopersmith presented her guests with gifts that
she said contained the key to understanding Washingtonians: Redskin beer mugs
and plastic footballs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The Summit: Ready to Raise the Curtain;
PROTESTERS BLOOM NEAR WHITE HOUSE

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 524 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 7


There were Ukrainian-Americans gripping black balloons as they denounced Mikhail
S. Gorbachev. There were conservative women's groups supporting the Strategic
Defense Initiative. There were demonstrators seeking less money for missiles and
more for AIDS research. There were immigrants from Vietnam, Ethiopia and
Afghanistan.

And there was Edwin Wagner, a 35-year-old beekeeper from New Castle, Del., who
carried a sign above his bicycle reading: ''Dec. 8 - John Lennon Lived and Died
for This Day.''

''We knew what John Lennon stood for: Give peace a chance,'' said Mr. Wagner,
standing in Lafayette Park, across from the White House. ''And that's what's
happening December 8th. Gorbachev and Reagan are giving peace a chance.''

A Disparate Array

On the clear, crisp day that the Soviet leader arrived in the United States,
Lafayette Park, the landscaped rectangle facing the White House, was crammed
with a disparate array of demonstrators. The largest number, hundreds of
Ukrainian-Americans, concluded their protest with a march along 16th Street
toward the Soviet Embassy that ended at a police barricade a block from the
mission.

The protests marked the start of demonstrations and vigils that will continue in
Lafayette Park and elsewhere until Thursday, the day Mr. Gorbachev is scheduled
to depart. At the National Cathedral, hundreds gathered for a vigil for peace
that began Sunday with the lighting of an eight-foot candle.

In Lafayette Park, the scene was a bit of a circus. American Buddhist monks in
saffron robes sat cross-legged, chanting peace hymns, while Ukrainian
demonstrators shrieked that Mr. Gorbachev was an ''archdeceiver'' and a
''butcher.''

Support for Space Shield

A dozen representatives of four conservative national women's organizations, who
claimed a membership of 750,000, began the protests with expressions of support
for President Reagan's space-based shield, the Strategic Defense Initiative. The
women carried broken umbrellas without fabric that symbolized, they said, the
United States without ''Star Wars.''

''We have no nuclear umbrella, we have no system to save American lives, it's
immoral, it's unacceptable, and that's why we need the Strategic Defense
Initiative,'' said Phyllis Schlafly, president of the Eagle Forum.

Other demonstrators included Bob Kunst of Miami, director of the Cure Aids Now
lobby, and Barry Gaspar of Washington, with a sign reading, ''Summit - Commit 10
Missiles Each to Cure AIDS.'' ''The value of each MX missile is $180 million,''
said Mr. Kunst. ''Why can't we put the money for 10 missiles in AIDS research?''
---- Israelis Rally for Soviet Jews TEL AVIV, Dec. 7 (AP) - About 10,000
Israelis held a rally today to demand that the Kremlin open the gates for Soviet
Jews to emigrate.

''We say to the Soviet leader, free my people,'' Foreign Minister Shimon Peres
told the crowd. ''We want him to know we will not forget our brethren in the
Soviet Union.''

''No more gestures, no more tokens,'' President Chaim Herzog said. ''For us, the
outcome of the discussion of human rights will be the litmus test for the
success of this summit.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Amalia Bany, a protester (NYT/Jim Wilson)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Former Prisoners of War Get Help in a Nashville Program

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: NASHVILLE, Dec. 7


More than 30 years after he was a prisoner of war in North Korea, Al Storm is
still jolted awake some nights by visions of enemy soldiers standing over his
bed.

He is one of a growing number of former prisoners in the Korean War and World
War II who are seeking counseling and other help under a special Veterans
Administration program.

More than 25,000 former prisoners have been examined since 1983, when the agency
established a policy calling for physical and mental examinations, said Alex
Kutner, a health systems specialist at the Department of Medicine and Surgery in
Washington.

Sixteen percent of those examined were found to need care for conditions they
had not been treated for previously, Mr. Kutner said.

Thousands Receive Counseling

Most of the former prisoners have reached middle age or are older because
relatively few American prisoners were taken in the Vietnam War - 766 as against
130,201 in World War II and 7,140 in Korea, agency statistics show. About 80,800
former prisoners of war are believed to be alive today.

Of those, about 4,800 are in active psychological counseling at 148 agency
facilities, officials said.

There is no way to know how many former war prisoners may suffer from
post-traumatic stress disorder, said Barbra Key, a psychologist who treats Mr.
Storm at the Veterans Administration Medical Center here. Pent-up grief and
anger often linger years after prisoners are freed, she said.

In four months of captivity in 1950, Mr. Storm endured beatings, filthy
conditions and weeklong confinement in a box so small he could only lie in one
position without moving. He lost 80 pounds and doctors told him he suffered from
hepatitis, dysentery, frostbite and beriberi.

The nightmares began soon after he was released, but Mr. Storm, now 55 years
old, said he ''just kept on living'' and did not seek help until recently.

''About six months ago I got seriously depressed,'' said Mr. Storm, who is
retired and lives in Nashville. ''I'm not sure why.''

The depression coincided with digestive problems that probably stemmed from
malnutrition he experienced while a prisoner, he said. He also suffers from
arthritis that he attributes to prolonged exposure to subfreezing cold.

New Law in 1981

Ms. Key said it was common for post-traumatic stress to be brought on by health
problems resulting from time spent in a prison camp. The physical problems often
appear as former prisoners reach middle or old age. Retirement or the death of a
spouse can also trigger the disorder, she said.

Until 1981, the problems of former prisoners were not officially recognized by
the Government, but a Federal law then extended a full-range of health care to
them, officials said.

The symptoms of post-traumatic stress include nervousness, depression, anger,
fear of losing control, guilt and shame, nightmares, restlessness and low
self-esteem.

Before 1980, the same symptoms were diagnosed as anxiety neurosis, sometimes
called combat fatigue, and were usually alleviated with medication. With the new
diagnosis, therapy largely replaces the old treatment methods.

The medical center here has started a therapy group of 30 prisoners from the
Korean War and plans another group for those from World War II, she said.

Mr. Storm called the group ''the greatest thing you could ever come up with.''

''You can't sit down and talk to strangers - they don't understand your
problems,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
2 Executive Recruiters Altering Management

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 429 words


Two of the major executive recruiting companies, Russell Reynolds Associates and
Spencer Stuart, have announced shifts in top management. At Spencer Stuart,
Dayton Ogden has been named managing director and chief executive, while at
Russell Reynolds, Hobson Brown Jr. was selected as president and chief operating
officer.

The two companies are among the largest executive recruiting firms. James
Kennedy of Executive Recruiter News ranked Korn/ Ferry International first in
terms of billings, ahead of Russell Reynolds, Spencer Stuart and Heidrick &
Struggles. Executive recruiting firms of all sizes number 1,500.

Mr. Ogden, 42 years old, steps into a newly created office after a restructuring
at Spencer Stuart, which has 220 search consultants in 29 offices around the
world. Mr. Ogden, previously the manager of the New York office, will be the top
executive. David Kimbell, head of the British office, will be chairman, a
non-executive post.

At Russell Reynolds, Mr. Brown, 45, has also been in charge of his firm's New
York office, to which he added responsibility for offices in California,
Australia and Japan. ''I've been with the firm for 10 years,'' Mr. Brown said
yesterday. ''When I joined we had 32 professionals and five offices. Today we
have 145 professionals and 21 offices.''

Mr. Brown succeeds Ferdinand Nadherny, 60, who becomes a vice chairman after
serving as president since 1980.

Executive recruitment, or headhunting, has been a hot industry in the last
decade, fed by the feverish changes brought about by mergers and acquisitions.
The question is whether the stock market collapse in October will mean a
downturn in the business.

Perhaps optimism is part of the executive recruiter's makeup; Mr. Brown and Mr.
Ogden were upbeat about prospects for their profession.

''If we were a harbinger of things we would be a good harbinger,'' Mr. Brown
said. ''Business has been stronger than last fall. I'd be totally Pollyannish to
believe there would not be some impact on the financial side, but not of such
significance that we could not pick it up in other areas.''

Mr. Ogden said the stock collapse ''has created problems but also
opportunities.''

Mr. Ogden, a Yale graduate, commanded a patrol boat on the Mekong River during a
Vietnam tour with the Navy. Before joining Spencer Stuart in 1979, he was a
partner with a search firm in Washington.

Mr. Brown, a graduate of the Wharton School and the University of North
Carolina, was a vice president with the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company before
joining Russell Reynolds in 1977.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Stage: 'Moonchildren,' In a Season of Weller

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words


EVER since it appeared on Broadway in 1972 - to enthusiastic reviews and scant
audiences - Michael Weller's ''Moonchildren'' has enjoyed a reputation as the
definitive play about college students of the 1960's. That's a tough burden for
any work to bear. The kids of the 60's seemed homogeneous only to those adults
who failed to understand them. Not every student was an antiwar activist or
hippie out of the caricaturing pages of Life magazine. And even those who were
had trouble agreeing on a political program or on the correct musical or
pharmacological route to a spiritual high. A ''definitive'' play about the
1960's generation would have to be a lie - a poster-bright smorgasbord of
slogans, fashions and knee-jerk attitudes.

Mr. Weller is much too talented a writer to reduce so complex and important a
period of our national life to a fatuous, glossy tableau out of ''Woodstock.''
Revisiting ''Moonchildren'' in its current revival at the Second Stage, one is
reminded that this play, its author's first, aspires instead to capture the
flavor of one quite specific moment - the academic year 1965-66, as it unfolded
in one communal apartment in one unnamed university town that just might be near
Boston. The play's chronological locus is crucial. In 1965-66, the most
ferocious rage of the decade, with its accompanying political and social
cataclysms, had yet to boil over. College men still counted on graduate-school
deferments from service in Vietnam. Rock music had yet to be stirred with acid.
Lyndon B. Johnson still seemed in the White House to stay.

It was a time of flux, and it's that mood of drift, of the electric quiet before
the storm, that Mr. Weller has preserved in ''Moonchildren.'' The play's eight
students are at most nascent rebels; they pursue the eternal run of collegiate
activities, starting with sex and studies, even as they worry about how they can
be more ''relevant'' and how they might better ''relate.'' There are
demonstrations against ''U.S. Intervention in Southeast Asia'' and vaguely
socialist principles of household bookkeeping. But everyone still has some
concern for grades, and the women, while growing suspicious of traditional paths
to marriage and motherhood, are still beholden to their less-than-giving men.

The play's key is the character of Bob - acted by Kevin Anderson, as cool here
as he was hyperkinetic when portraying the feral younger brother of ''Orphans.''
Having received a notification of a draft physical, Bob declares himself already
''dead.'' He lets inertia carry him through that trauma, through a
disintegrating romantic involvement and even through the pain of his mother's
offstage death by cancer. Bob's own malignancy is an utter inability to
integrate his feelings with his intellect and behavior, to disentangle (and
salvage) his political goals from his personal alienation. When the pain of loss
finally breaks through the hip facade - a wrenching sight in Mr. Anderson's
slow-fused performance - the split between Bob the boy-man and Bob the
conscience-striken citizen of the Vietnam era seems the dark crevice into which
so much of a generation's idealism disappeared.

But that's another, longer story, and a tale rendingly elaborated upon in Mr.
Weller's later plays. The Second Stage, which has previously revived his
subsequent ''Split'' and ''Fishing,'' is helpfully devoting its entire season to
Mr. Weller's canon. ''Moonchildren'' will be followed by a revival of the 1979
''Loose Ends'' and then by a new play, ''Spoils of War.'' Among other activities
celebrating the writer will be a screening of the Milos Forman film of ''Hair,''
for which Mr. Weller wrote a much underrated screenplay that encapsulates its
own psychedelic corner of the late 1960's.

My guess is that the later Weller will prove more commanding than the youthful
''Moonchildren.'' Though there's nothing cheap or false in this evening - the
adult authority figures are fully imagined characters, not cardboard squares or
heavies - the writing can be low-key to a fault. The haziness of method often
seems more pallid than Chekhovian. Cynthia Nixon, Penelope Ann Miller and Jim
Fyfe - good actors all - can't give definition to their understated roles. The
commune's two omnipresent practioners of flip, defensive put-on jokes seem like
merely one-note pranksters, and even that one cynical note isn't correctly
conveyed by the contemporary brattiness of the actors Alan Ruck and Sam Robards.

As directed by Mary B. Robinson, the entire production often proves a shade or
two off from period verisimilitude. No one on stage smokes so much as tobacco,
and the costumes are an odd hybrid of past and present. It's a telling
peculiarity of this rendition of ''Moonchildren'' that the intruders sometimes
upstage the apartment's occupants - particularly Larry Block as the loopy
middle-aged landlord, Paul Soles as Bob's distraught uncle and Geoffrey Nauffts
as a young encyclopedia salesman still clinging ingenuously to the old-fashioned
career aspirations his peers have begun to reject.

Of the students, Paul McCrane, as a humorless convert to self-immolating
radicalism, and the delightful Kathleen Wilhoite, as a strangely compelling true
believer in cosmic fads, are the most effective at re-creating the temper of an
increasingly distant time. How such characters - and the playwright who
chronicled them -traveled from then to now should become clear during the rest
of the Second Stage's all-Weller season. An early sketch, not a definitive
portrait, ''Moonchildren'' freezes its pioneering generation in tantalizing
midorbit, well before the crash to earth.


Before Woodstock

MOONCHILDREN, by Michael Weller; directed by Mary B. Robinson; set design,
Charles H. McClennahan; lighting design, Mal Sturchio; costume design, Mimi
Maxmen; sound design, Gary Harris; hair design, Antonio Soddu; production stage
manager, Roy Harris; stage manager, Carol Fishman. Presented by the Second
Stage, Robyn Goodman and Carole Rothman, artistic directors. At 2162 Broadway,
at 76th Street. Mike...Alan Ruck Ruth...Penelope Ann Miller Cottie...Sam Robards
Norman...Paul McCrane Dick...Jim Fyfe Kathy...Cynthia Nixon Bob Rettie...Kevin
Anderson Shelly...Katheleen Wilhoite Ralph/Effing...Geoffrey Nauffts Mr.
Willis...Larry Block Lucky...Dan Desmond Bream and Cootie's Father...Dave Florek
Uncle Murray and Milkman...Paul Soles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Cynthia Nixon and Kevin Anderson (Susan Cook)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 9, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Estimate of Risk Of Dioxin Is Cut In Cancer Study

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHABECOFF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1353 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 8


The Environmental Protection Agency, in a new draft study with the potential for
far-reaching policy implications, has sharply reduced its estimate of the
cancer-causing potential of dioxin, a widespread chemical pollutant.

Dioxin has been described as among the most potent toxic substances known to
man. But in a new risk assessment, the E.P.A. concludes that dioxin's potency as
a cancer-inducing substance is one-sixteenth that of the agency's original
estimate two years ago.

Agency officials said, however, that even considering the revised risk levels,
dioxin is still the most toxic of the cancer-linked substances regulated by the
agency.

Under the new risk assumptions, dioxin is 10,000 times more likely to cause
cancer than PCB's, or polychlorinated biphenyls, at the same level of exposure,
one agency official said. But the new assessment lowers the risk of dioxin by a
significant amount and ''brings it in out of left field,'' the official said.

Since dioxin appears in such minute quantities, the effect of the reassessment
might be that previously troubling levels will be considered far less dangerous
or even safe. The new report appears to strike a compromise between those
scientists who see the alarm over dioxin as exaggerated and those who feel it is
a major concern. The finding is igniting a scientific debate over just how
dangerous the ubiquitous chemical pollutant is to humans.

Scientists reviewing the report at the agency's request appear to be divided in
their assessment. Some reviewers, including Dr. Barry Commoner, director of the
Center for the Biology of Natural Systems at Queens College in New York, are
sharply criticizing the report as bad science, while others are welcoming the
findings as an overdue reflection of emerging scientific consensus on the
dangers of dioxin.

May Affect Agent Orange Suit

If the conclusions of the risk assessment, now in draft form and being reviewed
by a panel of scientists, are formally accepted by the environmental agency,
they could have a major impact on how the E.P.A. regulates exposure to dioxin
from municipal waste incinerators, paper products, toxic waste sites and a broad
range of other sources. It could conceivably affect the litigation filed by
Vietnam veterans who say they grew ill after exposure to Agent Orange, a
defoliant that is contaminated with dioxin.

Finally, the findings of the study could set a precedent for how the E.P.A. and
other Federal agencies deal with a wide spectrum of chemicals associated with
cancer.

One finding of the study, which was based on a review of scientific studies and
models produced over the last few years, was that dioxin may function as a
''promoter'' of other cancer-causing agents rather than being an initiator of
cancer. Until now, the agency has treated all substances that pose a risk of
cancer in humans in the same way; that is, any exposure to them is dangerous no
matter how low that exposure may be.

Now the agency is saying it agrees with evidence that dioxin, because it does
not cause the mutation of animal cells, may not initiate cancer but instead
trigger other cancer-causing substances to cause tumors. The agency therefore
believes that its old estimate of the risk of dioxin, which was based on results
of animal tests extrapolated for effect on humans, may no longer be valid,
because it was based on the assumption that dioxin itself was the cause of
cancer.

Agency officials said a whole class of substances that do not cause mutations in
animal cells but are associated with cancer could be considered promoters rather
than initiators of cancer. These include familiar substances such as
perchloroethylene, a chemical used in drycleaning and even asbestos. But the
officials conceded that the issue of promoters versus initiators is still a
matter of scientific debate.

Dioxins are unwanted byproducts of the production of pesticides and other
chlorine compounds and of combustion processes such as incineration. Tests
showed that even small doses of dioxin in laboratory animals produced several
kinds of cancer. But thus far there is only fragmentary evidence that dioxins
cause cancer or other health problems in humans except for an acute form of
acne.

High Levels of Dioxins

Some scientists have contended that this lack of evidence of cancer in humans
indicates that the tests on laboratory animals cannot simply be extrapolated to
humans.

High levels of dioxins have been found at toxic waste sites such as Love Canal
in Niagara Falls, N.Y., and have been spread with waste oil in Missouri. Dioxins
have been found in the smoke and ash of the rapidly proliferating municipal
waste incinerators around the country. Recently low levels of dioxin were found
in a wide range of paper products ranging from coffee filters to baby diapers.
Tests of human fat tissue suggest that most people already have absorbed
significant amounts of dioxin into their bodies.

The study, which looked at the risks of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, or
2,3,7,8-TCDD, considered the most toxic of the group of chemicals called
dioxins, examined a range of other risk assessments conducted by other Federal
agencies, including the Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease
Control, as well as those conducted by scientists in Canada, West German and the
Netherlands.

In its original assessment of the risks of 2,3,7,8-TCDD, made in 1985, the
agency estimated that exposure of humans to one six-thousandth of a picogram of
dioxin per kilogram of body weight each day over a 70-year lifetime presented a
one in one million risk of cancer. A picogram is one-trillionth of a gram.

In its new draft assessment, the agency's scientists estimated that exposure to
one-tenth of a picogram per kilogram of body weight per day would produce a
cancer risk of one in one million.

The agency said that its own estimate was the most conservative of those it
examined. The other estimates ranged from one-tenth of a picogram by other
Federal agencies to 10 picograms a day by Canadian scientists.

Choosing Risk Value

The report concluded that choosing a risk value ''near the midpoint'' of the
range described by the whole body of risk assessments represented a technically
sound science policy choice for use by E.P.A. risk assessors.

Peter Preuss, who coordinated the study for the E.P.A., said that, based on all
the new evidence that has emerged in recent years, the exposure level selected
by the agency in its new assessment was ''the plausible upper bound of risk.''

But scientists reviewing the study for the agency were divided about its
conclusions. Michael Gough, a biologist with Resources for the Future, a
nonprofit research organization here, called the report ''a very courageous
thing to do'' because it departed from the agency's traditional approach to
cancer-inducing substances. But he said that the new number chosen as the upper
bound of risk was still too conservative and that humans could face higher
exposures to dioxin without risk of cancer.

A 'Revolution' Foreseen

He noted, however, that the study could cause ''a revolution in the way they
look at carcinogens.'' Armed with this new risk assessment, he said, industry
and academia will be ''pounding on E.P.A.'s door'' to insist its past treatment
of cancer-causing substances was not appropriate.

Ellen K. Silbergeld, chief toxicologist for the Environmental Defense Fund, said
that it was ''appalling that what the agency did was to throw up its hands, look
at the range of estimates for TCDD, plot them on a logarithmic scale and take an
average.'' What was good about the study, Dr. Silbergeld said, was that it
acknowledged that dioxin did have an impact on the health of humans and that
humans already face a daily ''background'' exposure averaging one picogram per
kilogram of body weight.

Dr. Commoner, who has studied the effects of dioxin for many years and also is
reviewing the report for the E.P.A., said that even by its own method of simply
choosing a midpoint of other risk assessments, the agency's conclusion is wrong.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 10, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

2 in Navy Killed as U.S. Research Plane Crashes in Antarctica

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section B; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 726 words


A United States polar exploration airplane crashed and burned in Antarctica
yesterday, killing two Navy crew members and injuring nine others.

According to the National Science Foundation, which administers and finances
American research programs in Antarctica, the airplane, a Lockheed LC-130
Hercules, crashed during landing at 9 A.M. yesterday. The ski-equipped plane was
flying to a remote ice airstrip to aid in repair work being done to a similar
plane that crashed in the same location 16 years ago.

The airstrip is situated about 860 miles northeast of McMurdo Station, the main
American base in Antarctica and about 100 miles inland from Adelie Coast in
eastern Antarctica.

''The plane caught fire when it hit,'' Guy Guthridge, a spokesman for the
science foundation, said yesterday. ''But luckily, the crew working on the old
LC-130 crash was on hand to extinguish the fire and pull out the victims.''

Navy officials identified the two men killed as Lieut. Comdr. Bruce Bailey, 45
years old, and Donald M. Beatty, 24 and aviation storekeeper second class.
Lieut. Comdr. Einar Corelli, 45, was seriously injured, the Navy said.

Mr. Guthridge said the injured men were evacuated from the airstrip in another
airplane to McMurdo Station. Some were treated at the McMurdo base hospital and
the more seriously injured were evacuated to the American support facility at
Christchurch, New Zealand.

The Navy owns and operates aircraft for the science foundation. Along with the
crash of a science foundation helicopter in California earlier this year, the
accident is expected to hamper some of the scientific research programs under
way in Antarctica.

Mr. Guthridge said the cause of the crash was under investigation. Although the
site is on relatively smooth ice, the surface is often rippled by wind-blown
ridges of hardened snow that are difficult to see from the air and can knock the
landing gear off aircraft.

Recovery Can Take Years

The earlier crash at the airstrip involved an LC-130 plane that was supplying a
scientific research program by France and the United States for charting the
currents of ice that move through the polar ice cap. The craft was heavily
damaged. But LC-130's, which have special ski-and-wheels landing gear, are so
valuable and scarce that when they have crashed the science foundation has
attempted to patched up the wreckage so that the aircraft could be flown back to
the United States for refurbishing.

Recovery can take many years because of interruptions imposed by the constant
darkness of the polar winter, temperatures that drop below minus 100 degrees and
winds that can reach 200 miles an hour. But because Antarctica is the driest and
coldest place in the world, aircraft parts and wreckage neither corrode nor
decay, even over the course of many decades.

The LC-130 is a variant of Lockheed's C-130 turboprop transport plane that has
been a workhorse of many of the world's air forces ever since 1952. Lockheed
still manufactures the plane but the LC-130 variant, with its polar
modifications, was never built in large numbers. Only 10 of the planes remain in
flying condition; six are used by the Navy to support the science foundation's
Antarctic programs.

Replacement Cost of $40 Million

A spokesman said it was unlikely that the plane that crashed yesterday could be
rebuilt. Replacing the plane would cost about $40 million and would require
authorization by Congress, Mr. Guthridge said.

The plane was the only LC-130 modified with a camera bay for polar mapping.
About 100 hours of mapping flights scheduled by the United States Geological
Survey to broaden knowledge of Antarctic glaciology and topography have been
canceled because of the crash, Mr. Guthridge said.

The crash yesterday comes after the July crash in Ojai, Calif., of a Bell UH1N
Navy helicopter that was assigned to operate in Antarctica. The helicopter had
been undergoing servicing in the United States. All four crew members were
killed, including an aircraft maintenance specialist who was expected to aid
work on recovering the old LC-130.

The UH1N is a two-engine polar variant of the familiar single-engine Huey of the
Vietnam War era. The crash left the National Science Foundation with only five
of these helicopters for Antarctic research programs in the current Southern
hemisphere summer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Antarctica highlighting crash site (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Sihanouk Cancels His Plans to Meet Cambodian Again

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 374 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Dec. 10


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former leader, announced today that he had
canceled plans to meet in January and April with Prime Minister Hun Sen of the
Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government to continue talks aimed at ending that
nation's nine-year guerrilla war.

After three days of amicable meetings with the Prime Minister last week, Prince
Sihanouk sent him a telegram, made public today, saying it would be ''useless''
to hold further talks unless the other two guerrilla factions that are part of
the anti-Government coalition join the discussions.

Prince Sihanouk, who leads one of the three Cambodian rebel armies, said,
however, that he would agree to meet Prime Minister Hun Sen ''in the framework
of a four-party Khmer meeting'' that included the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge and
the non-Communist Khmer National Liberation Front.

When the Prince and Prime Minister met for the first time last week in a village
60 miles northeast of Paris, their talks were considered a breakthrough in
efforts to end the guerrilla war. They issued a joint communique saying they
would meet in France next month and in North Korea in April, but Asian diplomats
said Prince Sihanouk changed his mind to help put pressure on the other
guerrilla factions to join the talks.

In the joint communique, the two said that they wanted the other guerrilla
factions to join the talks but that they would meet again even if those factions
did not join them.

Displaying quite a different tone from last week, Prince Sihanouk said today in
a letter to the French press that Prime Minister Hun Sen was merely a ''valet''
to the Vietnamese. The Phnom Penh Government was installed in 1978 after
Vietnamese troops invaded Cambodia to help end the Khmer Rouge's three-year
reign of terror. Since that time, the guerrillas have been fighting the 140,000
Vietnamse troops in Cambodia.

In a postcript to his telegram, Prince Sihanouk said efforts at national
reconciliation would be difficult unless the Vietnamese-backed Phnom Penh regime
as well as the guerrilla coalition dissolved, making way for a non-aligned,
non-Communist state. He said it would have to be a ''French-style liberal
democracy'' with free elections monitored by the United Nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 12, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Some Say Frontier Is Still There, and Still Different

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1380 words

DATELINE: AZTEC, N.M.


Nearly a century after experts pronounced the death of the American frontier, a
loosely knit group of academics and public officials are arguing that the death
sentence was premature. The frontier is still out there in all its harshness,
they say, even if its borders are harder to define.

They say the vast open spaces of the West remain the nation's most misunderstood
and dangerous region, and one that needs to be viewed in a light entirely
different from the way its rural counterparts elsewhere are perceived. Experts
say the rates of violent death among youths in the most isolated parts of the
West are higher than those in big-city ghettos, and studies show that residents
of the underpopulated areas have worse health conditions and live shorter lives.

Frank J. Popper, chairman of the urban studies department at Rutgers University,
said the frontier exists as a distinct region with a view of life that stresses
independence, risk-taking and individualism, concepts that remain central to
both the American imagination and the direction of the West.

'Macho and Hell-Raising'

''I think we've taken a giant wrong intellectual turn in thinking the frontier
disappeared in 1890 or whatever,'' said Dr. Popper, whose writings on the
survival of the frontier have attracted the attention of health care
professionals in particular. ''It's not as big as it was, but it's there, and in
some ways it's just as violent and just as macho and hell-raising in 1987.''

Over the past two years health planners have increasingly drawn distinctions
between generally rural areas and places that are, in effect, on the edge of
civilization. Defining the frontier as areas with no more than six people to the
square mile, officials note that distance alone provides rare problems in law
enforcement and health care.

''When I was in Vietnam, a medic was never more than 10 minutes away,'' said
Lieut. R. L. Stockard, who heads the state police district that includes this
northwestern New Mexico town. ''Here you can wait by a wreck on the highway for
45 minutes before help gets there.''

But more than distance is involved. The frontier is also defined by the West's
boom-and-bust economy and dangerous occupations like mining, forestry and oil
drilling. Also at play are less tangible factors: the historic machismo of the
West, and the transient nature and fragile economies of many Western towns. Some
experts contend the combination has produced a far more rootless, violent world
than small towns or rural areas elsewhere.

Lots of Land, Few People

''Western towns are more of an aggregate than a community,'' said Phillip A.
May, a sociologist at the University of New Mexico. ''There is no cultural
cohesion. Westerners basically believe in rugged individualism first and the
government second.''

To people subscribing to the idea of a continuing frontier, its persistence is
as clear as the 1980 census. It showed that 394 counties, covering 45 percent of
the land area of the United States, including virtually all of Alaska, had six
or fewer people per square mile. In all, 2.2 million people live in these
counties, which are clustered almost entirely west of the Mississippi River.

Over the past two years consideration of these sparsely populated areas has
gained increasing attention from health care professionals. Many, including Gar
T. Elison, director of health planning and analysis of the Utah Department of
Health, have argued for a separate designation in assessing health care needs.

''The West has always suffered by being defined by people in the East,'' said
Mr. Elison, who is chairman of the National Frontier Health Care Task Force.
''We're always going to have a problem providing services if the frame of
reference for rural areas is West Virginia. Standards that make sense in the
East are often irrelevant in the West.''

He said population and patient census ratios used in evaluating the need for
rural health care programs or clinics inevitably short-changed frontier areas.
''It's been a way of saying the have-nots will always remain that way, and we
resent that,'' he said.

Rare Needs in Remote Areas

Mr. Elison said that in the past two years some 15 health care organizations had
endorsed the basic concept of having different standards for frontier areas.
Similarly, he said, a recent health bill in the House of Representatives cited
the need for recognizing the underpopulated regions' different needs.

There have been few definitive studies on differences between such areas and
places with 6 to 100 people to the square mile, which would be classified as
''rural.'' But recent analyses of statistics in Idaho, Utah, South Dakota,
Nebraska and Wyoming indicate residents in the frontier areas have poorer health
than those in urban or rural ones.

Mr. Elison said a study of mortality data in Utah showed frontier residents
fared the worst in terms of working years of life lost because of several
leading causes of death, including suicide, automobile accidents, other
accidents and infant diseases. (Working years are defined as the years from the
age of 15 to 65, and the figure is derived by subtracting the age of death from
65.) The figures are 33.5 percent higher in frontier areas than in urban ones,
Mr. Elison said.

Shift in Ideas on Violence

For academics like Dr. Popper, the frontier designation is less a tool for
program planning than a window onto the sparsely populated areas of the West.

He argues that the obscurity of life in those areas has distorted some of the
ideas about violence in the United States.

In a paper in The Public Interest this spring, Dr. Popper and two colleagues
analyzed violent deaths of American youths from 1939 through 1979. They studied
rates for 15-to-24-year-old whites, including Hispanic people, and found that
the Western states invariably had the highest death rates and the Northeast the
lowest. In the states with the highest death rates, Arizona, Nevada, New Mexico
and Utah, the most dangerous counties were the less populated ones.

Typically, those counties had higher death rates among their white population
than high-crime cities showed for urban blacks, Dr. Popper said.

''The rural areas of the West, rather than the American urban ghetto, is where
youth is far more likely to suffer violent death,'' Dr. Popper and his
colleagues, Michael R. Greenberg and George W. Carey, concluded.

Studies in 1986 by the Federal Centers for Disease Control found that the West
had the highest rates for youth suicides and for homicides among both whites and
blacks.

Experts cite as reasons for the large number of violent deaths not only
dangerous occupations and the individualism of the rural West but also the high
number of fatal auto accidents, reflecting both widespread drinking, dangerous
roads and the difficulties in providing emergency care in rural areas.

They're on Their Own

Law-enforcement officials say the individualism of the West is reflected in what
is often a predilection to handle problems outside the law.

''In a lot of these areas, there's really no law enforcement - no police, no
sheriff, no state police station,'' said Lieutenant Stockard, the state police
official here. ''People prefer to handle their own affairs and disputes by
themselves.''

He said the problems were compounded by a disparate ethnic mix. His region
includes insular Hispanic communities like Cuba, N.M., in the southern part of
the district, Indian reservations with high mortality rates and alcohol problems
in the middle, and largely white communities dependent on mining and oil and gas
to the north.

Mr. Elison said many Western states were involved in efforts to try to gather
data on frontier regions. He said most of the available figures probably
understated problems there because they did not take into account the economic
distress and resultant problems of the past few years throughout the West.

''We're in the midst of an economic crisis that began in 1983, and any earlier
numbers are not going to reflect it,'' he said. ''You look at the economy of the
West, agriculture is down, oil and gas are down, mining is down, forest
industries are down, housing starts are down. All those things are going to have
an impact.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of the United States highlighting counties with less than six
people per square mile (Frontier Health Care Task Force)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMIT AFTERMATH;
From Hare Krishnas to Yupic Eskimos, a Parade of Protesters

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 705 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 12


There were Jews and Hare Krishnas, there were Buddhist monks; Vietnamese exiles
mingled with Taiwanese evangelicals; Lithuanians and Ethiopians joined Afghan
children, and one lone voice spoke out for Yupic Eskimos.

All were bearing messages for the superpower leaders. Sharing space in Lafayette
Park, across Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House, they vied for a place in
the summit spotlight this week.

Evangelical followers of the Taiwan minister Elijah Hong shouted messages to
President Reagan through megaphones, castigating him for ''joining hands with an
anti-God regime.'' Peach-robed Hare Krishnas protested the detention of Krishna
devotees in Soviet prisons, psychiatric hospitals and labor camps. Antinuclear
protesters distributed pamphlets prescribing love as the answer to the arms
race.

Prayers for 'Mutual Trust'

A congregation of brightly clad Buddhist monks chanted to the beat of tenku
drums and sat cross-legged on folded sleeping bags as they prayed for ''mutual
trust and disarmament'' between the two countries.

The Rev. G. Jarvis McMillan of the National Presbyterian Church in Baltimore
paraded in front of the White House carrying a huge white-and-orange umbrella
with giant holes cut in each section and dangling paper plates reading ''SDI
Shield.''

The holes were meant to show that ''S.D.I. only keeps us 80 percent protected,''
Mr. McMillan said. ''The real route to security is through peaceful
negotiations.''

A small group of Vietnamese exiles distributed copies of a letter asking Mikhail
S. Gorbachev to cut off Soviet military aid to the Hanoi Government.

Members of the ''No Business As Usual Action Network,'' a New York-based group,
sang traditional Christmas carols with new lyrics. Their repertoire included
''World War III Is Coming to Town'' and another old favorite transformed into
''Jingle bells, jingle bells, 'Star Wars' on the way.''

At a news conference Tuesday night, one man queried Marlin Fitzwater, the White
House press secretary, and Gennadi I. Gerasimov, spokesman for the Soviet
Foreign Ministry, about the plight of the Yupic Eskimos.

''Will the two superpowers accommodate the cultural and socio-economic interest
of the Yupic community on both sides of the Bering Sea as they address their
boundary dispute over the oil of the Bering Sea?'' the man asked above a din of
boos and laughter.

Members of the American Freedom Coalition marched in front of the Soviet Embassy
on Wednesday night with gray plastic tombstones that read ''160 million dead.''

''We are not forgetting those who have died under the iron rule of Communism
since the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917,'' said Greg Mueller, a spokesman for the
group.

Afghan Children Turned Away

Four Afghan children, wounded by Soviet bombs, carried flowers and a letter to
the Soviet Embassy on Wednesday to ask Mr. Gorbachev to remove Soviet troops
from their homeland. Soviet officials refused the flowers and the letter. The
children, who were in the United States for medical treatment, left them at the
police barricade in front of the embassy.

Three hundred Afghan protesters joined in Lafayette Park Tuesday to urge the
withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. ''We are calling to Mr. Gorbachev
to stop genocide in Afghanistan,'' said Eshanjan Areef of the Afghan guerrilla
group Jamiat-e-Islami.

Members of three Ethiopian ethnic groups, the Eritreans, Oromos and Ethiopians,
also marched Tuesday, charging the Soviet-backed Government with causing famine
and abusing human rights.

About 250 people from Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania gathered at the park Tuesday
night as Mr. and Mrs. Gorbachev arrived at the White House for dinner.

''We demand that Gorbachev see the light and recognize that the Baltic states
were free and given to the Soviet Union in the Ribbentrop-Molotov agreement
during World War II,'' said Aristide Nicolaie of the Captive Nations Actions
Committee.

A group of Brazilian high school students, in Washington on Wednesday for a tour
of the capital, snapped pictures of each other next to various groups.

''All these people,'' said 16-year-old Teresinha Buono of Rio de Janeiro, waving
toward the demonstrators. ''It's just like Carnival.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of antiwar demonstrators forming a chain from White House to the
Soviet Embassy before summit meeting (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodia Is Short of Everything but Vietnamese

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1533 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


Even the weather conspires against the battered nation of Cambodia, which is
already short of money, expertise, labor, reliable statistics and communications
with the outside world.

A longer than usual dry season followed by late heavy rains in Asia may exact
the worst natural toll on food production since the Vietnamese-backed regime
came to power in 1979, officials here say.

The influx of thousands of Vietnamese immigrants has also distressed many
Cambodians. And Cambodia is in trouble with its major aid donor, the Soviet
Union, for reportedly ''wasting'' assistance from Moscow.

The country's Deputy Planning Minister, Nhim Vanda, told reporters with unusual
candor that Cambodia was not turning Soviet investment into exports to Moscow
fast enough. He implied that Soviet aid was given only for the sake of procuring
tropical goods, especially timber and rubber.

Rice Shortage Predicted

Although green rice fields seem to blanket the countryside, a shortage of
200,000 tons of rice is predicted for this year. In 1985, a 400,000-ton
shortfall was forecast but did not occur, prompting skepticism in the region
about this year's prediction.

In addition, the prices of some staple foods and other consumer goods have risen
abruptly over the last few months for a variety of reasons including local
corruption, officials concede. Prices may rise higher if and when the drought's
effects are felt.

Officials say the Cambodian people are already getting less than the minimal
nutritional requirements recommended by international organizations, although
their country is fertile and underpopulated.

The population was decimated by uprootings and massacres under the former Khmer
Rouge regime of Pol Pot, who heads the main guerrilla group fighting the
Vietnamese-installed Government.

But Cambodia is lacking not only in numbers but in the technological and
entreprenurial skills needed for development. Its literacy rate is about 20
percent, one of the lowest in the region.

Unlike Vietnam, Laos and other Communist nations, Cambodia has announced no
sweeping economic changes. Almost all industrial production remains under state
control, though family businesses are encouraged to increase consumer goods.

Some Smuggling Tolerated

The Deputy Minister acknowledged that a certain amount of smuggling was
tolerated by the Government because it also met consumer demands and until
recently kept the inflation rate low. Cambodia's currency, the riel, is much
stronger than its Vietnamese counterpart, the dong. The two currencies were at
parity in 1986, but the riel is now worth eight dong.

The city's largest free-trade market is full of Thai and Western goods, many of
which enter the country through Koh Kong, an offshore island in the Gulf of
Thailand, or through the port of Kompong Som. Reporters who paid a rare visit to
the southwestern port town recently saw large new houses rising everywhere.

But luxury consumer goods are not distributed widely. Children in the
countryside want to look at and touch a visitor's watch. Aid workers say there
are few radios.

Economic figures here are nearly impossible to obtain, apart from those
enshrined in the national plan; the Planning Ministry has no statistics on
Cambodia's foreign debt, for example. So it is hard to find out exactly how
large some shortfalls are, or the reasons for them.

''The needs of Cambodia cannot be calculated,'' Mr. Nhim Vanda said.

Parallel Economy Develops

With more and more of its functioning businesses controlled by black-marketeers,
many of them Thai and Vietnamese, the country is developing a powerful private
or ''parallel'' economy, Phnom Penh residents say. Almost anything in the
capital can be had for a price, including a ''ticket'' to Bangkok on a Thai
fishing boat for $400.

A foreigner based here summarized it starkly, saying:

''The merchants from Cholon control the black market; they finance exports and
imports; they dominate and manipulate the exchange rate.'' Cholon is the Chinese
section of Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.

The number of Vietnamese who have moved here since Hanoi's forces overthrew Pol
Pot in 1979 is a matter of controversy in Cambodia.

The Government insists that the Vietnamese, numbering no more than 60,000, are
returning families who had been expelled in the early 1970's in a wave of
Cambodian nationalism. Officials say the newcomers, many born here, represent
only one-tenth of the population of clerks and bureaucrats imported by the
French colonial government before World War II.

Some resident foreigners disagree. One described the Vietnamese now arriving as
a ''new tribe'' coming to settle the land, fish the waters and profit from the
markets. #100,000 New Vietnamese Foreigners say that while the presence of the
Vietnamese Army has been much reduced in Phnom Penh, there are probably more
than 100,000 new Vietnamese civilians concentrated here, in the eastern
provinces and in Kompong Som.

A stroll along Phnom Penh's Monivong Boulevard and nearby streets confirms this
impression. In a newly opened beauty salon, the manicurist and hairstylist were
recent migrants from Ho Chi Minh City. The shop manager said she had hired them
because they were ''very mod,'' with talents she could not find locally.

Around the corner at a well-equipped dental clinic, the family in charge was
Vietnamese, and in other shops the story was the same.

Most foreigners questioned in Phnom Penh rejected the assertions of Prince
Norodom Sihanouk and other insurgent leaders that Hanoi is introducing hundreds
of thousands of Vietnamese as a matter of policy to change the demographic and
cultural character of Cambodia through settlement and intermarriage.

Nationalist Feeling Emerges

But some diplomats in this secretive and isolated country said their impression
was that the growth of Vietnamese businesses at the expense of Cambodians did
exist and was fueling some nationalist strains in the Government. Many
Cambodians seem to believe that ethnic Vietnamese or Chinese-Vietnamese get
preferences in renting shops or in other dealings with officials.

It is an open question how much Cambodian produce is being bought cheaply or
commandeered by Hanoi.

Vietnamese are reported to be buying seafood at Kompong Som and transporting it
across to Ho Chi Minh City, where it is processed and exported for profit.

Rice may also be leaving the country in significant amounts, becoming a hidden
contributor to shortages here, refugees reaching Thailand say. Vietnam has
chronic rice shortages.

Empty Trucks From Vietnam

Travelers along the highway from Phnom Penh to Ho Chi Minh City, formerly
Saigon, recently saw large trucks, bullock carts and even bicycles loaded with
rice near the border crossing at Bavat, all headed toward Vietnam. Empty trucks
were coming back.

For Cambodians, international aid workers say, the daily struggle for survival
may have intensified, not lessened, over the last few years.

''Most Cambodians eat only a bowl of rice with a little fish for lunch and
dinner,'' a resident of Phnom Penh said. The average government worker's salary
has dropped to less than $2 a month at the unofficial exchange rate most often
used. A good bicycle, the standard mode of transportation, costs more than $100.

''We realize that the purchasing power of people on fixed salaries is not quite
up to the mark,'' Mr. Nhim Vanda said. But he ruled out pay increases, saying
what the country needed to do was to get more consumer goods into circulation to
reduce prices.

The Government's inability to restart the Cambodian economy in nine years is
thought to have several causes. The Government says the Pol Pot regime so
decimated the country and its people that development can begin only slowly.

Public Services Deteriorate

Residents of Phnom Penh say, however, that the Government, preoccuppied with
political orthodoxy, allowed the already minimal public services to deteriorate.
Garbage rots on sidewalks uncollected, prompting a recent cholera scare that led
to sanitation assistance from an international agency.

Electrical services continue to degenerate, while corrupt officials tap supplies
to sell privately. Others just steal power. Elevators have ceased to function in
hotels. The water supply is unreliable.

At the small Psar Depot soap factory, a model technology project being assisted
by the Mennonite Central Committee of Akron, Pa., plant managers say they have
frequent power cuts, amounting on average to three days' work loss a week. Those
who can afford it turn to private generators, giving the city a misleading look
of improvement at night.

Cambodian officials say the country's isolation - outside the Soviet bloc, only
India recognizes the Government Hanoi installed - is causing its people to
suffer. But some development experts question whether the country could absorb
much aid, given its low level of managerial skills and poor services.

In addition, some experts say, the thinking of development planners is possibly
a decade out of date, still rooted in the age of big projects that are not
appropriate to Cambodia's smaller-scale needs and skills.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Cambodian farmers loading a cart during rice harvest (The New
York Times/Fred R. Conrad); map of Cambodia and Southeast Asia

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Prosecution Witness Attacked at Brink's Trial

BYLINE: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 59, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 638 words


Defense lawyers have attacked the credibility of a key informer who said two
defendants took part in Brink's armored-car robberies for a black revolutionary
group.

The lawyers repeatedly pointed out discrepancies last week in the testimony of
the informer, Tyrone Rison, the prosecution's main witness against Mutulu Shakur
and Marilyn Buck, the defendants in the current Brink's trial in Federal
District Court in Manhattan.

Mr. Rison said he and Mr. Shakur were in a black revolutionary group that
committed robberies. He said Ms. Buck was part of a team of white supporters,
and some money from the robberies was used to support political activities.

Much of the cross-examination last week focused on a ledger that Mr. Rison
described as an account of money that the group kept in a hideout in Mount
Vernon, N.Y. He said the group, called the Family, took $500,000 in its most
successful robbery.

A defense lawyer, Chokwe Lumumba, repeatedly noted that the ledger contained no
mention of $500,000. Mr. Rison responded, ''That's correct, counselor.''

Stressing that the ledger did not support some of Mr. Rison's other testimony,
Mr. Lumumba brought out that the witness could not explain many entries in the
ledger.

''There seems to be quite a bit about this book that you don't know,'' Mr.
Lumumba remarked.

''I wasn't the bookkeeper,'' Mr. Rison retorted.

Previous Testimony

In a 1983 trial of several others in the Brink's case, Mr. Rison said the
$500,000 was kept in Mount Vernon, but he said in the current trial that some of
the money was sent to a hideout in Pittsburgh. The two current defendants were
fugitives during the earlier trial.

Mr. Lumumba and another lawyer, Judith Holmes, hammered at differences between
Mr. Rison's testimony in the two trials. The witness said he could not be
expected to ''remember every detail.''

Noting that Mr. Rison mentioned more details about the robberies now than he had
in the first trial, Mr. Lumumba asked him if ''your memory has improved over the
years.''

'Inner Conflicts'

Mr. Rison replied that he had previously failed to remember some things that he
now remembered because he had resolved some ''inner conflicts with myself.''

The lawyers suggested that Mr. Rison, who had pleaded guilty to racketeering and
is to be eligible for parole next year, lied about the defendants to win
leniency for himself.

Some testimony involved Mr. Rison's killing of a guard in a Bronx robbery. He
admitted shooting the guard, but described the shooting as an accident.

The lawyers also asked about Mr. Rison's admission that he had taken part in the
killing of a Vietnamese woman when he was a soldier in Vietnam. He answered that
he had watched others kill the woman, but that he had done nothing to stop them
so ''I was still part of it.''

Judge Charles S. Haight Jr. sustained a prosecutor's objection when Mr. Lumumba
suggested in a question that the Federal Bureau of Investigation ''framed''
people for political activities.

The lawyers, trying to portray the defendants as political figures, elicited
that Mr. Shakur was a leader of the Republic of New Africa, which advocates an
independent black nation in the the United States.

When asked if Mr. Shakur had done a lot of work for political prisoners, Mr.
Rison answered, ''I know he's done some political work - I don't know about a
lot.''

In questions about Joanne Chesimard, a Black Liberation Army leader convicted in
the slaying of a New Jersey state trooper, Ms. Holmes referred to Ms.
Chesimard's 1979 escape from jail as the ''liberation'' of a ''freedom
fighter.''

Mr. Rison said the two defendants helped carry out the escape. He also said Mr.
Shakur was in charge of planning the 1981 Brink's robbery in Rockland County in
which a guard and two police officers were killed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
Would a Promotion to Cabinet Level Improve the V.A.?

BYLINE: By JULIE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 854 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHY should Congress elevate the Veterans Administration to Cabinet status? It's
simple, to many veterans and legislators: There's no compelling reason for it
not to.

The momentum of the proposal illustrates not only the potency of the veterans'
well-organized lobby, but also the fact that an issue of broad political appeal,
a matter of waving flags and helping heroes, can grab center stage in Washington
no matter what else is going on.

Similar proposals have failed to pass in the last 17 consecutive sessions of
Congress. But on the eve of Veterans Day last month President Reagan endorsed
the proposal; the House passed it a week later, 399 to 17, and last week the
Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, in a chamber filled with enthusiastic
veterans, started work on its own bill. No one, apparently, wants to hear the
scant few lawmakers who argue that Cabinet status would give the Veterans
Administration little it does not have as an agency.

''I can't understand why the President went along with this,'' said
Representative Morris K. Udall, an Arizona Democrat. ''Organizationally, there's
no good reason for it. In fact, in some ways you risk complicating the
organization by layering on one more layer of authority.''

The House bill would change the agency's name to the Department of Veterans
Affairs, add a seat at the Cabinet table for a Secretary of Veterans Affairs and
make some senior V.A. officials political appointees.

''This train is going to leave the station,'' said Senator Willam V. Roth of
Delaware, the Senate committee's ranking Republican. ''It is our task to make
certain we move not just an engine and caboose, but a complete well-structured
package, freighted with better delivery of services and heightened visibility
for our nation's vets.'' Mr. Roth offered no specifics.

An Agency With Scope

The agency Administrator, Thomas K. Turnage, says he doesn't see the Cabinet
proposal, which he favors, as an expansion of Government: ''We're here
already.'' The V.A. serves 27 million veterans and 53 million dependents and
survivors, more than a third of the population. It is the largest independent
agency in the Federal bureaucracy, with an annual budget of $27 billion and more
than 240,000 employees. It operates one of the largest health care systems in
the world, and the number of patients it treats is expected to skyrocket as more
World War II veterans age; it administers one of the largest home loan guarantee
programs in the Federal Government, having guaranteed some $263 billion in
mortgage loans since 1944; and it has helped 18 million veterans go to college
or get job training.

When proponents explain why Cabinet status would improve the agency, they
mention the benefits of regular access to the President and participation in
policy-making. ''You'd bring this agency into the inner sanctum,'' said Senator
Frank H. Murkowski, the Alaska Republican who is the ranking minority member on
the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee.

An elevation in status also would give the V.A. ''some increased political
accountability,'' said Paul S. Egan, legislative director of the Vietnam
Veterans of America, which has 35,000 members and has long been an aggressive
critic of the agency. Its performance ''has been so poor that just about any
change'' would be an improvement, Mr. Egan told the senators. ''This is where we
differ from the other veterans' service organizations: We see elevation to
Cabinet status not as a reward for a job well done, but as a way of bringing
some sunshine into an agency that has been left to its own discretionary devices
for too long.'' He called the agency ''abusive'' in its dealings with veterans,
especially those with post-traumatic stress disorder (the Vietnam-era name for
combat-related psychological problems) and with those who were exposed to Agent
Orange and to radiation from atomic bomb tests. The agency has denied them
disability payments, saying there is no proof that their problems were caused by
their service experiences.

Practical considerations, however, are often passed over quickly in favor of
rhetoric about the pride, prestige and dignity of those who fought and died in
the United States armed forces. ''The veterans of this nation will have an
important avenue of access to the executive branch of our Government
commensurate with the sacrifices they have made for our country,'' said John F.
Heilman, legislative director for Disabled American Veterans, an organization of
1.1 million members.

Proponents assert that the agency's elevation would cost only about $30,000 a
year, the amount needed to give senior V.A. officials salaries equal to those of
Cabinet secretaries and their deputies. Conservative groups flatly express their
disbelief and call the proposal hypocritical in an era of concern over Federal
budget deficits.

''This will involve more in the long run than simply changing letterheads,''
said Tom Miller, who has studied the military retirement system as a senior
policy analyst at the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a conservative research
group. ''It's a bad idea.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph breakdown allocation of Veterans Administration's $27 billion
1988 budget appropriation request (Source: Veterans Administration)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

In and Out of Storyville: Jazz and Fiction

BYLINE: By Vance Bourjaily; Vance Bourjaily's most recent novel, ''The Great
Fake Book,'' includes a character who is more than passingly involved with
learning to play jazz cornet.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2917 words


ONE morning in New Orleans I went to a jazz funeral. The deceased was Thomas
Jefferson, a trumpet player, gone now at 65. His own band was going to play. It
was cool and cloudy when my wife and I, with the baby in his stroller, joined a
crowd gathered on the sidewalk and street outside the funeral home. We were
there for second-lining. The first line at a jazz funeral is family and friends,
there to mourn; the second-liners come to follow the slow music down the street
until the band stops, the body is passed by it, then the line of march reverses,
the music gets fast and the dancing starts.

The tune, as we started out, was ''Bourbon Street Parade,'' slow as could be.
The mood was thoughtful, if not somber, and I had something I'd been trying to
think about. It was an old canard, which held that American writers of fiction
had failed in their duty to use jazz, a native American art form, as subject
matter. If fiction has a duty, it seemed to me, it is to make characters live,
stories move and prose sing - that is difficult enough without adding the burden
of assigned topics. Turn it around: certain songs (''Sweet Lorraine,'' ''Autumn
Leaves'') seem made for jazz, but there is no obligation for musicians to make
jazz out of all songs.

Well. If the obligation to make use isn't contained in the topic itself, what
about ''native American''? Does indigenousness create responsibility? I thought
of baseball. Some fine stuff has been written about it - Ring Lardner's ''You
Know Me, Al,'' for example, and Thurber's wonderful piece ''You Could Look It
Up.'' There are other novels such as ''The Natural'' by Malamud. But so much of
the memorable work seems to be in nonfiction - Eliot Asinof's ''Eight Men Out,''
about the Black Sox scandal, and Roger Kahn's beautiful ''Boys of Summer'' head
a long list.

''Canard'' derives from the practice of medieval French con men of selling half
a duck, but I decided there wasn't even half a duck's worth of truth in the
charge. Along with seeing no particular obligation for writers to deal with
jazz, I couldn't see that they had failed to take advantage of the opportunity
to do it, either. They might even have done a little better by jazz than by
baseball.

THE first novel I'd ever read in which jazz was an important incidental concern
was Robert Paul Smith's appealing ''So It Doesn't Whistle,'' published back in
the late 1930's. Once I'd read it, I realized that jazz already was and probably
would be the background music for a lot of American fiction, from John O'Hara
all the way through Jack Kerouac and Thomas Pynchon. ''On the Road'' and
''Desolation Angels'' are full of musical advocacy, and McClintic Sphere, a
recurrent character in Mr. Pynchon's ''V.,'' is said to have been modeled on
Ornette Coleman. (Oddly enough, the writer who'd given the word ''jazz'' its
currency, F. Scott Fitzgerald, seemed to have known nothing much about it;
outside of an occasional reference to party music in the stories and in ''The
Great Gatsby,'' and a scene or two of people dancing to the gramophone, he wrote
little enough about music of any kind.) The first novel I read in which jazz is
a central concern was Dorothy Baker's ''Young Man With a Horn,'' another late
30's book, and if the best thing about it is the title, it still deserves the
respect due any work that takes the risk of pioneering. It is a surface novel,
suggested by the life of Bix Beiderbecke, but not even the surface seems true.
Nevertheless, it was the first full treatment of what I had come to think of as
The Story.

The Story goes like this: a musician of genius, frustrated by the discrepancy
between what he can achieve and the crummy life musicians lead (because of
racial discrimination, or the demand that the music be made commercial, or
because he has a potential he can't reach), goes mad, or destroys himself with
alcohol and drugs. The Story might be a romance, but it is a valid one.
Beiderbecke's was far from the only life that followed that pattern.

The Story is used, with variations, in more than half the jazz stories I could
call to mind, not all by prominent writers - though James Baldwin was there with
''Sonny's Blues,'' Shelby Foote with ''Ride Out'' and James Jones with ''The
King.'' The four I recalled most vividly are by Richard Yates, Terry Southern,
Eudora Welty and a writer about whom I knew nothing except that he'd written it.

This was Charles Beaumont, anthologized along with some - not all - of the
others in ''Eddie Condon's Treasury of Jazz.'' The Beaumont piece is called
''Black Country'' and it tells The Story memorably with a voodoo undercurrent
not uncommon in the fiction I was trying to sort out. The great player is
''Spoof Collins . . . who gave jazz spats and dressed up the blues, who did
things with a trumpet a trumpet couldn't do,'' and who is very much a victim of
discrimination as well as his own self-destructive urges. Spoof takes Sonny, an
obsequious white kid, into his band, someone to bully as they tour the
tumbledown black honky-tonk dance halls of the South.

Sonny gets good enough to take over by the time Spoof kills himself, and the new
leader seems driven to tour again through black country. Now his playing starts
more and more to sound like Spoof's. Sonny exhumes Spoof's trumpet and at the
climactic moment: ''Hate blue out of that horn then. Hate and fury and mad and
fight, like screams and snarls. . . . Life got groined and sliced and
belly-punched.''

A fair amount of jazz fiction - and nonfiction as well - was written in
musicians' jargon; even at its most authentic, the vocabulary had dated very
quickly. ''Black Country'' is the only piece I know that uses that jargon to
take off from, heightening it and making it individual and lyrical so that it
transcends its time. The prose sings, the story moves, the characters live.

A second memorable short story, ''A Really Good Jazz Piano,'' by Richard Yates,
is The Antistory, written in the 50's. This time the musician, a black man
exiled in France after the Second World War, has a more-than-welcome chance to
play some commercial music. A couple of jazz snobs, deciding that the pianist's
integrity is their affair, snub him publicly in a damaging way. That false sense
of self-worth based on adherence to intellectual fads is Mr. Yates's target, and
he is not the only writer who sees the pretensions of the cultists among the
negative elements in the jazz life.

Vengeance is Terry Southern's in ''The Night the Bird Blew for Doctor Warner.''
Warner, a middle-aged cultist, tries to use hip vernacular to gain admittance to
the dangerous shadowland of heroin use. Doing research for a book, he means to
join the ultimate connoisseurs of bop by mainlining with them. Directed down an
alley where he is told he can make his connection and go on to hear Charlie
Parker play, Warner gets mugged.

But for me the most remarkable of the jazz short stories, neither Story nor
Anti, is Eudora Welty's ''Powerhouse,'' which begins with a black band, led by
the redoubtable Powerhouse, playing for a white dance. Break time comes. In a
black tavern the musicians talk as other customers and the beautiful young
waitress listen. Powerhouse introduces a riveting conversational theme, claiming
he's got a telegram saying his wife has killed herself.

'' 'I even know who finds her,' cries Powerhouse. 'That no good pussyfooted
crooning creeper that follow around after me, coming up like weeds behind me. .
. . Bets my numbers, sings my songs, gets close to my agent like a Betsy-bug.'
''

It is the beginning of a wonderful piece of group improvisation - funny,
disturbing, mysterious, full of energy - all in words. After Powerhouse's solo
monologue, the other musicians trade fours, improvising on the theme:

'' 'Know who he is?'

'' 'Why that's old Uranus Knockwood.'

''. . . 'He take our wives when we gone.' '' 'He come in when we goes out.' ''
'Uh-huh.' '' 'He go out when we comes in.' '' 'Yeah.' '' 'He standing behind the
door.' '' 'Old Uranus Knockwood.'

'' 'You know him.'

'' 'Middled-sized man.'

'' 'Wears a hat.'

'' 'That's him.' ''

And on it goes, exuberantly, delighting the listeners. Instead of trying to
describe a jazz chorus, Ms. Welty has written one, analogically, in her own
medium.

Our jazz funeral had reached a boulevard called Elysian Fields. Some time would
be spent now passing by the body of Thomas Jefferson, so that each front liner
and musician could touch the casket. It was a time in which I could pass by some
novels and touch and be ready to dance back with them. There was a surprising
number, and they were of three kinds: books in which jazz and blues were
indispensably in the background and occasionally emerged, books centrally
concerned with the meaning of the music, and books about the jazzman's life,
which took me again into the realm of The Story.

Dealing with the first category, I'd try to give each novel space proportionate
to the open emergence of jazz in the book. In Ralph Ellison's ''Invisible Man,''
there are some country blues, and the hero takes a Louis Armstrong record with
him underground; that is about it. In James Baldwin's ''Another Country,'' Rufus
Scott is a jazz musician, but that isn't the source of his problems.

John Edgar Wideman's ''Sent for You Yesterday'' is another matter. It takes its
title from a blues song, and describes the life and impending death of a black
neighborhood called Homewood. An important minor character is Albert Wilkes, a
fugitive, a murderer, whose piano playing provides the emotional outlet in the
ecstasy of dance for which the neighborhood had yearned in his absence. When
Wilkes is shot down, his genius magically passes into the fingers of another
character, an albino. And when the new pianist loses his only child and stops
playing, it is treated as an episode in the decline of Homewood that signals
there is now no chance for recovery.

NTOZAKE SHANGE'S ''Sassafras, Cypress & Indigo'' is a loving book about a mother
and her three daughters, full of songs, poems, spells and even recipes. Music,
as often as any other kind of event, is used to move the plot. The lover of
Sassafras is a seven-foot-tall ex-con and saxophonist named Mitch, a violent
man. Sassafras leaves Mitch for a time, and her new lover is also a sax player -
a slight, tender, sensitive man named Leroy, Mitch's opposite. Perhaps they
represent the extremes in the music itself, even in the way it could affect
people's lives.

That led neatly to my next set of books, which dramatize ideas about jazz
itself, what it does for people, what it means as an American and even a world
phenomenon. The Czechoslovak writer Josef Skvorecky spoke to the matter in the
preface to ''The Bass Saxophone,'' a much-admired book of two novellas: ''And no
matter what LeRoi Jones says to the contrary, the essence of this music . . . is
not simply protest. Its essence is something far more elemental: an elan vital,
a forceful vitality . . . its effect is cathartic.'' For this reason, he goes on
to say, it is the music of liberty and cultural freedom, banned in his boyhood
by the Nazis and in his manhood by the Communists (and still, I noted, a music
that stands for defiance in Czechoslovakia, where the Government last March
convicted five directors of a jazz club and sent them to jail).

Ishmael Reed, in ''Mumbo Jumbo,'' a wild and wonderfully idiosyncratic book,
seems pretty much in agreement with Mr. Skvorecky. The book presents jazz as
triggering recurrent outbreaks of liberation of the human spirit, coming to us
through history from Africa and then from Haiti to New Orleans, always opposed
and dreaded by the establishment. It reaches, in the establishment view, a
virulence so dangerous to stability in America in the decade between 1920 and
'30 that it is necessary to manipulate the country into a financial depression
in order to suppress all that joy. Traditional servants in fighting jazz (or
''jes' grew,'' as Mr. Reed called it), the Knights Templar, fail their masters;
the Atonalists are then willing to support the repressive efforts of a crazy
house painter who turns up in Germany. On the side of liberation and magic are
voodoo men like Papa LaBas, and in ''Mumbo Jumbo,'' published in 1971, Mr. Reed
hopes that that era of Vietnam and civil rights activism was a rebirth, after
long suppression, of ''1920-1930. That 1 decade which doesn't seem so much a
part of American history as the hidden After-Hours of America struggling to
jam.''

Thomas Jefferson's casket was almost up front now, and I had just two books to
go, the ones which told The Story. One, I decided, must come to be acknowledged
as that important work of American fiction about jazz which the canardistes
denied had yet been written. And the other didn't miss by much. The other was
Michael Ondaatje's ''Coming Through Slaughter,'' published in 1976, a poet's
impressionistic mixture of legend, fact and invention concerning the life of
Buddy Bolden. Bolden, a New Orleans trumpeter of the 1890's, is traditionally
regarded as the first great jazz musician, though there was no one living who
had heard him play, nor were there recordings of his music. His life, however,
had been, for the first time, The Story. Bolden went mad in the late 90's, at
the height of his powers and his popularity. At the age of 31 he was committed
to the East Louisiana State Hospital, and was still an inmate when he died in
1931.

His legend was told and retold, even as he lived on in his obscurity, and Mr.
Ondaatje made use of tape recordings by some of the retellers. Using those parts
of the legend that served him, and inventing a good deal more, he wrote his
brief novel in highly-charged prose, the intensity of the language relieved by
powerfully imagined scenes - a fight in a barbershop, for one, or this, seen
through Bolden's eyes: ''Parading around alone. I walk to Gravier past Chinatown
and then cut back to Canal. . . . Along the water . . . the mattress whores have
moved off their usual perch to avoid being hidden by the mist. They walk up and
down, keep moving like sentries to show that they haven't got broken ankles. The
ones that have stand still and try to hide it . . . the mist has helped them
tonight. Normally the pimps are out hunting the mattress whores with sticks.
When they catch them, they break their ankles.'' IT was a rich enough work to
survive some bad luck, but I couldn't pretend the bad luck didn't matter. A year
or so after Mr. Ondaatje's book appeared, a scrupulous researcher named Donald
M. Marquis published a documented biography called ''In Search of Buddy
Bolden,'' which found many of the more striking details of the legend without
basis - for example, that Bolden was a barber, and edited a gossip sheet called
The Cricket. Those two were, perhaps, immaterial, but for the poet to have
presented Bolden's common-law wife, Nora, as a former prostitute when she was,
according to Mr. Marquis, from a social stratum higher than Bolden's, was the
kind of invention that distorts rather than illuminates. It made a reader wish
Mr. Ondaatje had invented a name for his trumpeter, rather than trying to do the
mix of fiction with fact.

So I came, as the final slow chorus of ''Bourbon Street Parade'' ended, to
considering a jazz novel that seemed to me to be of absolutely solid esthetic
and intellectual worth - ''The Horn'' by John Clellon Holmes, published in 1958.
It is The Story raised from paradigm to parable. Edgar Poole, revered by other
musicians as ''The Horn,'' represents two things. One is the trend of jazz
innovation associated with Lester Young that led to bop; the other is the
demonic element in American culture embodied by Edgar Allan Poe. It is as if Mr.
Holmes were saying: ''O.K. Native American art form? Then it must have the same
conflicting energies as other American arts. Let's take 19th-century American
literature. . . .''

And so, opposing Edgar Poole, blowing cooler music, is a character named Walden
Blue, who could be based on a a saxophonist like Wardell Gray, or could
represent the spirit of Thoreau. And there are Geordie Dickson (Billie Holiday,
Emily Dickinson), and Dizzy Gillespie, who might be paired with Mark Twain, and
Thelonius Monk with Melville. Yet the story itself is all contemporary and all
about jazz. The connections are intricate, not parallels but some other set of
equivalences that are sometimes puzzling but never unguessable, and the prose -
in yet another acknowledgement to the American past - is often Jamesian.

What risks Mr. Holmes is taking, and how many reviewers and critics totally
missed what he is doing. But it is there, and would not, I thought, work at all
if he had simply been retelling The Story. Edgar Poole is something more than
the musician as victim; he is a man driven no less by pride than by neglect, and
the tale, often a painful one, is as much about endurance as it is about music.
On Poole's ultimate, excruciating binge, his friends and disciples would save
him if they could -indeed, he could have saved himself, but his perverse
artist's pride would not permit it. The story ends as The Story must - but
meanwhile Mr. Holmes has some provocative things to say about our culture, in a
dense and thoughtful book that sustains more readings than one.

''Jazz does have its fiction,'' I remarked to the baby. ''And some awfully good
stuff, too. Now let's get this stroller into boogie gear.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. 44)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT BOOKS;
COOL STORIES, INFLAMED POETS

BYLINE: By ANATOLE BROYARD; Anatole Broyard is an editor of The Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words


A TRULY capitalist country is one that can afford not one but several annual
collections of ''best'' short stories. While short story collections used to be
notoriously poor sellers, they are proliferating - which means either that the
market for them has improved, or that American literature has, in some
improbable way, transcended the question of sales.

In ''The Best American Short Stories 1987'' (Houghton Mifflin), edited by Ann
Beattie, most of the stories are pretty good. There are very few technical
mistakes in the book - everyone seems to have learned how to write. Of course a
quarrelsome person might say that most of the stories don't strain enough at the
boundaries, don't reach for the kind of experiences that shatter the writer's
poise. In her introduction, Ms. Beattie says she looks for stories that surprise
her - yet the majority of these authors might disown such a primitive effect. In
modern fiction, technique tends to overwhelm surprise. The typical contemporary
story occupies your imagination almost imperceptibly.

Ms. Beattie quotes Raymond Carver's remark that short stories have more in
common with poetry than with the novel. I think this is true, but I'm not sure
it isn't because poetry has moved toward the short story. In fact, if I were to
try to say what is missing from many of these stories, I think it would be
poetry. The short story has become our most stylized art form, and poetry may be
too naive for it.

My favorite piece, by Susan Sontag, is just what I would expect from her. It's
about our latest, most desperate form of sophistication, our new ironical
frontier. It centers on a man who has AIDS. He is an art dealer and his friends
visit him as if he were offering a show of life and death. They go to the
hospital as patriots - they are the patriots of worldliness - might go to the
tomb of the Unknown Soldier. Because his illness gives him a metallic taste in
his mouth, the sick man is always eating chocolate, everyone brings him
chocolate. It's a detail of almost demonic rightness.

Mavis Gallant invents a country in her story, and I thought as I read about it
that no one else could have created this place. It is her country, she has made
something utterly new and strange. People there use motorcycle helmets - there
are no motorcycles - as flowerpots.

I had thought that Vietnam might be an exhausted subject, and Tim O'Brien
changed my mind. If I describe what he does, it will sound like a trick - but
it's better than that. He has a young American officer in Vietnam thinking about
a girl back home whom he hardly knows. He thinks of her so vividly! She is
almost as vivid as war, as a gun in his hand.

Craig Nova's story is about a prince, and I felt unaccountably pleased with this
prince, as if a fairy tale had come true in some rueful, contemporary way. In
Charles Baxter's story, a young man tracks down a brother he has never met - and
brings a bat, a baseball and two new gloves to help them relax together. Raymond
Carver's story is very good. It's about a man's mother, who is always moving
from one city to another, trying to find a place to be comfortable, just as
we've tried to find a place for mothers in fiction.

What is the dominant feeling after reading this collection? I think I would say
that they show what ''American'' means. Like short stories, Americans are hard
to sell to the world. Yet they seem all right here. Variegated. Decent. Quirky.
O.K.

When Baudelaire made his famous remark, ''I cultivate my hysteria with joy and
terror,'' there was a certain amount of Romantic posing going on. But if Robert
Lowell, John Berryman or Theodore Roethke had said this, it would have been no
more than a statement of fact. And it was true of Randall Jarrell too, only it
didn't come out in his poems.

One of the many odd things about these four poets was that each was a friend of
at least one of the others and intensely competitive in that friendship. In
''Manic Power'' (Arbor House), Jeffrey Meyers quotes Robert Lowell's wistful
observation, ''I think we have a famine for greatness.''

Perhaps the saddest case was Jarrell's, because he was the best critic of the
four (they were all good) and the worst poet. As Mr. Meyers points out,
''Jarrell lacked Lowell's rhetoric, Berryman's originality and Roethke's
lyricism.'' Though he was a noncombatant who never went overseas, Jarrell became
famous as a World War II poet - an irony he himself may not have perceived. He
was in the awful position of a man who knew better than anyone else in his time
what poetry was, what it could do - yet his own poems were accused of both
''prodigiousness'' and ''flatness.'' Worse than that, they were sentimental -
which must be the ultimate terror of the serious modern poet.

Jarrell and Lowell were close friends who read and commented in great detail on
each other's work. But while Jarrell praised Lowell to the skies in reviewing
him, the best Lowell could do in return was to call Jarrell ''a great man of
letters . . . the best professional poet.'' (What does professional mean in this
context?) He praised Jarrell's war poems as ''a tremendous product of our
culture.'' Yet what else could he do? The miracle is that they were able to
remain friends.

Berryman was even more nakedly competitive. Mr. Meyers quotes a friend of
Berryman and Lowell who describes them climbing a tree in Princeton, N. J., each
trying to get higher than the other. The poetry certainly got higher - American
literature has never seen higher poetry, in every connotation of the word.
Berryman's ''Dream Songs'' were like a dare, or in John Bayley's phrase, ''like
a suicide hitting the pavement.'' But then Roethke said that when the suicide
''hits that pavement and is just a blob, who knows, maybe he explodes into a
million universes and he is happy.''

ALL four were suicides in a sense: Jarrell threw himself in front of a car on a
highway; Berryman jumped from a bridge; Lowell and Roethke both died of heart
attacks brought on by drinking and, probably, by poetry. What is important about
them is not their desperation - bookstores are full of bad, desperate writers -
but the quality of their work. Lowell, Berryman and Roethke are three of the
best poets we have ever produced, and Jarrell was one of the best critics.

Poetry has cooled down now, has become more civil. Most of it is no longer a
life-or-death affair, it doesn't sound like a cerebral hemorrhage, an anxiety
attack, a beautiful panic. As Lowell said of Jarrell, today's poetry is ''a
tremendous product of our culture.'' It's closer to a kind of criticism than it
is to ordeal or revelation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Divestment Efforts Fade In the Face Of Success

BYLINE: By JENNIFER A. KINGSON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 26, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 853 words


TWO years ago, students at campuses across the country erected shanties and
staged hunger strikes in an attempt to persuade their schools to stop investing
in companies that do business in South Africa. Now the movement seems to be
fading, a victim, in part, of its own success.

At schools such as Harvard, Yale and Boston University, student organizations
that were set up to spearhead the divestment campaign have largely disbanded. In
the fall of 1985, when protests were in full swing, 1,500 of Brown University's
5,500 students voted in a referendum favoring divestment, which won 83 percent
of the vote. Last month, only 384 students voted in a similar referendum, and
almost a third opposed it. ''In the spring of 1985, we were getting whole
auditoriums full of students,'' said Valerie Eilert, a leader of the movement at
the University of Colorado. ''Now, maybe 20 people will show up.''

To some extent, the movement waned because it worked. Dozens of colleges and
universities agreed to sell all or part of their holdings in companies with
links to South Africa, some in direct response to student demonstrations. When
it came, divestment was actually a letdown for some protestors. ''It was
anticlimactic,'' said Kathleen Miller, a senior at Smith College who took part
in a sit-in in 1986. ''It wasn't seen as directly the result of our efforts.''

But some schools, including Dartmouth College, where protests caused much
strife, have not changed their investment policies significantly, and the
agitation has died down anyway.

Many of the movement's former leaders attribute the decline in campus protests
to restrictions on the news media that the South African Government imposed in
June 1986. While protests against the Vietnam War were fueled nightly by vivid
television footage, the anti-apartheid movement became hard to sustain once such
reminders diminished, some leaders said. Several organizers said renewed
interest might be stimulated by the recently released movie ''Cry Freedom,'' the
story of Stephen Biko, the slain South African black nationalist leader.

''It definitely is harder to motivate people when they don't have that graphic
representation of what they are struggling against,'' said Paul Zimmerman, a
21-year-old senior at Brown. In his sophomore year, Mr. Zimmerman and three
other Brown students fasted for 10 days to protest a trustee vote not to divest.
Now he is no longer involved with the issue. Instead, he speaks out against the
C.I.A., and recently participated in a campus debate on Central American policy
with two recruiters for the agency.

Widening Interests

In some areas of the country, the movement is still alive. Joel Segal, a
28-year-old law student at the University of North Carolina, is trying to
organize a national organization of students against apartheid. He points to a
candlelight vigil held on Oct. 13 at 60 campuses as evidence of the movement's
vitality. But what started as a single issue seems to have broadened to include
other concerns. Most activists see the ''hot'' new campus issues as offshoots of
the divestment movement. Attention has shifted from racism in South Africa to
racism at home, and to United States policies toward Nicaragua.

''You find the same core of people from the divestment movement who go to
rallies about domestic racism and Central America,'' said Tanaquil Jones, a
senior at Columbia University who took part in a three-week blockade of an
administration building in April 1985 by students who favored divestment.
Instead of holding large rallies, leaders of the divestment movement have
brought their message indoors, showing movies about apartheid and organizing
lectures and debates.

Some activists at schools where divestment was approved have been trying to up
the ante. In the University of California college system, which voted for
divestment in July 1986, some students are waging a campaign to get products
made by South Africa-linked companies out of campus shops. At the University of
Michigan, which has divested all but 1 percent of its holdings in companies
doing business with South Africa, students are urging the school to give
financial assistance to an African National Congress school in Tanzania.

At campuses where full divestment has been consistently voted down, many
activists quit out of frustration. One example is Dartmouth, where in the winter
of 1986 a group of conservative students destroyed three shanties that had been
built to symbolize the poor living conditions of South African blacks. Recently,
students held a rally and a fast to commemorate the event and keep the issue
alive. But Leo Spitzer, a history professor who was active in the movement,
said, ''The thing dragged on and on, it was divisive, and people burned out.''

The lack of fundamental change in South Africa has left many student activists
unsatisfied. ''The goals of the movement were too shortsighted,'' said Jaime
Acton, a senior at the University of California at Santa Barbara, ''The original
end goal was divestment, but the goal that should have been set up was to end
apartheid.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Southeast Asia Talks Face Major Shift

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Dec. 13


The leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, arriving here today
for their first summit meeting in more than a decade, face a region and a world
that has changed profoundly for them since their organization was founded 20
years ago.

Most significant, say officials of the six member nations - Thailand, Malaysia,
Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and the Philippines - is non-Communist Southeast
Asia's changing relationship with the United States.

But there are also shifts in attitudes toward China, the Soviet Union -which in
the last two years has been projecting itself as an Asian power that wants to
take part in the coming ''Pacific century'' - and Japan. Prime Minister Noboru
Takeshita of Japan will be the only non-regional leader at this meeting.

Today, on the eve of Monday's opening of the two-day conference, President
Corazon C. Aquino welcomed four heads of government: Prime Ministers Prem
Tinsulanonda of Thailand, Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia and Lee Kuan Yew of
Singapore and Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei.

President Suharto of Indonesia, the most security-conscious of the leaders, is
not planning to arrive until Monday morning.

Streets Swamped With Troops

So swamped with troops and police officers are Manila's streets that a Filipino
columnist described the meeting as ''a beleaguered gathering of the clan.''
Issues facing the association, mostly involving trade and economic cooperation,
are taking second place to the desire to give President Aquino a demonstration
of support, regional officials and analysts say.

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations - which subscribes to free-enterprise
economic systems and, more or less, to political pluralism - was born in 1967 at
the height of American military and economic involvement in the region.

Washington's decision to fight a war in Vietnam provided other regional nations
with what one official called ''a safe breathing space in which to develop'' and
a sense of security. Communist movements had sprung up in several Southeast
Asian nations as they gained independence in the decolonization period that
followed World War II.

The sudden withdrawal of the United States from Indochina shocked many Southeast
Asians and planted the idea that the American shield could no longer be relied
on in their planning. Thailand asked American troops to leave in 1975, and then
faced and ultimately defeated a Communist insurgency on its own, helped by the
withdrawal of Chinese support for the leftists.

Relations With China Improve

China has pulled back in the 1980's from fomenting trouble in non-Communist
Southeast Asia and in Burma, a regional nation that has not joined any bloc but
whose relations with Asean have begun to grow.

China's relations with Southeast Asian nations have consequently improved to a
degree everywhere. Bangkok and Beijing have the closest ties, involving some
military cooperation as well as trade and diplomacy. Even Indonesia, which has
no diplomatic relations with China because of Beijing's support for the
Indonesian Communist Party in the 1950's and early 1960's, has opened trade
talks.

While insurgencies supported by China are no longer the problem in Southeast
Asia, Communist Vietnam is still a threat, particularly to Thailand, which has
Vietnamese troops across its borders with Cambodia and Laos. Some Southeast
Asian governments also fear Vietnamese or possibly Soviet involvement in the
Philippine Communist movement and in small anti-government organizations
elsewhere.

Now, however, it is not the United States to which Southeast Asians turn for a
solution to the continuing war in Cambodia, but the Soviet Union and China.
Moscow is Hanoi's paymaster, Asean nations say, and the only power able to force
a Vietnamese troop withdrawal. China, on the other hand, backs the Pol Pot
faction of the Khmer Rouge, which is battling the Vietnamese-installed
Government in Phnom Penh.

The view from Asean is that alone or together, the two Communist powers hold the
key to peace in Indochina and possibly in the region as a whole.

Economic View of U.S. Shifts

For many Southeast Asians, the United States has ceased to be a factor. This
feeling was reinforced last week as regional officials noted that Cambodia was
apparently not raised, or not in any substantial way, at the summit meeting
between President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

Until recently, however, the United States was still regarded in Southeast Asia
as a major economic partner in development. Now, this perception is also
changing.

Rightly or wrongly, many Southeast Asians - 280 million people with the world's
most impressive growth rates over the last two decades - feel they are being
victimized by protectionist lobbies in the United States. They resent copyright
laws being forced on them, they say, by Washington to protect American edges in
technology and other fields.

American aid has declined, except to the Philippines, and investment has
constricted in tougher economic times.

Takeshita Pledges Aid

Prime Minister Takeshita is coming to Manila this week with a pledge of $2
billion in development assistance for at least five of the association's
members. Brunei, with a large oil industry and large financial holdings
worldwide, is one of the world's richest nations in per capita terms.

Philippine commentators today were describing Tokyo as Manila's most important
partner in development. Japanese investment outstrips American throughout the
region, and Japanese consumer goods dominate local markets.

Cultural and political gaps have also grown between the United States, where
many Southeast Asians are educated, and some of the nations once thought of
almost as Washington's proteges.

As democratic practices have eroded in Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore, where
detentions of political opponents have increased, those governments have been
critical of both the Western press and European and American-based human rights
movements.

At the same time that ties with the West seem to loom less large, the nations of
this region have begun to look around them to build stronger ties with closer
neighbors.

A Larger Role in Pacific

Led by Indonesia, Asean is taking the first tentative steps toward playing a
larger role in the Western and South Pacific. Papua New Guinea has been drawn
into some Asean activites as an observer. Some regional officials have begun to
talk about overtures to Fiji and other island nations. Ties with Australia and
New Zealand are strengthening.

Despite evolution on many fronts, some Asean officials say, holding this
hermetic summit meeting in what looks like an embattled capital city proves that
not everything has changed.

Asean was conceived in conflict and tension. In the early 1960's Indonesia under
President Sukarno was the threat. His ''confrontation'' with newly created
Malaysia after 1963 severely threatened growth and stability throughout the
region.

President Suharto, who put an end to the confrontation policy after 1965 may be
arriving late for this meeting, but he is coming to lend his backing to a
neighbor in trouble.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Indonesia showing location of Manila

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'Aryan Nations Hour' Mixes God and Hate in Utah

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 852 words

DATELINE: SALT LAKE CITY, Dec. 13


Dwight McCarthy, a chubby, mild-mannered radio host who has stirred protests
here over efforts to lead an incursion into Utah by an Idaho-based group of
extremists, brought allies here Saturday to help support his messages of racial
discord.

Mr. McCarthy, who prefers to be called a white separatist rather than a white
supremacist, describes himself as the state director of a fledgling Utah chapter
of the Church of Jesus Christ Christian-Aryan Nations, a group that has been
linked to The Order, a violence-prone, anti-Semitic band of segregationists,
several of whose members have been convicted of conspiracy, arson and murder.

And in his second week of broadcasting his arguments for segregating the races
in individual ''homelands,'' Mr. McCarthy, 37 years old, was supported on his
weekly program Saturday by leaders of two widely disparate factions, a black
nationalist group and a league of white separatists.

''God has commanded us to stay separate,'' Mr. McCarthy said, seeking to offer a
logical foundation for his beliefs. He spoke in a telephone interview after the
second of his weekly broadcasts of his ''Aryan Nations Hour'' over KZZI, a small
station based in suburban West Jordan.

Repeal of 14th Amendment

''The Aryan Nations have put forward two platforms that we can support,'' said
one of Mr. McCarthy's radio guests, Robert Brock of Los Angeles, who describes
himself as president of the black nationalist Self-Determination Committee Inc.,
which he said had about 3,700 members and chapters in 18 states. Those
''platforms,'' he said, were the idea of a separate homeland for blacks and
''reparations'' from whites to help pay for it.

''We would send nonwhites back to their country of national origin,'' said
another of Mr. McCarthy's guests, Daniel Johnson, in a telephone interview. Mr.
Johnson described himself as a spokesman for a League of Pace Amendment
Advocates, whose principal goal, he said, was repeal of the 14th Amendment to
the Constitution. The size of his group is a secret, he said.

The 14th Amendment, which prohibits states from abridging ''the privileges or
immunities of citizens of the United States,'' is generally regarded as one of
the principal bulwarks of civil rights of minorities.

In his first ''Aryan Nations Hour,'' a week earlier, Mr. McCarthy's guest was
Richard Butler of Hayden Lake, Idaho, who heads the Aryan Nations group. Mr.
Butler is one of more than a dozen segregationist leaders indicted in Arkansas
last April on Federal charges of conspiracy to overthrow the Government. He is
free on bail pending a trial scheduled for next year.

'Emigrate to Antarctica'

''We seek to preserve our race, our culture and our heritage,'' he said during
the program. ''We preach separation because that's the way our father God laid
out life on this earth.''

Both programs brought telephone calls from both attackers and supporters.

''Might I suggest you emigrate to Antarctica?'' said one caller. ''I don't know
how you can go on this program and use God as a premise,'' said another.

That first program also stirred a rally by protesting groups in a West Jordan
park, and leaders of several groups, including the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored people and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, to which Mr. McCarthy once belonged, have subsequently spoken out
against an Aryan Nations presence in Utah.

Mr. McCarthy had been the host of a call-in program called ''The Counter-Marxist
Hour.'' He changed the format for his Dec. 5 program after consulting with John
Hinton, the owner of the station, which sells time to a variety of groups with
unconventional ideas.. Mr. McCarthy, who describes himself as ''independently
poor,'' pays $100 an hour for his program.

Rebuttal, Not Censorship

Mr. Hinton has been criticized for selling the time to Mr. McCarthy, but, he
said the other day, ''All I am doing is providing a forum for free speech.'' He
said he disagreed with Mr. McCarthy's views and found his program boring.

Mr. Hinton's decision was defended by the executive director of the American
Civil Liberties Union of Utah, Robyn Blumner.

''Our First Amendment assures us that unpopular speech has a right to a forum,''
she said. ''The appropriate response is public rebuttal and not censorship.''

Mr. McCarthy says he had been a member of the Aryan Nations group for about five
years before deciding to ''come out of the closet.''

He described himself as a ''combat-medic'' veteran of the Vietnam War and a
''student,'' while declining to describe the source of the money for his
program, any employment history or other details of his private life.

As for his views, he said that though he was opposed to violence, he saw a war
between the races as inevitable unless both whites and blacks could gain
separate homelands. For the whites, he said, the goal initially would be an
enclave ''in the Northwest'' but eventually that should constitute ''the whole
United States.''

In such a war, he said, his role had been determined by his white skin, ''the
uniform I was born into.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dwight McCarthy (The Salt Lake Tribune/Al Hartman)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 15, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

6 SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS OPEN SUMMIT MEETING

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 409 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Tuesday, Dec. 15


The leaders of six Southeast Asian nations concluded a two-day summit meeting
today, calling for greater economic cooperation among themselves and an end to
the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

Early this morning the Government leaders signed what is being called the Manila
Declaration, reaffirming principles of regional cooperation.

On Monday, agreements to reduce regional trade barriers and begin more joint
ventures among member nations were endorsed by the six leaders: Presidents
Corazon C. Aquino of the Philippines and Suharto of Indonesia; Prime Ministers
Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore, Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia and Prem Tinsulanonda of
Thailand, and Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei.

But there is still considerable confusion and some disagreement on how to
proceed on the region's most vexing security and political problem: the presence
of up to 140,000 Vietnamese troops in Cambodia and 40,000 in Laos.

A week ago, there were hopes for at least the foundations for a solution to the
nine-year-old war in Cambodia.

Meeting in France

Early this month Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia and Prince Norodom Sinahouk,
who leads a guerrilla army against the Hanoi-backed Phnom Penh Government, met
in France for the first time. In an atmosphere of cordiality, they announced
that they were set to begin a process of negotiation. At the end of last week,
Prince Sihanouk suddenly canceled two rounds of talks.

The Prince, on temporary leave from his position as head of the Coalition
Government of Democratic Kampuchea, which holds the country's United Nations
seat, indicated first that he could not go on with negotiations without the
backing of his two coalition partners, the non-Communist Khmer Peoples' National
Liberation Front and the Communist Khmer Rouge. He was later reported to have
also denounced Phnom Penh for trying to make him a ''lackey of the Vietnamese.''

The turnaround caught the Association of Southeast Asian Naions off guard. Most
of all, it caused consternation in Indonesia, since that country's Foreign
Minister, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, has been acting as the organization's
go-between with Hanoi.

Last summer, Foreign Minister Mochtar was reported to have been told by the new
Vietnamese Communist Party leader, Nguyen Van Linh, that the Cambodian war was
becoming burdensome for Vietnam - the first such admission by a Vietnamese
leader, according to officials close to the Indonesian leadership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 15, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Try Economic Pressure on Haiti

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 525 words


To the Editor:

I have always found A. M. Rosenthal to be thoughtful and incisive, and so was
surprised when his column (''For U.S. Intervention in Haiti,'' Dec. 1) advocated
armed intervention in Haiti. He seems to believe that, because the United States
Government supported the previous dictatorial Duvalier regime in Haiti, that now
the United States has a responsibility to try to ''staunch the country's blood
and quiet its screams.'' But the way to end blood spilling is not with more
blood spilling.

Of course something needs to be done to reverse the bloody oppression that was
highlighted by the Nov. 29 election massacre. It is certainly tempting to think
of a military solution to such injustice. But it seems to me that the problem
with sending in troops to preserve freedom is that it won't work. Showing
military might has been the solution of choice for centuries, but since World
War II things have changed. It isn't working in Central America, and it didn't
work in Vietnam.

What may be even more important is that the context in which we live has
drastically changed as a result of nuclear weaponry. We now risk exterminating
ourselves by pursuing traditional means of securing ourselves. The military
route to resolving conflicts can't be relied upon to work any longer. It appears
that we are being forced to discover what does work.

Certainly one place to investigate finding a way to protect freedom is in
Madison's words, ''The only safe repository of freedom is in
self-determination.'' Foreign intervention doesn't fit that formula any better
in Haiti than it has in Nicaragua.

One of the most alarming aspects of the military intervention approach to Haiti
is its vulnerability to selective, and therefore hypocritical, application. Here
again, Central America makes a good case in point. In the name of justice and
freedom we have mounted a military campaign to overthrow oppressors in
Nicaragua. There is at least an equal deprivation of justice and freedom in
South Africa, probably as much in Chile, but we are not seeking to overthrow
those oppressors militarily.

As long as we selectively choose which violation of freedom warrants our
intervention and which does not, whether it be Haiti, Nicaragua or South Africa,
we ourselves are in violation of the basic principle that ''the only safe
repository of freedom is in self-determination.'' We even bring on ourselves the
deserved observation that we believe that any means are justified to achieve an
honorable end.

We obviously cannot send United States military forces everywhere there is
oppression. But we can lend principled, consistent support to cooperative
international efforts to promote freedom. The world is beginning to understand
its economic interdependence. If all contries that stood squarely behind freedom
from oppression were to cooperate in exerting economic pressure on the existing
Government in Haiti, we might be able to make some real constructive progress
there.

Who knows, we might even discover a process that could work in South Africa and
other parts of the world as well.

JOHN D. KIDD
Palo Alto, Calif., Dec. 3, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 16, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 16, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 896 words



International    A3-17


 In the Israeli-occupied lands, a band of several hundred Palestinians in the
squalid refugee district was at the center of the fiercest confrontation on the
worst of seven straight days of clashes with Israeli soldiers.    Page A1
 Israelis raid guerrila bases in Lebanon    A10


 Nicaragua's large standing army will be maintained even if Managua normalizes
its relations with the United States and its neighbors under the terms of a new
Central American peace plan, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said.    A1


 Congressional support for contra aid appears to be increasing after a
Nicaraguan defector's assertion that Managua plans to enlarge its military.
State Department officials continued introducing the defector to wavering
legislators.    A17


 Global stock dealing has slumped. Many investors have retreated to familiar
domestic markets in the wake of the market collapse, newly wary of the
international arena.    A1


 A South Korean presidential election was held for the first time in 16 years.
But Koreans were uncertain about whether they were making a grand democratic
leap or were about to slip into disorder.    A14


 Korean students prepare to protest    A14


 How to stop dirty tricks    A14


 'Star Wars' should be negotiable sometime in the future to reassure the
Russians that the West continues to favor a strategic equilibrium, Prime
Minister Giovanni Goria of Italy suggested.    A3


 Rights seminar split on coexisting with Soviet    A3


 Brasilia journal: India 'war' is bitter    A4


 Shultz favors Europe's nuclear arms    A5


 U.S. planning to inspect old Soviet radars    A6


 Poland will raise prices 27 percent    A7


 Haitian general lashes out widely    A8


 Cricket field confrontation creates uproar in Britain    A9


 Cubans on patrol in South Angola    A11
 Japan offers Southeast Asia aid    A12


 Manila parley ends with relief    A13


 Christmas in Ho Chi Minh City    A15


National    A20-32, B5,B7


 Gary Hart resumed his campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination,
filing as a candidate in the New Hampshire primary and vowing to ''let the
people decide'' about his fitness for office.    A1


 Mr. Hart's decision to re-enter the Presidential race stunned Democratic
leaders, threw the party's Presidential contest into turmoil, and left
Republicans gleeful over the Democratic disarray.    B7


 Judge Anthony Kennedy's testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee ended.
The Supreme Court nominee won congratulations from both Democrats and
Republicans who predicted that he would easily be confirmed.    A1


 A plan to convert N.I.H. laboratories into a private research center financed
with money from the Government, industry and foundations has been drafted,
confidential budget documents show.    A1


 A herbicide can still be used although it has been found to be a probable cause
of cancer in humans, the Environmental Protection Agency announced. But use of
the herbicide, alachlor, will be restricted.    A1


 Medicare reimbursement fraud was commited by International Medical Centers of
Miami, one of the largest health maintenance organizations in the country,
Federal investigators told Congress.    A21


 Quincy journal: Prosperity from cigar ashes    A20


 Air Force would arm B-52 with non-nuclear missiles    A20


 Snowstorm moves into Midwest    A20


 House leaders seek another stopgap appropriation    A22


Washington Talk    A32


Watching Cable News Network grow
Finders and fliers of foreign flags
Regional    B1-5


 A convicted rapist is not guilty of the crime, a judge and prosecutors
declared. The mistake could have been avoided if a test comparing the man's
blood type with that of semen found on the victim's underclothes had been
performed.    B1


 Heart surgeons are constrained by a shortage of donated hearts for transplants.
As they decide who should receive the next available heart, they must surmount
delicate medical and ethical quandaries.    B1


 News analysis: The false-arrest case involving four transit police officers has
raised questions about how police commanders should motivate and judge the
people who do some of society's most dangerous work.    B3


 Plans to take over school districts failing in New Jersey have been blocked in
the Legislature again, and Governor Kean has vowed to move against those
districts in court, with Jersey City at the top of his list.    B1


 The pastry chef at Le Cirque, the highly regarded New York restaurant, is
acclaimed as among the most gifted patissiers to hit the American restaurant
scene in years.    C1


 Architect of Columbus Circle project resigns    B1


 Westchester drug task force arrests 16 suspected dealers    B2


 Construction of aquarium approved    B2


 Weapons found on two defendants before murder sentencing    B3
 Apartments to replace wing of Walden School    B4


 Rights panel finds athletic club discriminates against women    B4


 Award helps rebuild emptied food co-op    B4



Neediest Cases    B4


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 16, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Japan Offers Southeast Asia Aid

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 359 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Dec. 15


In his first trip abroad since becoming Prime Minister of Japan, Noboru
Takeshita told the heads of six Southeast Asian nations today that his
Government would reject remilitarization and assist the region in greater
economic development.

In blunt language, he referred to the ''deplorable history of the last war,''
when Japanese forces occupied much of this area.

He then formally offered the nations of the region - the Philippines, Thailand,
Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and Brunei - a package of investments and loans
worth about $2 billion. He also promised wider market access to Japan for these
free-enterprise members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Prime Minister Takeshita, speaking at the third summit meeting of heads of
government of Asean countries, said there would be enhanced Japanese support for
regional cultural exchanges. He said he would consider opening a Southeast Asian
culture center in Japan ''for introducing the culture of each Asean country to
the Japanese people.''

Pledge for Cambodia

In addition, he pledged Japan's active participation in finding a solution to a
nine-year-old war in Cambodia. But he did not elaborate on what steps might be
taken.

Japan has been criticized for allowing private trade to develop with Vietnam,
thereby weakening, in the organization's eyes, the region's attempts to isolate
Hanoi economically until it withdraws its troops from Cambodia.

Increased Japanese military spending has prompted expressions of concern in the
region, most recently by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore. Millions of
Southeast Asians died in battle, by execution or in forced labor, from Thailand
to Indonesia and here in the Philippines during World War II.

Rise of Yen a Factor

In economic terms, Japan - Southeast Asia's largest creditor and investor - has
been criticized for failing to open its markets to regional goods and not
transferring enough technology or managerial skills to local people.

Lately, the rapid rise of the yen against the dollar has created additional
burdens for regional nations with loans and contracts negotiated in Japanese
currency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 16, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

ASIANS END TALKS IN MOOD OF RELIEF

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 569 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Dec. 15


Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia put into words today the relief felt
at the uneventful end of a two-day meeting of six Southeast Asian leaders, a
gathering held reluctantly and with unusually tight security in this volatile
capital.

''With the blessing of the Almighty, we have come to the conclusion of this
third meeting of the Asean heads of Government,'' Dr. Mahathir said of the first
summit conference in a decade to be held by the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations: Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and the Philippines.

''If I were to be asked what we achieved in the last two days,'' Raul S.
Manglapus, the Philippines Foreign Minister, said later in a meeting with
reporters, ''the obvious answer is that we held a summit meeting. The very
holding of the meeting is the supreme achievement of the hour.''

The Manila meeting was the third such high-level gathering in the organization's
20 years. Previous summit conferences were held in Bali in February 1976 and
Kuala Lumpur in August 1977.

Zone of Peace Created

This morning, before individual conferences with Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita
of Japan, the leaders signed a Manila Declaration of Asean Resolve, restating
the organization's political goals, including the eventual creation of a Zone of
Peace, Freedom and Neutrality and a nuclear-free region.

Both aims would affect the presence of American bases in the Philippines, an
issue Mr. Manglapus said was not discussed here. Officials of the organization
say that a concerted drive for regional neutrality or a nuclear-free zone is not
likely while the Soviet Union uses bases in Vietnam, and Vietnam occupies
Cambodia and Laos.

Only Indonesia, with the region's largest military forces and the the world's
fifth-largest population, continues to insist that these aims can be achieved
simultaneously with efforts to end the Cambodian war.

In economic moves, the heads of government agreed to explore a number of
measures to reduce tariffs between the member countries and increase regional
trade and investment. They also agreed to try to improve a languishing Asean
Industrial Joint Venture program.

Inviting Other Members

The leaders signed a protocol enabling nations outside Southeast Asia to join
the organization, a change primarily intended for countries in the South and
Western Pacific.

But if this session broke no new ground politically or strategically, it turned
into a resounding show of support for President Corazon C. Aquino from her
considerably more experienced counterparts.

Two of the leaders, President Suharto of Indonesia and Prime Minister Lee Kuan
Yew of Singapore, have been in power for more than 20 years.

The Philippines' neighbors in the region, preoccupied to varying degrees with
Vietnamese expansion in Indochina and fears of a revival of insurgencies at
home, are also concerned about the Communist rebellion here.

Some regional officials fear that a surge of Philippine nationalism, fostered by
the political left, will turn this nation into an unreliable ally or, worse, a
revolutionary base.

Mr. Lee said Monday that the heads of government had to overrule their security
chiefs to come to this meeting.

For her part, President Aquino sought to emphasize regional cohesiveness, while
acknowledging the country's insularity, saying at one point that Manila had
nothing to fear from Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 17, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article from Manila yesterday about a Southeast Asian summit conference
misstated the relative size of the Indonesian military. It is the largest among
the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations; Vietnam's military is
the largest in Southeast Asia.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 16, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Sihanouk Plans to Talk With Cambodian Chief

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 223 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Dec. 15


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former leader of Cambodia, announced another
about-face today and said he would meet with the Prime Minister of Cambodia's
Vietnam-backed Government after all.

Last Thursday, Prince Sihanouk, who represents the guerrilla coalition seeking
to topple the Phnom Penh Government, canceled plans to meet with Prime Minister
Hun Sen, but today he released a statement saying he would meet with Hun Sen.

The 65-year-old prince said he had decided to meet with the Prime Minister
because officials with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations had criticized
him for canceling talks he had scheduled with Mr Hun Sen. Meeting in Manila
today, association officials said Prince Sihanouk's decision not to meet with
Mr. Hun Sen would make it harder to remove the 140,000 Vietnamese troops in
Cambodia.

Asian diplomats speculated today that another reason that the prince decided to
reschedule the meetings was that he was jockeying to make sure that he remained
the leader of Cambodia's rebel coalition. The coalition includes the
Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge as well as the non-Communist Khmer National
Liberation Front.

At the same time, Asian diplomats said that by once again agreeing to meet with
Cambodia's Prime Minister, Prince Sihanouk was seeking to press other guerrilla
leaders to join the talks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 16, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

In Saigon '87, Ho, Ho, Ho, Ho Chi Minh

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


At the Dong Khanh Bakery in Cholon the other day, the pastry chefs got to work
on the first of the season's traditional French Christmas logs.

Chau Hon, the bakery's owner, says he sold 6,000 of the lavishly decorated cakes
last year. This year the sky's the limit for the models that say ''Noel 1987''
in red and white icing.

Mr. Hon added that his pastry cooks are already working seven days a week till
midnight in five bakeries to turn out 20,000 cookies daily.

''Life is easier now,'' he said as he showed a visitor around the city's
Chinatown, ''and everyone in Saigon - Buddhist and Christian - enjoys
Christmas.''

Suzanne Dai, the proprietor of an eccentric restaurant, agreed as she talked
about the coming holiday season. ''Christmas is not only for Catholics,'' she
said. Her bistro is in the library of her former law office.

In the Spirit of the Season

On a bookshelf by a table, between the dictionaries and the porcelain vases, a
white cat, in the spirit of the season, had just given birth to five kittens.

''Christmas is an international, cosmopolitan holiday that is a joy to
everyone,'' said Mrs. Dai, a former Deputy Speaker of the South Vietnamese
Assembly. ''Children, with no chimneys to hang stockings, put out shoes in the
hope of small toys from Santa Claus.''

The people of Saigon, now officially Ho Chi Minh City, have always been the
liveliest and most outward-looking Vietnamese, and they grab any opportunity to
have a good time, Mrs. Dai said.

Christmas Eve is the year's happiest occasion for promenading, dancing and
buying glittering trinkets for family and friends from street vendors who shower
passers-by with as much confetti as they sell.

Carols in Vietnamese

A visitor to Saigon a few Christmas Eves ago found the city's churches packed
and overflowing into the streets as tens of thousands of people came for
communion and familiar carols sung in Vietnamese.

''Many people who are not Catholic go to the midnight mass,'' Mrs. Dai said,
''because they love the music and the atmosphere.''

Nearby, around the Roman Catholic Cathedral, the first of the sidewalk Christmas
markets has opened to the light of tiny kerosene lamps that give red and gold
greeting cards an old-fashioned glow.

A mile or so away, along Hai Ba Trung, a Christmas fair is already under way on
the sidewalk in front of Tan Dinh Church. Here the poor can buy small
tree-trimmings made by hand out of paper scraps and cutouts. Those with money
can invest in imported plastic Christmas trees with twinkling lights and shiny
ornaments.

Across from the church, Din Van Bang has turned his religious-objects shop into
a wall-to-wall Christmas bazaar. For sale are locally made scenes of the
Nativity with a full cast of characters, from the Holy Family to the sheep on
the hillside.

In glass cases, browsers can also discover tinseled objects that have found
their way here from Sears Roebuck & Company and Wal-Mart Stores.

Dialectical Detente

Christmas in Saigon knows no politics. From behind shelves of Marx and Lenin in
a state book shop, the unmistakable strains of ''Jingle Bells'' bounced from the
tape deck, enlivening a display of books about the decline of the West.

Mrs. Dai said the war had temporarily dampened the Christmas spirit in the
1960's and early 70's.

But in 1975, after the Communist takeover of South Vietnam, she said, ''We had
our first Christmas in peace, and all the world came out on the streets.''

''No war, no curfew, no bombs,'' she said. ''The streets were full, full, full
of people - and they stayed out until four or five in the morning. It was a
joyous sight.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 16, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Air Force Would Arm B-52 With Nonnuclear Missiles

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 819 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 15


The Strategic Air Command is planning to equip a fleet of B-52 bombers with
small, nonnuclear cruise missiles that have been secretly developed by the
United States and with highly accurate short-range missiles made in Israel, Air
Force officers said today.

The missiles would be among the main weapons in a project devised by the SAC
commander, Gen. John T. Chain Jr., to convert the bombers from nuclear to
conventional missions to support American land and naval forces in Europe or the
developing third world regions.

The project, which would cost $3.3 billion over seven years, is supported by
senior field commanders of all services, Air Force leaders and policy-making
officials in the Defense Department said. But it must pass the review in which
about $33 billion is to be sliced from the Pentagon's 1989 budget.

The American missile, officially designated the Joint Tactical Missile System,
has a high-explosive warhead and would be fired at supply depots, headquarters
bunkers and communications centers more than 50 miles away.

The Popeye Is Accurate

The Israeli missile, informally referred to as Popeye, would be fired at tanks
and artillery or bridges and rail junctions less than 50 miles away. The Air
Force has fired the missile in tests at least twice, and it has been found to
have pinpoint accuracy, the officers said.

The SAC plan, which calls for converting about 150 of its 240 B-52's to the
conventional mission, appears to reflect two trends in military thinking.

One is to move away from nuclear weapons and back to conventional arms. More and
more officers believe that while nuclear weapons are vital to deter the Soviet
Union, they cannot be used in conflicts that are more likely to engage the
United States, such as those in the Persian Gulf.

The second trend emphasizes weapons that permit the user to fire while standing
off at a safe distance from the target rather than expose pilots and crews, or
airplanes and ships, to antiaircraft or shore-based missiles.

Advanced Guidance Systems

In both trends, the increasing accuracy of the weapons, which is achieved with
advanced guidance devices and sensors, makes them more destructive than weapons
that had to blanket a target in hopes of hitting it.

The Navy is acquiring more cruise missiles armed with conventional warheads than
with nuclear warheads. Within the next two years the Army expects to field a
missile similar to the one the Air Force is buying for the B-52's. The Army's
new missile would also be able to strike deep behind enemy lines.

In a way, the Strategic Air Command's plan for the B-52's appears to emulate the
Soviet Union, whose armed forces seldom throw anything away but find new uses
for aging equipment. The B-52's, the youngest of which is 25 years old, were
scheduled to be retired in the 1990's but will be kept in service if SAC's plan
is approved.

Officers at the SAC headquarters in Omaha said that General Chain, who was
previously chief of staff of American forces in Western Europe, had been
concerned with what he perceived to be the superiority in the conventional
forces of the Soviet Union and its allies.

Briefings Have Been Held

So he instructed staff officers to find ways to put SAC back into conventional
fighting. After the Vietnam conflict, SAC bombers reverted to the nuclear
mission for which they had been designed.

For the past few months, SAC officers have been briefing senior field
commanders, beginning with Gen. George Crist, the Marine officer who heads the
Central Command in Tampa, Fla. General Crist is responsible for American
military operations around the Persian Gulf.

General Chain has set several rules for the B-52's that would carry the American
and Israeli missiles and other conventional weapons.

The first was that the bombers would be armed with standoff weapons and would
not carry bombs. Many nations today, including those in the third world, have
extensive antiaircraft radar and missiles bought from the Soviet Union or
Western nations.

The second was that weapons would be acquired from existing stocks and would not
require a long and expensive development program. Both the American missile and
the Israeli missiles fit that description.

Like a Flying Torpedo

The Joint Tactical Missile System is a cruise missile that looks like a flying
torpedo into which radar-detection technology has been incorporated. It is just
coming into operation; details of its performance remain secret.

The Israeli missile is made by Rafael, a quasi-government company, and was
reportedly used with success in the Israeli campaign against Syrian forces in
the Bekaa region of eastern Lebanon in 1982 and 1983. Its accuracy was said to
be measured in inches, not feet.

The third of General Chain's rules was that the B-52's would be based overseas
and under the control of the field commander when engaged in operations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 17, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 45 words


An article from Manila yesterday about a Southeast Asian summit conference
misstated the relative size of the Indonesian military. It is the largest among
the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations; Vietnam's military is
the largest in Southeast Asia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Corrections

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 17, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

Lautenberg: Well-Liked but Vulnerable

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD D. MAY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1718 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 15


Frank R. Lautenberg is a hard man to dislike.

As the former chief executive officer of one of the nation's most successful
corporations, the Democratic Senator from New Jersey is welcome in board rooms.
But as a supporter of George McGovern's Presidential campaign, gun control and a
host of other causes dear to his party's left wing, he is also invited into the
most liberal of living rooms. Mr. Lautenberg is a multimillionaire, but because
he grew up in poverty and made his money the old-fashioned way - he earned it on
his own - it is hard to hold his wealth against him.

He wears carefully tailored suits but takes off his coat and appears in
shirtsleeves when he shows up at town meetings and suburban shopping malls. He
has a thatch of white hair, the face of a favorite uncle - doleful as a basset
hound even when he smiles - and his only known vice is an addiction to sweets, a
supply of which is stashed behind the desk in his Capitol Hill office.

Yet many of the political analysts who keep an eye on New Jersey say that ''good
old Frank'' may be vulnerable in his bid for re-election next year because, for
all his bonhomie, he has not lived up to the very high expectations that
accompanied his election five years ago.

''I'd give him a solid gentleman's C, maybe a C plus for his performance so
far,'' said Ross Baker, an expert on the Senate and a professor of political
science at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J. ''He's not become a
high-profile Senator or made himself into one of the most influential members of
that club.''

Richard Roper, director of the Program of New Jersey Affairs at Princeton
University, arrived at a similar conclusion. ''In the public's mind, at least,
Frank Lautenberg hasn't establshed an area of public policy with which he is
closely identified,'' he said.

Such criticism rankles the 63-year-old Senator. Shifting uncomfortably in his
office chair, he acknowledged recently that it had taken him a little while to
master his new job, to understand how Washington in general and the Senate in
particular operate. Running a legislative office on Capitol Hill, he said, is
very different from running his multinational company in New Jersey, the
Automatic Data Processing Corporation.

But he asserted that he had managed to ''shape an agenda''and establish ''a
steady record of accomplishments'' in such areas as the environment and aviation
safety.

Mr. Lautenberg holds seats on three important committees - Budget,
Appropriations, and Envirnonment and Public Works - and he has been a force
behind efforts to raise the drinking age to 21, to ban smoking on airplanes and
to introduce computers to schools in poor neighborhoods.

''These may not be earth-shattering issues,'' he said, ''but I think they are
the kinds of things that people care about for their quality of life.''

Overshadowed By a Colleague

At least part of Mr. Lautenberg's problem, analysts suggested, is that the
senior Senator from New Jersey happens to be Bill Bradley, a national figure who
many party leaders believe could win the Democratic nomination for President
were he to seek it.

Upstaged by his colleague, Mr. Lautenberg has tried to project a separate
identity not so much as the Senator from New Jersey but, as he bills himself in
reports to constituents, as the ''Senator for New Jersey.''

Mr. Bradley has nothing but praise for that approach. ''We complement each
other,'' he said. ''Frank has concentrated on his New Jersey issues, as he
should. Once people know you're committed to them and deliver for them, that's
the most significant thing you can have in your political bank.''

Gerald Pomper, a professor of political science at Rutgers, also said he thought
Mr. Lautenberg's strategy ''has been to stay very state- and
constituent-oriented. He's mostly gone around trying to push things for the
state, and he's done that well.''

For example, Mr. Lautenberg has taken an active role in developing the
Superfund, the national program for cleaning up abandoned hazardous-waste sites,
a bigger problem in New Jersey than in any other state.

He has written legislation directing the Federal Environmental Protection Agency
to conduct research on ways to remove radon, a cancer-causing natural gas formed
by the breakdown of radium in the soil that may be found in more than one
million New Jersey homes.

He has introduced bills and secured Federal money to clean up New Jersey's
coastal waters and protect wilderness areas. He has won money for Amtrak,
including for the restoration of its routes in South Jersey. And he has taken on
the battles of hundreds of New Jersey residents seeking all manner of assistance
from Medicare benefits to a new traffic light.

The Senator is eager to know if his efforts will pay off with the voters.

''Getting elected once should be enough for anyone,'' he said. ''But then, who
knows what it was in the first instance? Now you want to see if you passed the
test. Anyone with a sense of personal achievement wants to know what the boss
thinks of him, and for a Senator the boss is the voting public.'' The G.O.P.
Challenger: A Soldier and Athlete The Republicans seem certain to nominate Peter
M. Dawkins, the former Army general who won the Heisman Trophy as the nation's
outstanding college football player when he played at West Point, to run against
Mr. Lautenberg.

Mr. Dawkins, who overcame a childhood bout with polio, graduated 10th in his
class at West Point and won a Rhodes scholarship to study at Oxford, could be a
formidable opponent. He was a highly decorated Army officer in Vietnam and in
1981, at the age of only 43, received promotion to the rank of Brigadier
General. Not long after, he went to work as an investment banker on Wall Street.
Now, at 49, he has enlisted Governor Kean as chairman of the ''Pete Dawkins for
U. S. Senate Committee,'' which may explain why the Governor did not return
repeated calls over a two-week period seeking comment on Mr. Lautenberg's
performance.

Some political analysts predict the campaign will wind up as a sort of Battle of
the Resumes. Mr. Lautenberg's background, like that of Mr. Dawkins, is the stuff
of novels.

He was born in Paterson, N.J., the son of a Jewish emigrants from Poland and
Russia. His father, Samuel, tried both farming and running a bar. (A teetotaler,
he imposed a strict two-drink limit at his establishment and, not suprisingly,
the bar ''didn't last long,'' the Senator recalled.) Mr. Lautenberg's father
died of cancer at the age of 43, when the Senatorwas 18 years old. To support
the family, his mother opened a sandwich shop in which the young Mr. Lautenberg
and his sister worked part time.

''I didn't really think about where life was going to take me,'' he recalled.
Success in Business And a Turn to Politics Later that year, 1942, Mr. Lautenberg
enlisted in the Army, serving as a corporal in the Signal Corps in Europe. He
returned to the United States in 1946, attended Columbia University on the G. I.
bill, and graduating three years later with a degree in economics.

Mr. Lautenberg sold insurance for a while until, in 1954, he and a two
colleagues started a company called Automatic Data Processing. For the next
seven years they worked ''without a vacation or even a full weekend off,'' he
said. ''We weren't as smart as we were strong.''

The company, which started with five employees, now has 21,000 and provides such
computer services as paycheck processing for thousands of companies around the
country. ''A. D. P. has the longest successful growth record of any company in
America,'' Mr. Lautenberg boasted. ''If you had invested $300 in 1961 it would
be worth $300,000 now.''

His own net worth, he said, was ''10 million plus'' when he put his assets into
a blind trust last year.

For Mr. Lautenberg, however, success was accompanied by restlessness. ''I wanted
to spread out from just the business, making more money and building a bigger
company,'' he said. Philanthropy became one outlet - he endowed a cancer
research center at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem in memory of his father -
but it was politics that held the strongest attraction.

Mr. Lautenberg spent $1.5 million of his own money to win the Democratic primary
in 1982 and another $3.5 million to defeat Millicent Fenwick, the well-known
former Congresswoman in the general election.

By all estimates, the Lautenberg-Dawkins fight will be even more expensive,
although this time the Senator will not have to pay so much of the bill himself.
He has already raised $1.6 million for a war chest planned to exceed $5 million.
But it could go as high as $10 million, depending on how much the Republicans
spend to make Mr. Dawson's name and face recognizable in homes from Cape May to
Saddle River.

Differing Views Of the Coming Race

Beyond name recognition, party affiliation is likely to be a significant though
still uncertain factor in the race because 1988 is a Presidential election year
and New Jersey has a popular Republican Governor and a popular Democratic
Senator.

Mr. Lautenberg and Mr. Dawkins, when asked recently to critique each other,
responded in general and rather tepid terms.

Mr. Dawkins said, ''I'm not sure his performance is as good as the people of New
Jersey deserve.''

Mr. Lautenberg replied, ''What kind of preparation has he really had for this
kind of service?''

The experts do not agree on what is likely to happen in a Lautenberg-Dawkins
contest.

William Schneider, a political analyst at the nonpartisan American Enterprise
Institute in Washington, believes that ''given New Jersey's longstanding image
problems, the voters may find Dawkins irresistible.'' He added: ''We're talking
stature. State of champions. With Dawkins and Bradley you'd have two Senators
who are athletes and scholars. A Democrat and a Republican.''

Rick Sinding, president of the Center for Analysis of Public Issues, a
Princeton-based nonpartisan research organization, thinks that appraisal misses
the mark.

''Lautenberg is going to be very difficult to beat,'' he said. ''Incumbents
always have a tremendous advantage. New Jersey voters don't throw incumbents out
unless they're really angry with them. And you'd have a hard time finding
anybody who is really angry with Frank Lautenberg.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 19, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
EDITORS' NOTE

A headline on Thursday about Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey said,
''Lautenberg: Well Liked but Vulnerable.'' The subheading said the Senator ''has
not been identified with any major public issues.''

The article itself quoted political experts who said Mr. Lautenberg had not
become closely identified with specific areas of public policy. But it also
included Mr. Lautenberg's re sponse - that he had managed to ''shape an agenda''
and establish a record of accomplishments in areas like the environment and
aviation safety.

In fairness, the subheading should have attributed the criticism and re flected
the response.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Frank Lautenberg (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 17, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Haig Opens a Harsh Attack on Bush

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: NASHUA, N.H., Dec. 16


Riding in a van as sleet pelted the windows, Alexander M. Haig Jr. said with a
laugh that he had decided, at long last, ''to have a ball, have some fun, talk
in an uninhibited way.''

So the Republican Presidential candidate, in speeches, news conferences and
interviews on Tuesday in New Hampshire, cheerfully delivered a series of attacks
on Vice President Bush, the front-runner for the nomination. The attacks were
unusual for their bluntness and even animosity.

''I'm not going to play Marquis of Queensbury politics,'' said the former
Secretary of State and four-star Army general who is struggling to gain
credibility as a candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination.

''I've known George for 25 years,'' Mr. Haig told about 50 supporters gathered
at a real estate office here. ''A leader he is not. A courageous leader he is
not.''

Breakfast With Gorbachev

''I don't think he's up to the challenge,'' Mr. Haig said at another point.

Mr. Haig attacked Mr. Bush for ''cheapening'' and ''trivializing'' and ''turning
into a domestic political game'' the recent visit to Washington of Mikhail S.
Gorbachev by inviting political supporters to breakfast with the Soviet leader.
''It shows something about the character of that fellow,'' said Mr. Haig,
adding, ''Is he tough enough to deal with Gorbachev? No.''

He assailed Mr. Bush's record as Vice President, saying, ''All those things he
was assigned to do he did poorly.'' He cited the jobs of heading teams to curb
drugs, reduce regulations and deal with terrorism.

''I couldn't believe how George Bush skated around and floated around Irangate,
the way he did, with the President taking all the heat,'' said Mr. Haig in an
interview. ''I find it very difficult to understand how he could know every
detail of the INF treaty and be totally unfamiliar with Irangate. It's a
contradiction in terms.''

Mr. Haig said ''everyone knows this is long overdue.'' On a personal level, he
said, what disturbed him was that at recent campaign appearances in Florida and
Virginia, one of Mr. Bush's sons introduced the Vice President ''by reading his
Distinguished Flying Cross citation.''

A Show of Manhood

''It's absolutely unprecedented,'' said Mr. Haig in the interview. ''Anybody who
has to spend all his time demonstrating his manhood has somehow got to know he
ain't got it.'' Among Mr, Haig's decorations are two Silver Stars and two Bronze
Stars for valor.

Mr. Haig, whose 18 months as President Reagan's first Secretary of State were
marked by jurisdictional battles with the White House, indicated that some of
his strong emotion toward Mr. Bush was the residue of anger that Mr. Haig
harbored toward Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d. Mr. Baker, a close friend
and adviser to Mr. Bush, was White House chief of staff when Mr. Haig was in the
Cabinet.

Beyond that, Mr. Haig made it evident that, with his relatively low ranking in
the Presidential polls, he had little to lose but say what was on his mind and
perhaps settle some old scores.

''I've had some very controversial episodes in my history,'' said the
62-year-old former commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
''Watergate. Vietnam. The day the President was shot. And when you have to make
decisions rather than avoid making decisions, then you generate a level of
animosity as well as a level of support.''

Opposition to Treaty

At a news conference in Concord, where he became the fourth major Republican
candidate to file for New Hampshire's primary Feb. 16, Mr. Haig seemed to go out
of his way to criticize Mr. Bush.

Asked about the intermediate-range missile treaty, Mr. Haig said he opposed it
but still supported President Reagan.

''Not blindly, like the Vice President,'' Mr. Haig said. ''When I disagreed with
him he heard it from me. I didn't sit there at his side to say, 'yeah' to every
cockamamie idea that came before the President and then claim I didn't know
about it afterwards unless it was a winner.''

Mr. Haig, in his campaign swing, is especially caustic about Mr. Bush's denial
that he was unaware of the diversion of funds from Iranian arms sales to
Nicaraguan rebels.

Mr. Haig, who plans to campaign in New Hampshire for at least two weeks in
January, is fully aware that his prospects in the Presidential race are slender.
''I have to do well here, but it doesn't mean first place at all,'' he said.
''It could mean second or third place, depending on the spread. If I don't get
beyond that it may be trouble, and for me it may be fatal trouble.''

''If I'm able to convince the electorate fine, and if not, so be it, it's not
fatal to me in my stage of life because I'm not looking for a job, I'm not
angling for the Vice President's job or a Cabinet job. I just want to call it
the way I see it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, DECEMBER 18, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1075 words




International    A3-15



The U.S. congratulated Roh Tae Woo, the declared winner and ruling party
candidate in South Korean presidential elections, despite opposition complaints
of widespread electoral fraud.    Page A1



South Korean opposition leaders declared the results of the presidential
election to be void because of what they called widespread fraud. They pledged
to step up anti-Government resistance.    A12



Koreans protest electoral defeat    A12



George Bush backed arms sales to Iran early last year, according to a White
House memo made public by the Congressional Iran-contra committees.    A8



The Mafia continues to function, according to a deputy prosecutor a day after a
jury returned 338 guilty verdicts in Palermo in the most successful law
enforcement effort ever undertaken against the Sicilian underworld.    A3



Union Carbide was ordered by an Indian judge to pay $270 million as interim
compensation to victims of the 1984 Bhopal gas-leak disaster, which killed more
than 2,000 people and injured at least 200,000.    D4



Anatoly Karpov beat Gary Kasparov in Seville, Spain, to take a 12-11 lead and
come within one-half point of regaining the world chess title he held for 10
years.    A1



Dole backs missile treaty    A3



Ho Chi Minh City journal: Re-education of a South Vietnamese    A4


Budget disputes delay U.N. close    A5


Prague leader steps down    A7


Managua defector's story called ''speculative''    A8


Salvador arms linked to Panamanian    A8


Webster faults officials in Iran affair    A9


Iran attacks Maldives's ship    A10


U.S. reorganizes gulf command    A11



National    A16-35, B4-5, B10



American consumers will save billions of dollars in 1988 and inflation will slow
because of OPEC's inability to curb its members' crude oil production, industry
analysts say.    A1



Japanese concerns would be barred from taking part in the construction of public
works projects in the United States, under an accord by House and Senate
conferees.    A1



Airport and airline employees, including flight crews, must go through security
screening at checkpoints set up at boarding gates, under a Government order
effective Monday.    A1



Mortality rates at 6,000 hospitals, including 146 where deaths exceeded Federal
predictions, were issued by the Government in its most systematic attempt to
help people assess the quality of health care.    B5



News analysis: Guarded praise for report on mortality    B5



The AIDS virus is sopped up like a sponge by a cellular protein that has been
synthesized by means of genetic engineering techniques, opening a promising way
to combat the lethal disease, scientists said.    A1



Tough new abortion curbs on family planning groups were approved by
Congressional budget negotiators in a major victory for the Reagan
Administration.    A31



Stock prices plummeted amid fears over the dollar and the arrival of another
futures-related ''triple witching hour.'' The Dow Jones industrial average
dropped 50.07 points, or 2.54 percent, to 1,924.40.    D1



The sentencing for Ivan F. Boesky, set for today, may be one of the most
important events in white-collar law enforcement in many years, according to
lawyers, law enforcement officials and regulators.    D1



The Air Force suggests ending work on a weapon system to destroy Soviet
satellites in space to help cut the Pentagon budget, according to Defense
Department officials.    A35



Traffic deaths soar where speed limits rise    A16


I-95 Journal: Road is complete but debate goes on    A16


Dioxin in breast milk is evaluated    A17


10% rise found in preschoolers    A18


Reagans to avoid links with Deaver    A22


Deaver prosecutor assails Gov ernment's moral code    A23


LaRouche jury is told of fraud    A25


Conferees work on spending bill    A30


Mclaughlin expects scrutiny in labor post    A32


Accord reached on nuclear dump    A32


Democratic chairman critical of Hart re-entry    B10


Dukakis seeks Presidential stature    B10



Washington Talk    A34



What they say about Wright
Finessing facts on the summit

Regional    B1-4, B7-8



The building of schools in New York City should be removed from the authority of
the Board of Education and taken over by a state agency that could do the work
faster, a state panel said.    A1



A plan to convert a school building in East Harlem into a shelter for homeless
families was soundly defeated by the Board of Estimate. The 9-2 vote was a
dramatic setback for Mayor Koch.    B1



The rising number of AIDS patients in New York City hospitals has prompted state
health officials to increase overall hospital capacity by up to 500 beds,
reversing 10 years of reductions.    A1



Stanley M. Friedman, the former Bronx Democratic leader, and a colleague may not
be prosecuted on state corruption charges because, after their Federal
convictions, this would violate double-jeopardy laws, New York's highest court
ruled.    B1



A judge accused by the prosecutor in Brooklyn of humiliating a complainant has
been accused by jurors in another case of demeaning witnesses, falling asleep on
the bench and intimidating lawyers.    B3



Prosecutors investigating the death in city custody of a 28-year-old Bronx woman
were faced with conflicting reports from witnesses about her struggles with the
police.    B2



Support for upstate lawmaker grows after indictment    B1


Waterbury, Conn., awaits Jane Fonda with mixed emotions    B1


Controls at hospital whose nurse is suspected are criticized    B2


L.I. radio station fades out    B2


Cuomo reads a Christmas tale    B3


Plan for high-priced restaurant at pier on the Battery    B3


Appeals Court upholds order to close Bronx school    B3


Dismissed Howard Beach alternate juror discusses case    B3


Murder suspect surrenders    B3


Deaths increase among Medicare patients    B4


Ethics Committee counsel recommends Biaggi ouster    B7



Neediest Cases      B8


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HO CHI MINH CITY JOURNAL;
'Re-educated' 12 Years, An Ex-General Reflects

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


In April 1975, when the Republic of South Vietnam was on the edge of collapse,
Nguyen Huu Co, a retired general and former Defense Minister, took stock of his
options.

''I thought first of leaving,'' he recalled. ''I had many American friends to
help me. But the situation changed too fast.''

''I failed to get out by plane because I had no priority,'' he went on. ''I went
to Vung Tao and tried to leave by ship, but it was too risky. I had 11 children
with me, and I couldn't accept the risk.''

Less than two months later, with Hanoi's army in control of this southern
capital, Mr. Co was told to report for ''re-education.''

'Money and Clothes for Month'

''They were very clever,'' he said. ''The announcement in the press and on
television said that all people going to camp should bring enough money and
clothes for one month.''

He was to remain in prison camps for more than 12 years. This September, at 62
years of age, he was released, the highest-ranking member of the former
Government to be freed to date, officials say.

Diplomats and other foreigners in the country with contacts among Vietnamese
officals believe that the release of Mr. Co and other generals shows some
lessening in Hanoi's fears of former South Vietnamese military officers.
Vietnamese acknowledge there was concern in the late 1970's that there would be
a strong resistance in the South.

Some diplomats say that the highly publicized recent trial of guerrillas charged
with trying to infiltrate the country through Laos under the leadership of a
former South Vietnamese admiral might be a warning to those now being freed.

Describes His Experiences

Mr. Co, who met reporters at his home in the presence of a Government
interpreter, although he speaks both English and French fluently, was relaxed as
he described his experiences.

His account, if not complete, nevertheless provides information on conditions of
important political prisoners serving long terms. It also documents the many
shifts in prison procedures over the years that some diplomats in Hanoi think
may have been at least in part related to political fluctuations.

In Mr. Co's experience, prisoners shifted from one ministry's control to another
and moved from camp to camp more half a dozen times. Thousands of Vietnamese
remain in these political prisons more than a decade after the Communist
takeover.

An Exile in Hong Kong

Mr. Co, who was trained as a soldier by the French and Americans, was active in
politics in the early 1960's, when he joined in overthrowing Ngo Dinh Diem, who,
he said, ''made so many mistakes.'' Among these, he said, were promoting Roman
Catholics from central Vietnam at the expense of southern Buddhists, and
rewarding military men for loyalty, not merit.

By 1967, Mr. Co, then a Deputy Prime Minister and Defense Minister, had fallen
out with Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky, whom he considered ''immature.'' He was sent
into exile in Hong Kong for three years.

When President Nguyen Van Thieu allowed him to return in 1970, Mr. Co steered
away from politics and became a commercial banker and later a businessman.

When he was arrested in June 1975, however, he was included in a group of 32
generals, and was treated as a military man in prison.

Sudden Move to the North

Mr. Co was first held at Quang Trung, about nine miles north of Ho Chi Minh
City, as Saigon was soon renamed. Conditions were good, he said. Prisoners could
read and watch television. There were political lectures.

In June 1976, he was suddenly moved at night by air to Yen Bay, 120 miles north
of Hanoi. Handcuffed, Mr. Co calculated his new position by counting the hours
of flying time -four - and by noting that the sun was rising to his right.

In 1978, he and other generals were moved to Ha Tay, in the Red River delta east
of Hanoi, to an Interior Ministry camp. Hard labor ceased. Instead, Mr. Co said,
they were asked to write everything they knew about the South's military
strategies and the functioning of its Government.

Education and Labor

In 1979, Mr. Co says he was moved alone twice - to Nam Ha and Thanh Lam - and
experienced a period of combined political education and manual labor. Military
and civilian political prisoners were mixed.

By 1981, he had been returned to Ha Tay and the other former generals. His last
move, in 1983 was back to Nam Ha, until his release.

''The last four years were not so hard,'' he said. ''I read books sent by my
family. I wrote them letters, but they took a long time - sometimes three months
- to reach them.''

A Christian, he also prayed ''inside myself,'' he said, and thought.

Wife Began to Work

''What I thought about most was the condition of life, and how I could take care
of my family.'' His wife, Nguyen Thi Tin, who had never worked, had begun to
knit for factories. ''It was different, but I got used to it,'' she said. ''My
spirits were high.''

Mr. Co said he also thought about Communism and democracy.

''In both systems there are some things good and some things bad,'' he said.
''We have to teach each other to take advantage of the good points and eliminate
the bad.''

Mr. Co, who attends a Baptist church three or four times a week now, is trying
to make contact with friends and relatives abroad who could advance him money to
start a business. His daughter Lau Nguyen Ward in Alhambra, Calif., has already
provided some assistance.

Ultimately, the Co family will have to decide whether to apply to emigrate under
the Orderly Departure Program. Mr. Co says he cannot think of going unless all
his family, now including 15 grandchildren and a daughter of 21 suffering from
Down's Syndrome, can come. He has lost too many years of family life to want to
strike out on his own.

''We pray to God to lead me,'' he said. ''If he wants me to go out, he will
arrange everything for me and my family. If things are difficult, that means God
blocks our way.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Nguyen Huu Co and his wife, Nguyen Thi Tin (NYT/Fred R.
Conrad)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Wary Waterbury Waits for 'Hanoi Jane' Fonda

BYLINE: By NICK RAVO

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: WATERBURY, Conn., Dec. 17


It was on Veterans Day that Gaetano (Guy) Russo, a former assistant adjutant in
the Connecticut National Guard, first learned that Jane Fonda was coming to town
to make a movie. Outraged, he wrote a letter to the local newspaper. A few days
later, he had 250 bumper stickers printed. They read, ''I'm Not Fond'a Hanoi
Jane.''

More than a month later, Mr. Russo has learned the power of the press. He is
being heralded as the leader of a nationwide anti-Jane Fonda movement. His
bumper sticker sales are booming. His telephone rings with calls from supporters
and reporters. A demonstration is planned for January.

Mr. Russo is stunned by the hubbub. And so is Waterbury, a working-class city of
106,000 that has suddenly, and inaccurately, gained repute as an almost-maniacal
hotbed of God-fearing flag-wavers who believe in America right or wrong, love it
or leave it.

''All I did was write a letter to get it off my chest, to do my duty,'' said Mr.
Russo, a 69-year-old World War II veteran.

''But I can't believe it. The calls keep coming in. I have to take my phone off
the hook to go to the bathroom.''

The brouhaha started after plans were announced by MGM/UA to shoot much of the
movie ''Union Street'' in Waterbury next spring. Mr. Russo's letter to The
Waterbury Republican condemned Ms. Fonda for her visit to Hanoi in 1972 and
strongly suggested that she make the film elsewhere.

Then, last week, the other Waterbury daily, The American, published an article
about Mr. Russo selling ''Hanoi Jane'' bumper stickers.

A day later, The Associated Press followed up with an article about the
campaign. And that touched off a barrage of letters and telephone calls from
around the nation.

''I just can't believe how many people do not like the woman,'' said Thomas F.
Fitzgerald, 46, a spokesman for a local Veterans of Foreign Wars post and a
leader of the bumper sticker sales. ''We'll be glad to have the movie here -
just not her.''

Some here, however, say the outcry over Ms. Fonda's visit is not indicative of
how most people in the city feel. They say opinions about the actress and
political activist are not different in Waterbury from what they are in other
cities where Ms. Fonda provokes a range of strong reactions.

During her 1972 visit to North Vietnam, Ms. Fonda, an antiwar activist, made
broadcasts over Hanoi radio criticizing American involvement in the war.

'One Letter to the Editor'

''There is a lot of mixed emotion,'' said David Ricci, the manager of the Across
From the Horse restaurant. ''There are people who don't like her, but there are
a lot of people who'd like to see the film come to town. The younger people, the
post-Vietnam people, are for the movie.''

Others believe the reaction to Ms. Fonda's visit next spring is a minor event
that has been blown out of proportion.

''I think it's amazing how this story has fed on itself,'' said Anthony P.
Bergin, chairman of the Waterbury Convention and Visitors Commission. ''One
letter to the editor and now all this.''

Sherman D. London, editor of the editorial page of The Waterbury Republican and
The American, said his newspapers have now received 96 letters against Ms. Fonda
and 20 in favor, more letters than it has ever received on any other issue.

Sales to V.F.W.'s

He added, though, that only 35 to 40 of those letters are from residents of the
area.

As for the bumper stickers, more than 3,000 have been sold for $1 apiece, Mr.
Russo and Mr. Fitzgerald said. Only about a third of them, however, have been
sold locally. ''We've been selling a lot at the V.F.W.'s,'' Mr. Fitzgerald said.
''We'll probably wind up selling 7,000.''

The film depicts the life and struggles of a working-class woman in a small
town. ''Waterbury was chosen because it's right for the feel and look of the
film,'' said Dawn McElwain, vice president of publicity for MGM/ UA in Culver
City, Calif.

A spokesman for Ms. Fonda, Stephen M. Rivers, said he believed that most of the
criticism had come from a vocal minority responding to the Associated Press
article.

Last week he commissioned a telephone poll of 402 Waterbury residents that
showed that 54 percent of the respondents liked Ms. Fonda and 37 percent did
not. The poll, conducted by Fairbank, Bregman & Mullin, a marketing and research
concern in Los Angeles, also showed that 73 percent were in favor of Ms. Fonda's
coming to town for the movie and 13 percent were not. The margin of error was
six percentage points.

Mr. Rivers was particularly critical of the Associated Press article for stating
that ''many'' Waterbury residents were outraged by Ms. Fonda's visit. He said
the actual number of residents upset or involved in protesting the movie was
minuscule.

Charles J. Hanley, an assistant managing editor of The Associated Press in New
York, defended the thrust of the article but said there ''could have been more
careful editing.'' He also said that the word ''many'' was changed to ''a
number'' in subsequent articles.

Favorable Editorial

Waterbury's Mayor, Joseph Santopietro, and United States Representative, John G.
Rowland, have opposed the visit, but the response from the business community
has been muted.

The Waterbury Republican and The American have editorialized in favor of her
coming to town.

Mr. Bergin of the convention and visitors commission noted that his office had
received numerous calls asking about work on the picture, which is expected to
bring about $5 million to the local economy.

''It will be a great example of democracy in action,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gaetano Russo and Thomas F. Fitzgerald

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


Jed Harris: the Movie Frederic Raphael, who won an Academy Award for the
screenplay for ''Darling'' and dissected marriage to a fare-thee-well in ''Two
for the Road,'' is turning his attention to the legendary Broadway producer Jed
Harris.

And if the screenwriting project he has undertaken for the producer Joel Silver
comes to fruition, there is no one Mr. Raphael would rather see play the role
than Richard Dreyfuss.

''Jed Harris invented Broadway, really,'' Mr. Raphael said. ''He didn't only
invent it, he also brought to it an extraordinary sense of theater. He had a
touch of genius. It's a fascinating period, the 20's and 30's, which are now
more or less like B.C.''

Mr. Raphael pointed out, though, that whatever the fate of his own screenplay,
Harris has already been immortalized on film.

''The first movie I went to in New York City with a little girl,'' said Mr.
Raphael, recalling an episode in the mid-30's, ''was a movie which Ben Hecht and
Charles MacArthur wrote called 'The Scoundrel.' It had Noel Coward in it, and it
was terribly sophisticated, at least it was when I was 18. I just thought it was
the most grown-up thing I'd ever seen. That character that Noel Coward played
was, of course, based on Jed Harris.''

Mr. Raphael, who has long been settled in London, said that Sir Laurence
Olivier's portrayal of ''Richard III'' was based on the actor's experiences with
Harris. ''Laurence Olivier was directed by Jed Harris,'' Mr. Raphael said, ''and
his memories of him were not entirely sunny. But what they couldn't take away
from him was that he did have an extraordinarily theatrical sense.''

''I think he kind of spat in the world's eye,'' Mr. Raphael said of Harris,
''and we need a few people who do that. There are enough conniving people
around, and whatever he did, he didn't turn the other cheek, and he didn't offer
soft answers.''

'Toys' in Another Attic

With his latest film, ''Good Morning, Vietnam,'' set to open next week, Barry
Levinson (''Diner,'' ''Tin Men,'' ''The Natural'') is pondering his next project
with one eye - figuratively speaking - on the past and the other on the the
future of the dollar.

From the past - 1979, he says -comes a screenplay he co-wrote with Valerie
Curtin about the military-industrial complex. No, not exactly in the Dwight D.
Eisenhower sense of foreboding. This one's a comedy about a former general who
takes on the job of running a toy company.

Mr. Levinson said that among his recollections of the sources of inspiration for
the film, tentatively titled ''Toys,'' were hearing that the Russians had once
learned something about United States nuclear submarines from a model-building
kit and that a worker in a high-security toy company had run amok, killing
several people, including himself.

The future of the dollar figures in the future of the project because Mr.
Levinson was planning to direct the film for 20th Century-Fox in London.
''Because of the devaluation of the dollar,'' Mr. Levinson said, ''the budget
has gone sky high. If we can find a way to make it at the price agreed upon,
we'll do it. If not, we're going to have to wait again.''

Mr. Levinson hopes to know the answer by the first of the year.

Moved by 'Spirits'

''It's a little thin sometimes, but it can be quite satisfying.''

That's Steve Guttenberg on the subject of making love to a ghost.

Mr. Guttenberg, fresh off the comedy hit ''Three Men and a Baby,'' has been
spending most of the autumn in Limerick, Ireland and London, co-starring with
Daryl Hannah and Peter O'Toole in ''High Spirits,'' a comedy written and
directed by Neil Jordan, best known for ''Mona Lisa.''

''It's sort of a ghost-love-story-fantasy picture,'' Mr. Guttenberg said. ''I
play a guy in a bad marriage with Beverly D'Angelo,'' he said, making clear the
quality of the marriage was in inverse proportion to his professional admiration
for Ms. D'Angelo. ''We come over to Ireland on sort of a second honeymoon and go
to this castle which Peter O'Toole owns, which he's going to lose to his
creditors unless he comes up with a scheme. And the scheme is that there are
real ghosts in the castle, which there aren't. They're fake ghosts, except I
meet a real ghost, who's Daryl. My marriage is breaking up, and I fall in love
with her.''

Looking to the future, Mr. Guttenberg said he wasn't sure what he'd be doing
next. ''A lot of decent things have come my way,'' he said. ''Nothing really
great. I'd like the next one to be a real satisfier.''

A Life of Dvorak

The composer Anton Dvorak is the inspiration for a project being billed as the
first co-production involving the Czechoslovak Government and a United States
producer - the American Screen Company. Loosely based on the life of Dvorak and
tentatively titled ''The New World Symphony,'' the project will involve the
talents of the Prague Philharmonic and, as director of photography, Miroslav
Ondricek, who served in the same capacity on ''Amadeus.'' Filming, in Prague and
New York, is expected to begin in the spring.

Price Protest

A demonstration against the $7 ticket prices recently instituted at Cineplex
Odeon and Loews theaters has been scheduled by a coalition of community groups
for 11 A.M. tomorrow at Cineplex Odeon's Olympia Twin theaters, on Broadway at
107th Street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Will Sparks, 63, Dies; Johnson Speech Writer

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 221 words


Will R. Sparks, a speech writer for President Lyndon B. Johnson and a retired
director of public affairs for Citicorp, died of a brain tumor Wednesday at Long
Island College Hospital. He was 63 years old and lived in Brooklyn.

He was a writer, director and producer of films for the television series ''Wide
Wide World'' in the 1950's.

In 1964, he became a speech writer for Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara and
later took the White House position. Returning to private industry, he wrote
speeches for Harold S. Geneen, then the chairman of ITT, and Walter B. Wriston,
the Citicorp chairman, before becoming vice president for public affairs at
Citicorp in 1980.

Mr. Sparks, a native of Chicago, graduated from the University of Chicago. He
produced several films for the United States Army, including some during the
Vietnam War, and he received the Army's Distinguished Service Award.

After his White House years, he was the author of ''Who Spoke to the President
Last?'' He was an assistant editor of Great Books of the Western World and wrote
extensively for magazines, including Life, Look, The Saturday Evening Post and
The Atlantic Monthly.

He is survived by his wife, the former Zona Kingery; two sons, Guy, of Grant's
Pass, Ore., and Robert, of Ithaca, N.Y., and a daughter, Johanna, of New York
City.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, DECEMBER 20, 1987


SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 975 words



INTERNATIONAL/3-25



Costa Rica's President is troubled by Nicaragua's plans for a military buildup,
calling them a clear breach of the spirit of the regional peace agreement signed
last summer.    Page 1



Nicaragua's national currency will become worthless in 1988 if fundamental
economic changes do not occur, according to diplomats, economists and trade
union leaders.    20



Sandinistas seen as badly equipped     20



A new election law for Haiti was published by the military-dominated Government.
It bars independent observers but not soldiers from the polls and lets
authorities monitor every voter's ballot.    1



Palestinian rioting spread to Jerusalem, with crowds of rock-throwing youths
attacking Israeli-owned banks and taking over streets in the Arab district for
hours.    1



A new chapter in naval tactics was opened earlier this month when the first Navy
vessel carried robotic aircraft into the Persian Gulf, an actual theater of
operations.    1



The world chess title was retained by Gary Kasparov, who mounted a pressing,
aggressive attack, as he had to, to beat Anatoly Karpov in the final game.    1



Protests in Seoul continue     3



Khmer leader to join Sihanouk in talks     3



Beijing display of the shoddy falls apart     4



Prague and Vatican discuss church tensions     6



Ruling upheld in plot on Pope     8



Betting a dream in Philippines     9



U.S. envoy vs. Bonn potatoes     11



U.S. and China agree to curb textile imports      12



Vietnam trial a boon for refugees     13



Pakistani gets out the vote     14



Benefactor for Hungary on Wall Street     16



London's gossip columnists hoisted by their retorts     16



Two worlds dig in on Cyprus     18



U.S. guardsmen building road in Honduras     21



Peru urged to curb abuses in fighting rebels     23



Athens accused of censoring Reagan talk     24



Immigrants rush to beat Swiss deadline     25



NATIONAL/26-38, 50-54, 64



In the Federal budget negotiations, an ''agreement in principle'' was reached on
a proposal to continue nonmilitary aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, removing an
obstacle to approval of legislation for the 1988 budget compromise.    1



In the Texaco-Pennzoil dispute, Texaco will file a reorganization plan that will
permit the company to emerge from bankruptcy in the spring, executives from both
companies said.    1



Carl Icahn was a pivotal player in bringing about the agreement between Texaco
and Pennzoil. A recent entrant into the affair, Mr. Icahn had assumed the role
of deal maker a month ago.    36



Poverty statistics have masked the problem of the growing number of
disadvantaged Americans who live in near total isolation from mainstream
society, social scientists say.    26



Chicago's new Acting Mayor, Eugene Sawyer, a black, is facing open hostility
from some blacks while enjoying a wide measure of acceptance among whites.    26



Gary Hart worked on his revival into the political field from the moment of his
withdrawal from the Presidential campaign last May. It was the move of a man
described as complex.    34



Pentagon rules face legal challenge     26



Job outlook for 1988 college graduates seen as good      29



Acid leak in Texas leaves residue of questions  be,su1 30



Senate approves farm banking aid     33



39 candidates file to run in New Hampshire primary     35



Meese amends forms on financial holdings     38



Aged singers and holiday cheer     51



Menorah is lit in Vermont park

     51



A gay rights bill falters      52



From health club to parachute     52



Norman Rockwell fights AIDS     54



Maine town wants to die     54



McDonald's enlists retirees     54



No more amenities in Maine park     64



REGIONAL/40-48, 56-63



The Howard Beach jury deliberated for a 10th day in the trial of four white
teen-agers charged with murder or manslaughter and other crimes in the racially
volatile case.    42



The turnover of underpaid workers at voluntary human services agencies in New
York City is producing a ''crisis'' that threatens to impair social services, a
study says.    45



Hugh Carey and six other lawyers plan to join Whitman & Ransom after deciding it
would be too risky to start a new law firm as they had announced two weeks ago.
    46



In Harlem, reading skills are taught at a storefront, which is a chapter of
Literacy Volunteers of New York City. Many residents regard the store as
something of a phenomenon.    42



Debate in Nassau over the budget submitted by the County Executive has
surrounded the spending plan since parts of it were revealed before the November
elections.     48



A crowd of angry movie fans demonstrated against the advent of $7 movie tickets.
''People have been outpriced from their neighborhood theaters,'' one
demonstrator said.    45



Political Notes     40



A New York transit police commander is relieved      40



Koch says city will go broke if his shelter plan fails     41



Police asked to explain surveillance     47



Murals brighten poor areas     56



Albany offers aid but not money for local trash disposal plans     56



''Coats for Kids'' to keep 14,000 warm     58



Employers ruled not liable in employee drunken driving     59



New York City begins a youth program     61


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Khmer Leader Sets Terms for New Talks

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 19


The leader of the largest civilian Cambodian rebel organization says he will
join Prince Norodom Sihanouk in reconciliation talks with the Phnom Penh
Government, but only if Hanoi will first give a public assurance that it will
withdraw its troops from Cambodia when the negotiation process begins.

The Cambodian rebel, Son Sann, head of the Khmer Peoples National Liberation
Front and prime minister in the resistance coalition that holds Cambodia's
United Nations seat, said in an interview Friday that unless the departure of
140,000 Vietnamese troops from the country is made part of a negotiated
solution, the guerrilla leaders will be ''accepting an occupation.''

Mr. Son Sann, a former tutor of Prince Sihanouk who became his Prime Minister in
the 1950's, said that in the first round of talks near Paris, from Dec. 2 to
Dec. 4, between the Prince and Phnom Penh's Prime Minister, Hun Sen, the
Cambodian rebels had sought to include a call for a Vietnamese troop withdrawal
in the final statement, but had failed. He said they also were unable to
persuade the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian leadership to declare the temples of
Angkor Wat an area of access to international scholars.

''Hun Sen took all he wanted and gave nothing,'' Mr. Son Sann said.

Talks Proposed for Jan. 27

Today, the Cambodian Government press agency reported that Mr. Hun Sen was
planning to meet the Prince again on Jan. 27 in Saint Germain-en-Laye, France.
Prince Sihanouk, who over the last few weeks has changed his mind several times
about whether to go ahead with the meetings, would like to be joined in future
talks by his coalition partners, Mr. Son Sann and Khieu Samphan, who represents
the Khmer Rouge in the coalition.

The Khmer Rouge, known to oppose the peace process, has not replied to the
Prince's request. Mr. Son Sann and Mr. Khieu Samphan, both based in Bangkok, are
due to meet here next week. Prince Sihanouk, who has homes in Beijing and
Pyongyang, is in France for the winter.

Diplomats and scholars in the region who follow Cambodian affairs say that the
Hun Sen-Sihanouk meeting was in itself a gain for Vietnam, which has been trying
to bring the Prince, who is popular in Cambodia, into a Phnom Penh Government.

Hanoi's former Prime Minister, Pham Van Dong, persuaded Prince Sihanouk to lend
his prestige to the Khmer Rouge when they seized Phnom Penh with Vietnam's
support in 1975.

Impressed With Hun Sen

Mr. Son Sann, who is 76 years old, said he was impressed with Prime Minister Hun
Sen, who is 36 and was a Khmer Rouge deputy regional commander before defecting
to the Vietnamese in the late 1970's.

''He is clever, a very clever man,'' Mr. Son Sann said. ''I would like to give
him the benefit of the doubt; he is a Cambodian.''

''I know that all the Cambodians, even the Heng Samrin troops, want the
withdrawal of the Vietnamese,'' he said. Heng Samrin, another former member of
the Khmer Rouge, is Cambodia's Communist Party leader.

Mr. Son Sann said his intelligence reports indicated that between 700,000 and a
million Vietnamese have settled in Cambodia under Hanoi's occupation, and that
many had been given Cambodian citizenship to disguise their origins.

A Million Khmer at Border

He said that at the same time a million ethnic Khmer had been sent to the Thai
border to clear mines and build barricades against the guerrillas. He said that
5 to 7 percent of them were killed or handicapped by the work, and that more
than 70 percent were affected by malaria, which is severe and endemic in the
border region.

More than half the 275,000 Cambodian exiles in camps along the Thai border are
followers of Mr. Son Sann's Khmer People's National Liberation Front. Their
biggest encampment, Site 2, with more than 130,000 people, is the second-largest
Cambodian city after Phnom Penh.

Mr. Son Sann's army is smaller, however, than that of Prince Sihanouk or that of
the Khmer Rouge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnamese soldiers watching as tanks are loaded aboard
landing craft during exercise near Kom Pong Sam, Cambodia (The New York
Times/Fred R. Conrad)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRIAL IN VIETNAM SAID TO AID REBELS

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 915 words


The trial of a group of anti-Communist guerrillas in Vietnam this month has
provided an unexpected windfall of publicity for the fighters' organizers in the
United States, leaders of Vietnamese refugees in this country say.

''The Communists wanted to scare people at home into not joining the resistance,
but they actually created a psychological victory for these people among
Vietnamese in America,'' said Yen Do, editor of a Vietnamese language newspaper
in Orange County, Calif.

Mr. Yen said that until the trial, in which 17 people were sentenced to prison
for trying to infiltrate Vietnam through Laos, the anti-Hanoi movement among
refugees in the United States had lost credibility because of lack of evidence
of any effective military activity against the regime.

The main rebel group in the United States, the National United Front for the
Liberation of Vietnam, had also suffered over the last two years from
factionalism and charges of corruption among its leaders, according to Mr. Yen
and other Vietnamese.

Fate of Leader Questioned

But the public trial in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, has also raised
questions about the fate of the front's chairman, Hoang Co Minh, a former
admiral in the South Vietnamese Navy who became a house painter in Washington
after escaping to the United States in 1975. Hanoi says Mr. Minh was killed in
Laos in August as he tried to infiltrate from Thailand into Vietnam with 200
fighters.

But a spokesman for the front, Nguyen Dong Son, denied that Mr. Minh is dead.
''Admiral Hoang Co Minh is safe,'' Mr. Son said by telephone from the
organization's headquarters in San Jose, Calif. ''This is just a disinformation
scheme by the Communists.''

Asked why Mr. Minh had not reappeared to rebut the statements about his death,
Mr. Son said: ''Do you think it is easy for him to sneak out of Vietnam? He is
leading the struggle.''

But Mr. Yen and other Vietnamese say the more time that passes without an
appearance by Mr. Minh the greater the doubts that he is alive.

Nevertheless, Bui Diem, a former South Vietnamese Ambassador to the United
States who now lives in Washington, said the trial and all the speculation about
Mr. Minh ''gives the front enormous publicity, way beyond what they could get by
themselves.''

'Created a Lot of Interest'

He added that ''it has created a lot of interest in the Vietnamese community,''
now estimated to number more than half a million in the United States.

The trial has also raised sensitive questions for the Reagan Administration,
since Mr. Minh became an American citizen and some of the other guerrillas
killed or captured with him are reported to have American citizenship.

An American official said the State Department had ''made appropriate
inquiries'' of the Vietnamese authorities to determine if any of those put on
trial were Americans but so far had not received any evidence of that.

At the trial, the indictment charged that ''obviously, the U.S. imperialists are
the mastermind, the inciter and supporter of Hoang Co Minh and his followers.''
The presiding judge also demanded the deportation from the United States of the
man he called the remaining rebel ringleader, Nguyen Kim, and said the American
Government should dissolve such anti-Hanoi groups or ''bear the responsibility
for the destabilization of Southeast Asia.''

Mr. Kim, an official of the front, did not return phone calls to his office in
San Jose.

Improved Ties Sought

The Vietnamese criticism of the United States comes as Washington and Hanoi have
been moving gingerly to improve relations. Last summer the two nations concluded
an agreement providing for American experts to visit Vietnam to help search for
Americans missing since the Vietnam War.

An American official knowledgeable about Vietnam said the Government was not
involved in any way in helping Mr. Minh. ''We've really got clean hands on
this,'' he said.

He added that intelligence reports showed that the fighting in August in Laos in
which Mr. Minh was supposedly killed ''was not a pure rout as Hanoi said.''
Instead, the official said, there were more than 20 sharp engagements, which
indicated a surprising level of training and equipment on the part of the
rebels. The front also had more troops than the 200 mentioned by Hanoi, but
fewer than the 10,000 the front has claimed, the official said.

Front's Leaders Split

The front was organized in 1982 and established a clandestine radio transmitter
that could be heard in Ho Chi Minh City, according to recent Vietnamese
refugees. But two years ago a number of the front's leaders split with Mr. Minh
over charges that he and his brother had embezzled funds raised from refugees so
they could finance a chain of Vietnamese restaurants.

The front became embroiled in further controversy because Mr. Son, its spokesman
and some believe its key leader now, is a relative of the new General Secretary
of the Vietnamese Communist Party, Nguyen Van Linh. Mr. Son, a former economic
official in the Saigon Government, stayed on in Vietnam after the Communist
victory in 1975 and was not jailed, as most officials and officers were. He was
later able to leave Vietnam under the official Orderly Departure Program.

Mr. Son's easy fate after 1975 has raised accusations that he was protected by
Mr. Linh, a serious charge among Vietnamese refugees, who are staunch
anti-Communists. But Mr. Son denies it, saying his family lost touch with Mr.
Linh in 1930.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Pentagon Rules Face Challenge In Security Case

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 708 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 19


Two Vietnamese-American employees of the Defense Department have filed a lawsuit
charging the Pentagon with violating their constitutional rights by denying them
security clearances ''solely on the basis of their national origin.''

Phong T. Huynh and Vien U. Huynh, who are brother and sister, filed the suit in
Federal District Court here Thursday, asserting that a Pentagon regulation
denies ''naturalized United States citizens equal protection of the laws and
thus violates the Fifth Amendment.'' The Huynhs are both employed at the Naval
Surface Warfare Center in Dahlgren, Va.

The regulation they have challenged governs access to information that has been
classified top secret, secret or confidential. The regulation holds that a
naturalized citizen who originally came from one of 29 countries ''determined to
have interests adverse to the United States'' is precluded from access to
classifed material unless he or she has been a citizen for five years. If the
person has been a resident of the United States for 10 years, even though a
citizen for less than five years, a clearance may be granted.

Among the countries listed are Communist nations such as Vietnam, the Soviet
Union, Cuba and several East European nations, in addition to Iran, Iraq, Syria
and Libya. China is not listed.

Employment Called in Jeopardy

The Huynhs, who have been citizens for less than five years, both argued that
their employment at the naval center, which does weapon research, has been
jeopardized because they need access to classified material to do their jobs.

A spokesman for the Defense Department had no immediate comment. The suit named
Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci as defendant, but that is a formality;
Defense and Justice Department attorneys will handle the case for the
Government.

Both Fled to Malaysia

In the court document, the Huynhs said they were born in Saigon. Mr. Huynh
served in the South Vietnamese Army in the war against North Vietnam and was
denied employment by the Communists after their takeover in 1975. He and his
sister fled separately by boat to Malaysia in 1978.

Mr. Huynh spent a year and Ms. Huynh nine months in a refugee camp before
migrating to the United States in 1979, where they settled in Queens. Ms. Huynh,
who is a graduate of Hunter College with a degree in computer science, became an
American citizen in January 1985. Mr. Huynh graduated from the City College of
New York in 1985 with a degree in electrical engineering and became a citizen in
August that year.

Shortly after becoming a citizen, Mr. Huynh began working at the naval center in
its electronic systems department. In July this year his sister joined the
center as a computer scientist in a different branch of the same department.

But the same day that Ms. Huynh began work, a senior official at the naval
center, Gary J. Grittner, told Mr. Huynh that he might lose his interim
clearance and Ms. Huynh that she might never be cleared because of the Pentagon
security regulation, the court document asserts. He suggested they start looking
for new jobs.

Several weeks later, the Huynhs and other Vietnamese-Americans applied for
waivers of the regulation that barred them from obtaining clearance, which the
naval center said would take about six months to process. Meantime, the suit
said, Mr. Grittner again advised Mr. Huynh to look elsewhere for work.

Mr. Huynh said in the suit he did not want to leave his job because he had
settled in Virginia, was working toward a master's degree at Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and would require a security clearance even in the private
sector. Many commercial companies with military contracts work on classified
projects.

Ms. Huynh was denied an interim clearance and was transferred from the
electronics department to a department that does maintenance in which security
clearance is not required, the court document said. She said it was less
challenging and rewarding than the work she expected to do.

The Huynhs, who are represented by Philip Le B. Douglas and Kenneth Berlin of
Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam & Roberts, of New York and Washington, asked that the
Pentagon regulation be declared unconstitutional and the Pentagon be enjoined
from enforcing it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Rockwell Cover Joins Fight on AIDS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 54, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 251 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 18


Norman Rockwell has been recruited posthumously in the fight against AIDS, with
the illustrator's folksy depiction of a father teaching his embarrassed son
''The Facts of Life.''

Members of the AIDS Action Committee in Massachusetts suggested that Rockwell,
known for his warm scenes of small-town America, would have approved.

The artist died in 1978 at the age of 85. His son, Tom, a co-executor of his
father's estate, said in a telephone interview from Poughkeepsie, N.Y.: ''It
certainly did not make me feel uncomfortable to have my father's work associated
with that. One of the things he was associated with was tolerance, so I think
it's fairly easy to think what he would have said.''

Larry Kessler, the AIDS committee's executive director, said Rockwell was chosen
for the poster precisely because he is associated with family values. ''I think
there may be people who'll say we've stolen an American symbol,'' Mr. Kessler
added. ''But I choose to believe that Rockwell belonged to all of us.''

Rockwell created ''The Facts of Life'' for The Saturday Evening Post. The rights
are owned by The Saturday Evening Post Marketing Company, which said it let the
Massachusetts group use the picture free.

In the 1960's Rockwell illustrated, mostly for Look magazine, such issues as
civil rights, space exploration, the generation gap and the Vietnam War.

Peter van Raalte, president of the Post marketing company, discounted
suggestions that some might object to linking Rockwell with AIDS.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Norman Rockwell's ''Facts of Life'' as a public service
campaign (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TELEVISION;
TOM SELLECK STALKS HIS FUTURE

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Section 2; Page 37, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2194 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU


DESPITE A COLD THAT would put him to bed the next day, Tom Selleck was
cheerfully standing amid fussing makeup men and gaffers, joking and mouthing his
lines on a lush lawn below Diamond Head with the Hawaiian surf for background
music. He was shooting yet another episode of ''Magnum, P.I.,'' this one a
typically improbable tale about a brother and sister who are plotting the murder
of their wealthy father.

Moments later, during a break in the filming, the actor folded his 6-foot-4
frame into a director's chair under the shade of a mammoth hau tree. The man is
remarkably similar to his alter ego as a Honolulu private detective - open,
amiable, gentle and self-effacing, despite all his success and wealth. This is
the eighth and final season of ''Magnum, P.I.'' and a critical juncture in the
42-year-old actor's career. After seven and a half years as Thomas Magnum,
private investigator, Tom Selleck, actor, is eager to prove that there is more
to him than meets the television eye, that he is a versatile actor as well as a
shrewd businessman.

In addition to currently enjoying considerable box-office success with his
latest feature film, the Touchstone Pictures farce ''Three Men and a Baby,'' he
is serving as both leading man and producer for this last season of ''Magnum,''
starting up a new production company, expanding a real-estate partnership with
one of his two brothers, juggling several movie offers and toying with the
''scary'' prospect of a Broadway play this fall - his first attempt at the
professional stage - in a revival of ''Mr. Roberts.''

For the moment, though, he is still here in Hawaii, wrapping up ''Magnum,
P.I.,'' this week in an episode co-starring Carol Burnett. The series' title
character is a retired naval intelligence officer who lives on the beachfront
estate of Robin Masters, a mystery writer who is never seen. As devotees of the
series know, the cast of characters includes the estate manager, Higgins (John
Hillerman) and two fellow Vietnam veterans, one a charter helicopter pilot named
T.C. (Roger E. Mosley), the other the manager of a Honolulu discotheque, Rick
(Larry Manetti). This fictional world is also peopled by the staples of the
television cop genre: drug lords, rapacious playboys, con artists, Arab gold
dealers, hookers and treacherous police officers.

There was not supposed to be a ''Magnum'' this season. The character was
disposed of in an apparently irreversible coma last season. But Universal
Studios and CBS prevailed on Mr. Selleck to bring him back to life for one more
season, a prospect Mr. Selleck said he welcomed not just for the money but to
hold the Hawaii ''family'' together for a while longer and for the chance to
bring the story of Magnum and the three other main characters to a ''proper''
conclusion.

If there was ever any doubt about the profitability of a long-running television
series, ''Magnum, P.I.'' dispels it. According to industry estimates,
syndication of the series has accounted for $350 million of the $800 million in
gross sales chalked up by Universal this decade. Each episode is worth about $2
million in syndication revenues. Little wonder that Universal wanted to add to
the 150 episodes of the first seven seasons. Mr. Selleck won't say how much
''Magnum, P.I.'' has been worth to him, but acknowledges that he is a
millionaire many times over and could retire in Hawaii if he wanted to, which he
doesn't.

By the end of March, filming of the series will be completed and ''Magnum,
P.I.'' will presumably rerun into television infinity, making Mr. Selleck even
richer. But the big question for the actor is: Can he transcend the role, can he
leave it behind and move into something fresh? Or will the handsome,
broad-shouldered actor, who is best known as a ''hunk,'' be typecast forever,
just as Carroll O'Connor will probably always be Archie Bunker in the viewing
public's mind?

''I'm not as typecast as I worried I was,'' Mr. Selleck said. ''The offers for
movies, quite honestly, have got better and better throughout the course of
'Magnum.' I want to stretch as an actor. That does not mean I want to do
something 180 degrees away just to prove I can act. I think people have a
certain concept about what my appetite is, based on 'Magnum' and on the movies
I've done. I think they may be a little surprised.''

''It's not true he plays the same thing every week,'' argues Charles Johnson,
the co-executive producer of the series. Mr. Johnson points out that many sides
of the character are shown, a dark obsessed hard side, a humorous side, a
fearful side. He cites episodes in which the actor is trapped under a small
airplane or bitten by centipedes, sequences in which Mr. Selleck exhibits such
emotions as fear, agony, delirium. ''People underestimate Tom Selleck,'' Mr.
Johnson went on. ''They ask, 'Is there anything else to him?' In our business
you get into a mold and people do not let you do anything else.''

Mr. Selleck himself is sensitive to suggestions that Magnum is a shallow and
repetitive action role. He called the role a ''seven-and-a-half-year character
study that I've never grown tired of.'' Magnum, he continued, has grown and
evolved, become more complex; his foibles have been exploited, including the
possibility he fathered an illegitimate child by his former wife. ''It's really
a show about people,'' Mr. Selleck said. ''The plots are not as important as the
subplot and the reaction of the characters.''

There is much of the Selleck personality in the Magnum character. According to
Mr. Selleck, he helped transform the character from an infallible James Bondian
figure to a more vulnerable one. ''He fails so much, he is far from perfect with
women, he gets flustered when he gets romantically involved, he messes up,'' Mr.
Selleck said. This trait, he felt, makes Magnum appeal to men as well as women.
''What I like,'' he added, ''is that the show evolved more toward character
orientation as the years went on. That's my influence. I like him better now.''

The initial few years of the series took ample advantage of Mr. Selleck's sex
appeal and the warm Hawaii setting: lots of shirtless scenes on boats and
beaches in wet swimsuits. But more recently, that approach has been played down.
''People called us a hunk-and-car-chase show,'' Mr. Johnson says. ''So, we
started de-emphasizing that. We did not want to be known as a show with a man
with no top. Now you rarely see scenes with Tom standing around the guest house
with four bimbos and no shirt.''

Mr. Selleck said that he was instrumental in this shift, partly because he
became senstive to press comments. ''The perception was created by the media,''
he argued. ''I never felt that's what the show was about. But I'm 42 now. I
don't like to take my shirt off now.''

Over the years, the actor also gradually took on a larger role in influencing
the series' plots. A few seasons ago, he vetoed a script in which Magnum played
a gigolo. ''I'm not a writer, but I'm a pretty good fixer,'' Mr. Selleck said.
''The character is told through my point of view, so my reaction to the script
is pretty valid.''

Mr. Selleck's occasional influence turned into control of the show last year,
when he graduated from actor to behind-the-scenes executive. The show was
beginning to stumble. Competing directly on Thursday evenings with the hugely
popular ''Bill Cosby Show,'' struggling with a sizable turnover in staff and
flagging morale, plus running 12 percent over budget, something needed to be
done.

So, Mr. Selleck offered to take over as executive producer, and the network
moved the show to a new time slot, on Wednesday opposite ABC's ''Dynasty,''
still stiff competition. At first, the studio was skeptical about letting Mr.
Selleck become executive producer, but he persuaded them that, given the
distance of the set from Hollywood, local control would allow quicker decisions
and save money. He took no credit for that work last season, save for two
episodes - enough to qualify him for membership in the Producers' Guild. He
takes pains to say much of the burden was carried by his co-executive producer,
Mr. Johnson, and supervising producer, Chris Abbott.

''We ended up under budget, and it was the comeback show of the year,'' Mr.
Selleck boasts. ''I was real interested in credibility as a producer, but I
don't know if I would do it again by jumping into a TV show I was starring in
with 14-hour days. What pleases me is we saved money and improved the quality of
the show.''

''Burned out'' from the effort, Mr. Selleck said he would take a rest before
getting into something new. But most of all, he added, he was looking for film
roles in a romantic comedy and a western.

Unlike some of Mr. Selleck's previous feature films, ''Three Men and a Baby'' is
a big box-office hit. In it, he co-stars with Steve Guttenberg and Ted Danson;
some critics have wondered whether Mr. Selleck could have carried the
sophisticated comedy by himself. The actor said he was initially attracted to
the project because it required less of his time than a sole leading role, given
the demands of producing ''Magnum, P.I.''

At any rate, Mr. Selleck said he prefers working with an ensemble: ''I feel more
at home in an ensemble role. It adds to your abilities. I don't think a picture
in which you are the sole lead is necessarily better than ensemble. Contrary to
what people think, 'Magnum' is an ensemble piece. I'd love if people would come
to me with supporting roles.''

The actor's track record in feature films has been mixed. He is proudest of
''Runaway,'' a 1984 fantasy in which he played a police officer who stalks
errant robots, though it was not a box-office hit. His first starring vehicle,
''The High Road to China,'' a 1983 romantic adventure in which he played a boozy
World War I fighter pilot, was not a critical success, but it grossed more than
$50 million. ''Lassiter,'' a 1984 spy thriller, is his least favorite. Some
critics saw the ''Magnum'' persona in all these characters. And while Mr.
Selleck insists they were just confusing the actor's ''instrument,'' himself,
with the roles, it is a perception that could haunt him in future acting
endeavors.

Next fall, he hopes to make his Broadway debut, in ''Mr. Roberts,'' not an easy
challenge, given the the tall, indelible shadow of Henry Fonda. ''I should not
watch the Fonda film anymore,'' he said. ''It's intimidating. Since I am coming
from a TV series, there will be a tendency for Broadway to say 'prove
something.' ''

Meanwhile, Tom Selleck, businesman, is also at work. He has invested some of his
considerable earnings from ''Magnum'' in Selleck Properties, a real-estate
partnership with his brother Bob. The firm's major venture to date has been to
rehabilitate a shopping plaza in Palmdale, Calif. And he is working with his
father, Robert Selleck, who recently created the Selleck Company, a real-estate
brokerage. The actor has also set up a production company, called TWS
Productions, along with Mr. Johnson and Ms. Abbott.

The actor lives in a secluded house below Diamond Head. But his new acting and
business careers, he said, will amost certainly require him to move back to Los
Angeles. His new wife, his second, Julie Mack, who is an acting student, lives
there.

He will be reluctant to leave Hawaii, he said. Most of the 100-odd crew for
''Magnum, P.I.'' is local, and they will not find new jobs easily. The Honolulu
studio is to be razed.

Mr. Selleck said he would not take the ''safe'' way out by waiting a year and
doing another television series. But can he succeed in another arena? ''I am
more successful than I could have fantasized about,'' he said. ''My dad was a
self-made man, I worked through college. I am real proud. But when 'Magnum'
became successful, I set new goals. You are never quite there. You should never
stop dreaming. I am concerned that you can do a TV series and nobody wants you
to work for them because you are too typed. If I ever decide not to work, I want
it to be my decision.''

LOOKS COUNT

''Tom Selleck has a great flair for comedy,'' says Leonard Nimoy (in photo),
director of ''Three Men and a Baby,'' the movie in which Mr. Selleck co-stars
with Steve Guttenberg and Ten Danson. ''I see him in the comedy tradition of
Spencer Tracy, Cary Grant, Clark Gable -a light touch, twinkle in the eye,
slightly crusty, can do a joke on himself.''

In the film, Mr. Selleck plays one of three New York bachelors who suddenly find
themselves saddled with an infant girl. In a review for The Times, Janet Maslin
wrote in part: ''Mr. Selleck, as an architect who starts out resenting the
newcomer. . .but eventually takes her to a job site in a tiny pink hard hat,
succeeds in melting before the audience's eyes.''

Mr. Nimoy says that he found little echo of the Magnum character in Mr.
Selleck's film performance: ''This is Tom Selleck in this movie, not Magnum.
We've seen an actor emerge in this picture.''

The director adds that ''Tom was generous and collaborative, a thorough
professional'' and, tongue in cheek, that ''he'd have a great future in
pictures, if only he were good-looking.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Tom Selleck with Carol Burnett rehearsing a scene from
''Magnum, P.I.''; Leonard Nimoy

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: DECEMBER 20, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 489 words

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     6    WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
            (Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
            woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.

 2     7    GARDEN OF SHADOWS, by V. C. Andrews.
            (Pocket, $4.95.) The beginnings of the evil that
            beset the Dollanganger family in previous novels.

 3     3    THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.
            (Bantam, $4.95.) Complex family relationships in
            South Carolina's low country and New York City.

 4     3    CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $4.50.) A
            mystery writer dreams up a multimillion-dollar
            jewel heist that becomes horribly real.

 5     3    NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Pocket,
            $4.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans from being
            discovered by the Germans.

 6     3    SECRET FIRE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon,
            $4.50.) An Englishwoman, abducted by a Russian
            prince, makes her captor her romantic slave.

 7     3    THE DINNER PARTY, by Howard Fast. (Dell,
            $4.95.) The feelings of family and friends surface
            at a Washington get-together.

 8     8    WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Avon, $5.95.)
            Iran following the Shah's departure.

 9     3    PATIENCE OF A SAINT, by Andrew M. Greeley.
            (Warner, $4.95.) A hard-bitten newspaperman on
            the trail of a wily politician.

10     3    SECRET FOR A NIGHTINGALE, by Victoria
            Holt. (Fawcett, $4.95.) An English nurse discovers
            the truth about her husband's tragedy.

11     23   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley,
            $4.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians.

12     18   IT, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)
            Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman.

13     82   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom
            Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
            brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

14     2    BLOODTHIRST, by J. M. Dillard. (Pocket, $3.95.)
            A new ''Star Trek'' novel.

15     16   FLOWERS IN THE ATTIC, by V. C. Andrews.
            (Pocket, $4.95.) Four innocent children locked
            away from the world by a selfish mother.

16 *   9    FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen
            Coonts. (Pocket, $4.95.) Navy aviators in the
            Vietnam War.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction

 1     34   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Berkley, $6.95.)
            Anecdotes and ruminations by the television star
            and father of five.

 2     2    A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.
            (Fireside/Pocket, $4.50.) The Indiana University
            basketball team during the 1985-86 season, with a
            postscript about the 1986-87 championship.

 3 *  217   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
            (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
            spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 958 words



IN LA-LA LAND WE TRUST, by Robert Campbell. (Mysterious Press, $3.95.) La-La
Land is Los Angeles, where the discovery of a headless corpse helps a private
investigator named Whistler uncover a pornography ring run by a seemingly
respectable businessman with a voyeuristic taste for murder. ''Whistler is in
many ways a very modern reincarnation of Hammett's Continental Op,'' Newgate
Callendar said in The Book Review last year. He called Robert Campbell ''one of
the most stylish crime writers in the business.''

BROTHERS IN ARMS: A Journey From War to Peace, by William Broyles Jr. (Avon,
$4.50.) Long after the Vietnam War had ended, the journalist William Broyles
Jr., a former Marine lieutenant, felt nostalgia for what he considered his
''initiation into the power of life and death.'' Returning to the battlefield in
1984, he found that some of his former adversaries were just as wistful as he
was and eager to reminisce. The conversations ''have a credibility born of
mutual respect,'' Bill Kurtis said here last year. The author's ''journey was
quite personal, but it speaks for thousands of men who are still troubled by the
unsettled issues'' of the war.

ENCHANTMENT, by Daphne Merkin. (Fawcett, $3.95.) Having grown up in the
emotional icebox of an Upper East Side household, Hannah Lehmann feels chilled
and smothered by her past. ''In the wrong hands, the inside story of the Lehmann
family, dirty linen and all, could easily have made uncomfortable reading,'' The
Times's John Gross said in 1986. ''Thanks to Daphne Merkin's subtlety and
sureness of touch, it is a story that draws the reader on unresisting.''

FIDEL: A Critical Portrait, by Tad Szulc. (Avon, $5.95.) A skilled manipulator
of the masses and the news media, Fidel Castro has managed to play off the
United States and the Soviet Union against each other for three decades. Last
year, Walter Goodman said in The Times that as a ''conscientious and
fair-minded'' biographer, Tad Szulc ''provides as full an account of the rise .
. . of [the Cuban leader] as any general reader could ask and more than some may
require.''

MALCOLM, by James Purdy. (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $7.95.) When James Purdy's
novel about the slow corruption of a 15-year-old boy was published in 1959, our
reviewer, William Peden, praised the author's ''talent for depicting the sickly,
the abnormal, the blasted aspects of contemporary American life.'' The same
publisher has reprinted Mr. Purdy's subsequent novel, THE NEPHEW ($7.95), in
which the aunt of a soldier missing during the Korean War writes a memorial to
him, learning in the process disturbing facts about the town where she lives. In
1960, R. W. B. Lewis said in these pages that the book was ''a small work of
authentic fictional art.'' It reads ''as though some of the stories in
'Winesburg, Ohio' had been rewritten by Eugene Ionesco.''

CRISIS IN BETHLEHEM: Big Steel's Struggle to Survive, by John Strohmeyer.
(Penguin, $7.95.) As the editor of The Globe-Times of Bethlehem, Pa., John
Strohmeyer watched the fall of the once-powerful Bethlehem Steel Corporation,
which he sees as emblematic of the problems faced by the industry as a whole.
Last year, our reviewer, Steven Greenhouse, admired the book for conveying both
the company's ''extravagant and insular corporate culture'' and ''the
extraordinary physical dangers of steelmaking.''

THE GATES OF HELL, by Harrison E. Salisbury. (Da Capo, $12.95.) Harrison E.
Salisbury, a former Times editor and foreign correspondent, based this novel on
the life of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. When it was first published in 1975, one
reviewer said the book's ''evocation of Russian history enthralls the reader. .
. . Salisbury has written a moving and informative novel.''

TAKING THE WORLD IN FOR REPAIRS, by Richard Selzer. (Penguin, $7.95.) The
surgeon-writer Richard Selzer is known for his essays about what physicians call
''invasive procedures.'' In his latest collection, which also includes some
short stories, he moves beyond the operating table. ''As he palpates the world,
listening for the tiny arrhythmias of despair, he jots down his observations
with a surgeon's cunning and a stylist's zest,'' Diane Ackerman said here in
1986.

PECKHAM'S MARBLES, by Peter De Vries. (McGraw-Hill, $4.95.) Earl Peckham, whose
gloomy novel ''The Sorry Scheme of Things Entire'' has sold three copies, falls
in love with the best-selling author Poppy McCloud, whose work he considers
trash. ''The comedy . . . is less strenuous than in some of Mr. De Vries's other
books,'' John Gross said in The Times last year. ''But the author still remains
in a class by himself among contemporary comic writers.''

CRACKPOT: The Obsessions of John Waters, by John Waters. (Vintage, $5.95.) As
director of the films ''Pink Flamingos'' and ''Polyester,'' John Waters prides
himself on being a purveyor of bad taste. In this collection of essays, he
occasionally lets down his facade, as when he describes his stint teaching at a
prison institution for murderers, sex offenders and other hard-core criminals.
''Mr. Waters is far more interesting when he ditches the crackpot pose and
writes from the heart,'' our reviewer, Anthony Schmitz, said last year.

SEMITES AND ANTI-SEMITES: An Inquiry Into Conflict and Prejudice, by Bernard
Lewis. (Norton, $7.95.) Historically, the Islamic world has not been infected
with the anti-Semitic religious fervor of the Christian West, the historian
Bernard Lewis writes. But he fears that the situation is changing. He wrote
''this provocative book to sound the alarm against what he sees as the deepest
and most dire consequence of the Arab-Israeli conflict,'' Arthur Hertzberg said
here last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William Broyles Jr.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By DAVID MURRAY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 311 words


THE NEW BREED. By W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $16.95.) This seventh volume of W.
E. B. Griffin's ''Brotherhood of War'' series brings back many of the same
characters whose military careers have been delineated in the first six. The
series is in the platoon-movie genre - one of everything. There is, for example,
the Jewish soldier who is both a decorated hero and an intelligence officer so
good at his job that he hobnobs with President Johnson in the Oval Office. Also
included is the spoiled rich kid who turns into a first-class officer. Earlier
volumes were about fighting in World War II, postwar Greece, Korea and Vietnam.
In all these conflicts, the adversaries were not only the historic ones but also
the American brass who refused to consider the modern improvements being touted
by the novel's intrepid band of military brothers, such as new tactics for armor
and the helicopter. In ''The New Breed,'' the scene is the Congo in 1964, and
again the enemy is a dual one: both the Congolese rebels, who are described in
unrelievedly brutal terms, and the ''hand wringers'' in the State Department and
C.I.A. who prevent fighting Americans from mowing down blacks to rescue American
and Belgian hostages. What saves the book - and the series - from mediocrity is
a generous ration of detailed and fascinating descriptions of weapons, tactics,
Green Beret training, Army life and battle. The Brotherhood members themselves,
although painted in primary colors, are still interesting characters and are
usually possessed of intelligence and humor. Their womenfolk are also well
drawn, but so brave and cheerful that they make one's teeth ache. In sum, ''The
New Breed'' is absorbing, salted-peanuts reading. Mr. Griffin is an Army veteran
himself, and his proficiency on the word processor convinces one that old
soldiers never die, they just write away.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By WENDY SMITH

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 286 words


INDOCHINE. By Christie Dickason. (Villard, $18.95.) A vivid sense of place and a
thorough knowledge of Vietnamese culture distinguish this colorful if flawed
first novel by an American-born director and choreographer who lived in
Indochina in the 1950's. Christie Dickason's heroine, Nina Luoc, is the daughter
of a Frenchwoman and a wealthy Vietnamese who sees her privileged life shattered
in 1954 when her mother is killed and her father disappears in the wake of an
explosion at their home. Stranded in the Saigon streets, Nina is rescued by a
messenger from her father and initiated into the family opium trade. She rises
to precarious fortune in the years of America's increasing involvement in
Vietnam, jousting with rival drug lords and juggling two lovers, one an American
journalist and the other a guerrilla who will stop at nothing to rid his country
of the hated White Devils. ''Indochine'' is most notable for its characters'
pragmatic, essentially amoral point of view, in which the Americans are simply
the latest in a long line of foreign colonizers whose ignorant authority must be
evaded or twisted to individual advantage. The author smoothly intersperses her
narrative with necessary historical information, and she has a considerable gift
for evoking the chaotic atmosphere of a war-torn nation. However, the plot,
which is never more than serviceable, degenerates toward the end into an
improbable series of confusing maneuvers that allow Nina to jet off into the
sunset with no visible remorse and lots of cash. So many loose ends are left
dangling in blatant anticipation of a sequel that this otherwise satisfying
novel might just as well have closed with the words ''To Be Continued.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Dr. Coffin Says Goodbye to Riverside

BYLINE: By MICHEL MARRIOTT

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 608 words


As a cold rain beat against stained-glass windows, more than 2,000 people sat
quietly in the neo-Gothic grandeur of the Riverside Church yesterday to hear the
Rev. Dr. William Sloane Coffin say goodbye.

In words tinged with sadness, Dr. Coffin delivered his last sermon as the senior
minister of the interdenominational church, at Riverside Drive and 120th Street.

''It's finished now,'' Dr. Coffin said. ''Even the unfinished is finished now.''

After a standing ovation, Dr. Coffin stood for a few moments with his hands
clasped and with a smile. Then - alone - he walked slowly out of the sanctuary,
followed only by the hollow sound of his steps striking the marble floor.

Greater Diversity

For a moment, no one moved. A few dabbed at the corners of their eyes.

''It is very sad,'' said 19-year-old Samuel Adams Dexter, a history major at
Columbia University who had been attracted to the church, which he joined
yesterday, by Dr. Coffin. ''I hope what he stands for won't be diluted now that
he's gone.''

Dr. Coffin, who in the 1960's led protests against the Vietnam War and racial
segregation, had been at the church for 10 years. There, many say he transformed
Riverside, built in the 1930's by John D. Rockefeller Jr., into a more joyful,
hopeful place dedicated to a world wracked by inequity and warfare. During Dr.
Coffin's years there, the church has become more racially and ethnically diverse
and has increased its commitment to helping the poor, from the South Bronx to
South Africa.

Early next year, Dr. Coffin, 63, who has been a longtime opponent of nuclear
weapons, is to become president of a Washington-based disarmament group,
SANE/Freeze. He announced his decision to leave the church last summer.

Granting 'Permission'

His sermon yesterday was not fashioned solely as a farewell. He spoke of four
tenets of the Christian faith: promise, hope, love and joy, and the need for
them. And he cautioned his congregation not to become so pious that they fail to
enjoy the world and its creations.

''To suppress joy in life is to produce hatred of life,'' he said.

Then the minister summed up his work at Riverside as having simply given his
congregation ''permission.'' Elaborating, Dr. Coffin said he had given people
permission to do the things their hearts had been telling them they should do.

In fact, church officials said that Dr. Coffin had infused in Riverside a
Christian philosophy that made words and deeds inseparable. If the church
believed war was wrong, then the church must actively seek to disarm the world.
If racial and sexual prejudice were intolerable, then the congregation should
reflect diversity.

But Dr. Coffin's ministry has never had the unanimous approval of his
congregation. His ministry, at times, has contributed to discord within the
church. Last spring, some detractrors called for Dr. Coffin's resignation
because they believed he had become less a minister than an advocate of social
and political concerns.

Since announcing his resignation last July, Dr. Coffin has maintained that his
departure was not influenced by those who opposed his policies.

A few minutes after the sanctuary began to empty yesterday afternoon, Dr. Coffin
and his wife, Randi, met well-wishers in the church's basement assembly hall.
Standing near the rear, Dr. Coffin spoke with dozens of people - young and old -
who waited in line to see him.

Alyce Mott, who has been attending services at Riverside for the past seven
years, told Dr. Coffin that she hoped the world would listen to his message of
peace and humanity in much the way his congregtion had.

''I hope so, too,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Rev. Dr. William Sloane Coffin (NYT/Dith Pran)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 22, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Advertising;
Competition Grows in the Yellow Pages

BYLINE: By Philip H. Dougherty

SECTION: Section D; Page 17, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 761 words


THE split-up of the Bell System on Jan. 1, 1984, has not only led to intense
competition in the area of communications but also in the world where your
fingers do the walking, the world of Yellow Pages.

A good example of what is happening nationwide can be found in New York, where
the long-established Nynex Yellow Pages is in a battle with the Yellow Pages
Directory of the Southwestern Bell Corporation. This situation has created
publishers who are suddenly more compliant to the wishes and desires of their
customers.

Or, as Francis J. Barton, president of the Wahlstrom & Company ad agency put it:
''We had a century-old business that had been operating in a monopolistic
cocoon. Now there is a choice of media.''


Michael A. Ryan, director of communications for Northern Telecom and chairman of
the Association of National Advertisers' Telephone Directory Advertising
Committee, noted yesterday that, because of competition, things were being
accomplished in the Yellow Pages that could never have taken place when there
was a monopoly.

A year and a half ago, when Mr. Ryan was with a similiar committee from the
American Association of Advertising Agencies, his group persuaded the National
Yellow Pages Service Association to adopt a program to standardize advertising
space. Such standardization is very important to a business that lives by
computer technology.

Work is continuing on plans to audit the circulations of Yellow Pages
directories and to get syndicated audience research on the users of individual
Yellow Pages directories, which is especially important with the current
duplication. The marketing of all major media is enhanced by such research.

The growth of new Yellow Pages media means new challenges to the Yellow Pages
specialty ad agencies. No longer do they have the easy task placing a client's
ad in the only directory in a market. Now they have to make choices among the
various directories and, if necessary, defend that choice to the client.


Still, a situation like this gives an agency an opportunity to be creative in
its media placement. And Mr. Barton of Wahlstrom is currently bragging that, for
the third year in a row, his agency has won the creative media award in its
category from Marketing and Media Decisions magazine, which announced the award
in its December issue.

Mr. Barton said that the Yellow Pages provide plenty of room for creativity. In
some areas of the country, particularly in California, there are 8 to 10 Yellow
Pages directories. Of course, this has had had the pleasant effect of tempering
advertising rates, especially among the newcomers.

Mr. Barton also finds that the competition has led some publishers to give their
books a brand identity. With Pacific Bell, it's the Smart Pages; Ameritech calls
its Pages Plus; Bell South, the Real Yellow Pages, and GTE, The Everything. They
and others are adding a number of additional service pages in order to be more
''reader friendly.'' Marketing is catching up with the genre.

After 22 years in the business, there is no doubt that Mr. Barton believes in
the efficacy of the medium and he occasionally inserts such gung-ho commentary
as, ''In the world of buyer looking for seller, Yellow Pages is the primary
entity.''

Or, ''It is a shopping mall in print.''


Wahlstrom & Company in Stamford, Conn., was founded in 1954 by the late Fred
Wahlstrom, who had once been on the staff of the Association of National
Advertisers. It was acquired in 1973 by Foote, Cone & Belding. Since then,
several other major agencies have also acquired Yellow Pages agencies, not only
so they can offer still another service to clients, but also because these
agencies have been growing nicely. So has the national Yellow Pages category.
Mr. Barton said it has grown from $208 million 10 years ago to $433 million five
years ago to $800 million today.

It is certainly not a medium that attracts the free-spending package-goods
crowd. It is more likely to attract nationally advertised businesses with local
installations, like car rental companies and insurance companies.

Mr. Burton, 48 years old, is a New Yorker. He graduated from Cardinal Hayes High
School in the Bronx before going on to City College. After a tour of duty in
Vietnam as a Marine Corps captain, he went to the St. Regis Paper Company, where
he eventually became involved with Yellow Pages advertising and the Wahlstrom
agency, which was working for one of the St. Regis divisions.

In 1970 Mr. Wahlstrom lured him away and made him part of the finger-walking
set.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Francis J. Barton

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 23, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Operetta: 'Dynamite Tonight'

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KIMMELMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 456 words


TOWARD the end of ''Dynamite Tonight,'' a cabaret-style operetta set in a
war-ravaged bunker, a woman bearing word of a cease-fire is shot, to which one
soldier sings, ''If peace was declared, killing a girl was not the thing to
do.''

Such is the prevailing tone of this 1963 work by the composer William Bolcom,
with libretto by Arnold Weinstein. It has been revived, under the direction of
Barbara Vann, at the Medicine Show Theater, 353 Broadway, between Franklin and
Leonard Streets, through Jan. 30.

''Dynamite Tonight'' was Mr. Bolcom's first piece for the stage, written when he
was 25 years old and, for better and worse, bearing the mark of a talented
beginner. In its manically cynical and studiedly subversive way, the work
swerves more than occasionally toward the sophomoric.

Nonetheless, ''Dynamite Tonight'' already reflects Mr. Bolcom's distinctive
compositional style in its all-embracing, eclectic approach to the music. It
includes dissonant vocal lines, hymn-like melodies, Broadway-style show tunes,
World War I-era songs and a tango set to the line, ''I've Got an Appendix
Attack.''

Nothing is developed far; no numbers stick in the mind long after they are over.
Still, there is a rough, energetic quality to Mr. Bolcom's writing that sustains
one's attention through much of the show's 70-minute length.

Otherwise, Mr. Weinstein's story line is well-intentioned but all too slim and
uninspired: a crazed captain and his beleaguered sergeant have been encamped for
some time in a bunker, making dynamite-filled bombs. They are visited by various
soldiers and enemies, and they must tend to a love-struck prisoner of war.
Several of the encounters aim toward the lunatic flavor of a Marx Brothers skit
without conveying the quick wit; the show's end is both predictable and trite,
though admittedly the impression may have been different when the work was first
performed, as the Vietnam War was just becoming the subject of increased
concern.

In Ms. Vann's direction, the Medicine Show production takes full advantage of
the work's slapstick quality, setting the actors in constant, swirling motion.
Only some of it is genuinely amusing. Modest sets are smartly employed. John
Cheek, the production's music director, and Denise Puricelli play Michael S.
Roth's two-piano arrangement of the score.

No one sang well, though the work does not put a high premium on vocal skill.
Among the cast, James Barbosa was unrelentingly demented as the captain; Paul
Murphy proved endearing as his sergeant, who keeps forgetting his family has
been killed. Jerry Lazar tried to look touching as the prisoner without quite
doing so; Charles Turner did better at the task, portraying Smiley, a
movie-crazed soldier.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 23, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Film: 'Good Morning, Vietnam'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words


THE time of ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' is 1965. Adrian Cronauer (Robin Williams),
an Armed Forces Radio disk jockey previously stationed in Crete, lands in Saigon
to breathe a little life into the local programming. Until Cronauer's arrival,
the AFR Saigon station has depended largely on the music of Mantovani and Percy
Faith and helpful hints on how to withdraw books from the Army's lending
libraries, interrupted from time to time by sanitized newscasts.

Though behind-the-lines sabotage is on the rise, and huge numbers of additional
troops are arriving daily, the programming of the Saigon station reflects a
prescribed sunniness that has less to do with the increasingly grim reality of
Vietnam than with that of a giant rec room for pre-teens of the 1950's. At the
top of the charts in this never-never land: ''Around the World in 80 Days.''

Within several days of taking over his dawn show, Adrian Cronauer has become the
biggest, most controversial personality in Vietnam. Out the window have gone
Mantovani, Percy Faith, Bing Crosby and Perry Como, to be replaced by the
raucous laments and urgent innuendoes of James Brown, Martha Reeves and the
Vandellas and Wayne Fontana, among others.

Between recordings, in his on-air monologues, Adrian Cronauer floats down the
stream of his own manic consciousness. He talks about sex, the drama inherent in
weather forecasts in the tropics, body functions, Army regulations, politics and
Richard Nixon, then the former Vice President. At frequent intervals, he
conducts interviews with characters inhabiting the dark side of his brain,
including an Army fashion designer who's distraught about the material used for
camouflage uniforms. ''Why not plaids and stripes?'' asks the petulant designer.
''When you go into battle, clash!''

When in top form, Cronauer appears to be speaking in tongues, most of them all
too familiar. At one time or another, he sends up just about every race, color,
creed and sexual preference. The Army brass is upset, but his service listeners
love him. Here, at last, is someone who knows the difference between a police
action and a war. Reality has gained a precarious beachhead.

''Good Morning, Vietnam,'' directed by Barry Levinson (''Diner,'' ''Tin Men'')
succeeds in doing something that's very rare in movies, being about a character
who really is as funny as he's supposed to be to most of the people sharing the
fiction with him. It's also a breakthrough for Mr. Williams, who, for the first
time in movies, gets a chance to exercise his restless, full-frontal comic
intelligence.

Since making his film debut in Robert Altman's ''Popeye'' seven years ago, Mr.
Williams has appeared in five movies, including George Roy Hill's ''World
According to Garp'' and Paul Mazursky's ''Moscow on the Hudson.'' Each film has
had its endearing moments, but there was always the feeling that an oddball
natural resource was being inefficiently used, as if Arnold Schwarzenegger had
been asked to host ''Masterpiece Theater.''

Just how much of the fresh, cheeky Williams brilliance was going up the chimney
can now be seen in ''Good Morning, Vietnam.''

The movie, which opens today at the Loew's 84th Street Sixplex and Cinema 2, is
very much a star vehicle, but it's an exceptionally strong one. Mitch
Markowitz's screenplay, based loosely on the experiences of a real-life Vietnam
disk jockey, skids over a melodramatic subplot that would be fatal to any other
movie.

Though Mr. Williams is the film's life as well as its conscience, Mr. Levinson
knows how to present the star without exploiting him to a point of diminishing
returns. ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' surrounds Mr. Williams with an especially
strong cast of supporting actors, including two recruits from ''Tin Men.'' They
are Bruno Kirby, as a polka-loving officer who longs to replace Adrian Cronauer
as the station's star disk jockey (''In my heart I know I'm funny,'' he says
after his first disastrous broadcast), and J. T. Walsh, as a sergeant major
who's offended by Cronauer's loose ways with regulations.

Also commendable are Noble Willingham, who plays a remarkably free-thinking
general, one of Cronauer's biggest fans; Forest Whitaker, as Cronauer's
sidekick; Cu Ba Nguyen, as a Saigon bar-owner with a most singular sexual
preference; Chintara Sukapatana, as a young Vietnamese woman whom Adrian lusts
after, and Tung Thanh Tran, as her brother.

It's meant as praise for both the director and writer to say that several of the
film's best sequences (aside from Mr. Williams's monologues) give every
indication of having been improvised, though to what extent I've no idea. In
one, Cronauer takes over an English class for Vietnamese civilians and proceeds
to teach them the nuances lurking within the most commonplace American
obscenities. In another, the disk jockey is suddenly confronted by his public in
the persons of a truckload of soldiers heading into combat.

Mr. Levinson, who appreciates the Williams monologues as much as theater
audiences will, provides them with a context that enriches their meaning without
upstaging them, cross-cutting between Cronauer, broadcasting from his antiseptic
radio studio, and the tormented, sometimes scenic Vietnamese countryside where
his voice is being heard.

Make no mistake about it: Mr. Williams's performance, though it's full of
uproarious comedy, is the work of an accomplished actor. ''Good Morning,
Vietnam'' is one man's tour de force.

MAKING (AIR)WAVES - GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM, directed by Barry Levinson; written
by Mitch Markowitz; director of photography, Peter Sova; edited by Stu Linder;
music by Alex North; production designer, Roy Walker; produced by Mark Johnson
and Larry Brezner; released by Touchstone Pictures in association with Silver
Screen Partners III. At Loews 84th Street Six, at Broadway; Cinema 2, Third
Avenue at 60th Street.

Running time: 120 minutes. This film is rated R.

Adrian Cronauer...Robin Williams
Edward Garlick...Forest Whitaker
Tuan...Tung Thanh Tran
Trinh...Chintara Sukapatana
Lieut. Steven Hauk...Bruno Kirby
Marty Lee Dreiwitz...Robert Wuhl
Sgt. Maj. Dickerson...J. T. Walsh
Gen. Taylor...Noble Willingham
Pvt. Abersold...Richard Edson
Phil McPherson...Juney Smith

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robin Williams

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 23, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 878 words


THE NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY. 100 Years of Adventure and Discovery. By C. D.
B. Bryan. Illustrated. 484 pages. Abrams. $45.

IN 1984, when President Reagan arrived to dedicate the National Geographic
Society's newly completed headquarters on M Street in Washington, he apparently
looked around the vast new building and then said to his hosts, ''I guess you
have trouble storing your old National Geographics, too.''

Well, the collectors who inspired the President's crack can now throw away those
piles in the cellar, attic and garage. At least the ones who've been keeping
back issues as souvenirs can do so. For C. D. B. Bryan's ''National Geographic
Society: 100 Years of Adventures and Discovery'' captures the essence of the
magazine with the familiar yellow-and-white cover.

The elephants and frogs are here. The steaming tropical jungles and the snowy
mountain peaks. The colorfully dressed natives are here. And the bare-breasted
women. The San Francisco earthquake is here. So are floods, blizzards, famines,
droughts, hurricanes, pestilence, avalanches and volcanic eruptions. So are the
giant Olmec heads and the ant's head blown up to the size of a human's.

Remember Peary's trek to the North Pole? It's here. And Hiram Bingham's
discovery of Machu Picchu? It's also here. The dead who were buried by Mount
Vesuvius at Herculaneum? Their bones are here. As one observer entered their
chamber, he ''could almost sense a collective groan across the ages.'' The
account of Reinhold Messner's 1980 solo ascent of Mount Everest is here: ''I sat
there like a stone. I had spent every bit of strength to get there. I was empty
of feeling.''

Even the physical experience of reading National Geographic is captured, or the
experience once the magazine's third editor, Melville Bell Grosvenor, decreed in
the late 1950's that photograph captions must provide a distillation of the text
they illustrated. Browsers can catch the essence of the book by just looking at
the pictures and reading their captions.

Of course, you have to read Mr. Bryan's text to appreciate fully the remarkable
history of the society, which began in 1888 as a meeting of 33 gentlemen intent
upon ''organizing a society for the increase and diffusion of geographical
knowledge,'' and has grown in the intervening century to a membership of over 10
million.

In this text, Mr. Bryan - the author of four novels and two previous works of
nonfiction, ''The National Air and Space Museum'' and ''Friendly Fire,'' about
the Vietnam War experience - has struggled nobly to pull together and render
coherent a bewildering variety of material: the history of the society,
biographies of its leading personnel and a survey of all the magazine has
covered over a century, to mention only the most obvious.

It is understandable that here and there he loses his way and must reorient
himself by the somewhat hackneyed device of the annual survey: ''As 1919 drew to
a close, Theodore Roosevelt was dead, President Wilson presided over the first
League of Nations meeting in Paris. . . . The U.S. House of Representatives was
considering limiting immigration, Lady Astor was elected to Parliament, American
Oliver Smith perfected the mechanical rabbit, paving the way for modern
greyhound racing, and National Geographic Society membership reached 668,174.''

He must also, in this otherwise celebratory book, deal with the occasional
controversy the society has managed to provoke. These have mainly stemmed from
two of the seven guiding principles invoked by Gilbert H. Grosvenor, the
magazine's first full-time editor - to wit, that ''Nothing of a partisan or
controversial character is printed,'' and that ''Only what is of a kindly nature
is printed about any country or people, everything unpleasant or unduly critical
being avoided.''

These principles began to seem absurd when in 1937 the magazine published an
article called ''Changing Berlin'' (''To develop boys and girls in body and
mind, and thus insure a sturdy race to defend Germany in the future, is a policy
of the present government.''), which as a title must rank with the old sick
joke, ''Surprising Hiroshima.''

Still, it wasn't until the 1970's, when the first editor's grandson, Gilbert M.
Grosvenor, took over, that the magazine began to run articles with opinions on
such subjects as Harlem, Cuba, Quebec and South Africa. In response, the
society's ultra-conservative board of trustees rose up in protest and after a
confrontation with the editor decreed that the magazine would ''continue to
travel the world unencumbered by ideology.''

But having declared itself above ideology, National Geographic has taken
implicitly strong stands on such subjects as energy, vanishing species of
wildlife, ecology, nuclear waste and Vietnam. No doubt it will continue. In
response to President Reagan's joke about old National Geographics, Mr.
Grosvenor remarked, ''Mr. President, rather than needing a space to store our
past, we needed a space to house our future.'' Such optimism abounds in these
pages. Very likely it will prove justified. When the last syllable of time is
recorded and the curfew tolls the knell of the final parting day, someone from
National Geographic will probably be there to report the event.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of C. D. B. Bryan (Dave Faulkner)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 24, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: Journalism and Scholarship;
I. F. Stone at 80: The Scooping Goes On

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1110 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 23


His eyesight and hearing are failing. He can no longer study or write for 12
hours at a stretch without a break. But I. F. Stone, who turns 80 years old on
Thursday, is gloriously happy, surrounded by the books he loves.

''I'm having a wonderful old age of scholarship,'' he said. ''I'm having a
ball.''

Sixteen years ago, suffering from a heart problem and expecting to ''drop dead
any minute,'' Mr. Stone closed down his one-man report from Washington. The
newsletter was devoted to deflating the political establishment, and it led a
generation of journalists, once young and now middle-aged, to hold him in awe.

But he is still debunking the establishment, in this case centuries of
historians.

Next month, Little, Brown & Company will publish Mr. Stone's latest book, ''The
Trial of Socrates,'' the product of more than a decade of study. The book takes
classical scholars to task for accepting Plato's assertion, written almost 2,500
years ago, that Socrates was sentenced to death simply for exhorting his fellow
citizens to be virtuous.

Without defending the verdict, Mr. Stone seeks to show what Plato left out: that
Socrates, the greatest of Greek philosophers, was perceived as a real threat to
national security for undermining the Athenians' faith in democracy at a time
when the democratic government faced a threat of being overthrown yet again by a
vicious dictatorship of the aristocracy.

In his role as a classical scholar, Mr. Stone thinks of himself as basically a
journalist. He taught himself classical Greek so he could read untranslated
works, but he also views his book as his ''latest scoop.''

By extension, when he was publishing his newsletter, Mr. Stone was basically a
scholar. His sources were not so much people as documents. He specialized in
finding contradictions and inconsistencies in the voluminous records of official
Washington. He used them to attack McCarthyism, racism, the nuclear arms race,
the Vietnam War and countless other episodes and events he saw as blots on
democracy.

His politics and his personality have changed little over the years. He
considers himself ''a radical,'' grieves over the ascendancy of ''right-wing
kooks'' and decries ''the ugly spirit of the subliminal message of Reaganism,
that you should go get yours and run.''

'Without Rancor'

But typical of one of the rare gentle men who ever achieved stature in
Washington, Mr. Stone said, ''I am without rancor.''

''Some people,'' he said, ''become radical out of hatred. Others become radical
out of love and sympathy. I come out of the second class. I have hated very few
people.''

Mr. Stone's home, across the street from Rock Creek Park in Northwest
Washington, is a monument to the written word. In his tiny study, in his
bedroom, in the guest room, in the computer room where he does his writing and
in the den, the walls are lined with books, floor to ceiling.

He has all the classical philosophers and poets, in different editions, in Greek
and Latin, English, French and German. He is especially proud of a 1546 Latin
translation of Plato, the first translation from the Greek. He has biographies
and Bibles and plays and histories and novels.

''There's so much I haven't read,'' he said ruefully. ''There's so much to
learn. My areas of ignorance seem to widen.''

Problem With Eyesight

His eyesight has been a problem all his life. He now manages to read with a
magnifying glass and special lighting, and he writes on a computer with
lettering one-third of an inch high.

Mr. Stone said that he had always been a ''technological klutz,'' and that the
Macintosh baffled him at first. He recalled complaining to his daughter, a poet,
who encouraged him to buy the computer when he began to write the Socrates book,
that ''the only thing God didn't do to Job was give him a computer.''

But after a time, he mastered the technology, and he said he could never have
completed the book without it. ''The computer propagates verbosity,'' he said,
''and you have to watch that when you write. But when it comes to making
revisions, there's nothing like it.''

Looking back, Mr. Stone (his full name is Isidor Feinstein Stone) recalled all
the joys of journalism and little of the pain. The most fun he ever had, he
says, was covering the formation of the United Nations in San Francisco in 1945.
The most excitement, he said, was in 1946 when he was the first reporter to
travel with illegal Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe to Palestine. And his
best scoop, he says, was his discovery in 1956 that underground nuclear tests
could be detected thousands of miles away, not just within 200 miles as the
Eisenhower Administration was contending.

But the scoop he thinks about most often was his first one, as a high school
student working as a reporter for The Camden Courier-Post in his hometown,
Haddonfield, N.J. Having learned that the local historical society was raising
money to refurbish the town's Quaker cemetery, he fabricated a story about how
an elderly man walking by the cemetery late at night saw the ghost of Elizabeth
Haddon, after whom the town was named, polishing a grave marker on a buttonwood
tree.

The piece ran on the front page, Mr. Stone remembered, and he received a bonus.
But to this day, it embarrasses him. ''I started out my career on a piece of
journalistic fakery,'' he said. ''I haven't faked a story since, but it still
bothers me.''

Mr. Stone has never been far from the news. He spends hours every day reading
the papers, and now, with his Socrates book complete, he is dipping back into
journalism. He has started writing a column periodically for The Nation, the
magazine that first brought him to Washington in 1940.

A long-time student of the Supreme Court, he was fascinated by the hearings last
October on Judge Robert H. Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court. On balance,
he said, he is glad the nomination was defeated because he could not abide Judge
Bork's views on privacy and civil rights.

''But I couldn't help but feel sorry for him,'' he remarked. ''In a way, I sort
of wish he'd gone on the Court. He's a brilliant man, and I think he might well
have changed.''

After reflection, he continued: ''Responsibility, you know, often makes people
rise to the occasion.''

Mr. Stone is also embarking on another scholarly project. ''It seems so fanciful
at 80 to be thinking of something new that I hesitate to talk about it,'' he
said.

Pressed, he let on what he is thinking about: a series of biographical essays on
the seminal figures involved in freedom of thought in human society.

He expects it will take years of research and study and writing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of I. F. Stone; using a magnifying glass to read a listing on
his computer screen (The New York Times/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 24, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Secrecy and Folly

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 740 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Secrecy in government has a thousand fathers: a thousand excuses. But Frank
Carlucci, the new Secretary of Defense, came up with a particular gem last week.
He testified that the President should not have to inform the Congressional
intelligence committees promptly about covert operations because foreign
countries whose help we need do not like the idea.

''These countries don't always understand our institutions,'' Mr. Carlucci said,
''and simply cannot appreciate the oversight mechanism. They are basically
mistrustful of the dissemination of information beyond the executive branch.''

In other words, the United States has to trim its system of government to suit
other countries, many of them tyrannies. Our constitutional ideal of openness,
which has worked well for nearly 200 years, must give way to values that are
less democratic -and manifestly less successful.

Mr. Carlucci and other officials testified against a bill to make the President
report all covert operations within 48 hours. It is the one piece of legislation
to come out of the Iran-contra inquiry, and it has bipartisan support. But
President Reagan wants to keep the right to withhold information indefinitely
''in exceptional circumstances'' - the loophole that he used to conceal the Iran
arms trade for hostages.

Of course the excuse of what other countries think is just that: an excuse. The
real reason for opposing this bill is power. The President and his people want
the power to act on their own, without the inconvenience of having to explain
and justify their policy.

More than ever now, knowledge in government is power. Every effort by the
executive branch to keep its policies secret is essentially a grab for power.
Secrecy is the modern battleground of the eternal struggle for power and the
American system of divided government.

Indeed, it is the current habit of executive officials to claim that any effort
to keep the President accountable to Congress is an invasion of his
constitutional power. Under Secretary of State Michael H. Armacost testified to
that effect on the covert reporting bill. In Washington, city of preposterous
arguments, that must have set a record for preposterousness. Congress, with its
plenary authority over what the Government spends, could at any time prohibit
all covert operations. To require a prompt report on them is a far milder
exercise of its undoubted power.

But nowadays there is a cult of Presidential power on the American right. Its
spokesmen argue that Presidents must be free to do whatever they want in foreign
affairs: start wars, spend money, ignore Congress. They talk as if there had
never been an American Revolution or a Constitution. In candor they should call
themselves the George the Third Society.

Anyone seriously interested in how our constitutional system governs the conduct
of foreign affairs should read the current issue of Foreign Affairs. A profound
and compelling article by Prof. Louis Henkin of Columbia University disposes of
the claim that Presidents can act abroad in disregard of Congress. Alexander
Hamilton was the constitutional framer most devoted to executive power. Yet not
even he, Professor Henkin points out, claimed that the Constitution gave the
President any authority ''to act contrary to direction by Congress.''

Professor Henkin concludes that current clashes over the Constitution and
foreign policy stem ''not from constitutional uncertainties but from unhappiness
with, even resistance to, what the Constitution prescribes.'' Presidents just
regard the Constitution as out of date for our world.

The royalist view of the Presidency has in fact been tried in recent years, and
the record speaks for itself. Presidents acted on their own, in secret, at the
Bay of Pigs, in Vietnam, in the Iran-contra affair. Those exercises of power
without accountability were disastrous.

It turns out that the men who wrote our Constitution 200 years ago knew best
after all. In foreign affairs, as in domestic, policy is wiser when there are
checks on its exercise.

The Reagan Administration has pushed the claims of executive secrecy and power
to new extremes. A recent report by the civil liberties group People for the
American Way traces the growth of secrecy in myriad ways: a secret Pentagon
''black budget,'' unreported Presidential directives, widespread censorship. It
will be one of Ronald Reagan's most crippling legacies to this country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 24, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Tale of a Soured Friendship Unfolds in Queens Killings

BYLINE: By ESTHER IVEREM

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


On St. Patrick's Day 1982, two men moving a dining room set into a sixth-floor
apartment in Elmurst, Queens, decided to take a break. They sat down on a
landing to drink a few beers.

Minutes later, they were shot dead -one man with four bullets in his chest, the
other with a shot to his head.

The police now say they have finally found the killer - after a nearly six-year
investigation that led them through the underworld of Houston and its collection
of police informers and career criminals. The investigation, they say, unraveled
a story of an intense friendship between the suspect and one of the victims, who
met as medics in Vietnam, became heroin addicts and then turned to crime to
support their habits.

Late Tuesday, the suspect, Donald W. Nacy, a 36-year-old maintenance worker, was
extradited to New York from Texas, where, based on evidence presented by New
York City detectives, he was arrested in July in the deaths of the two men,
Randall Runkle, his friend, and Frederick Markowitz. He pleaded not guilty in
the killings. #3 Failed Requests for Heroin The slayings, the police say, were
the result of the long-simmering resentment on the part of Mr. Nacy that he -and
not Mr. Runkle - had gone to prison for a bank robbery they had committed. The
resentment, they say, erupted into violence after Mr. Nacy -who had moved to
Texas from New York to join relatives - three times sent money to Mr. Runkle to
buy heroin in New York and never received the drugs.

''He didn't know anybody in Texas,'' said a Queens detective, Steve Weiner. ''He
tried to buy heroin there and was always getting beat.''

According to Detective Weiner, Mr. Runkle and Mr. Nacy became friends in
Vietnam. Once, Mr. Nacy was shot and Mr. Runkle treated him, saving his life.
During the war, however, both became drug users and then developed a hard-core
heroin addiction after leaving the service.

To support their habits, the two men attempted a bank robbery in Manhattan in
1979, the police say. Mr. Runkle drove the getaway car and was never apprehended
but Mr. Nacy was shot three times by the bank's security guard and was convicted
of first-degree robbery. According to law-enforcement officials, Mr. Nacy ended
up serving more than two years of a maximum six-year sentence.

In apparent anger, he would occasionally tell people that Mr. Runkle ''had left
him swinging'' and had not backed him up during the robbery, according to Bob C.
Hunt, a criminal lawyer based in Houston who became involved in the case while
representing another client.

According to Detective Weiner, by the time Mr. Nacy was released on parole on
Nov. 10, 1981, the two men appeared to have settled their differences. They
lived together at the apartment at 40-05 Hampton Avenue in Elmhurst, where the
slayings later took place. Mr. Nacy was visited there by his parole officer just
before leaving for Texas. He was allowed to move to Houston.

But the relationship did not end then, according to Detective Weiner. ''Two or
three times,'' Mr. Nacy sent money, at least a few hundreds dollars, to Mr.
Runkle in New York and never received the drugs. By the following March, Mr.
Nacy was so enraged, the detective said, that he flew to New York City on St.
Patrick's Day, found Mr. Runkle and shot him and Mr. Markowitz, 35, of Rego
Park, Queens, who was an innocent bystander.

When he returned to Houston, Mr. Nacy told his uncle, Sonny Sehon, that he
''Took care of Randy'' and gave Mr. Sehon the .38 caliber revolver used,
according to the police. He told his uncle, who is out on parole on a life
sentence for robbery, to keep the gun hidden away ''because it has a history.''

For the next five years, Mr. Nacy worked as a maintenance and repair man in
Houston.

According to court transcripts, Mr. Nacy provided information to the Houston
Police Department that led to the conviction of two men, Harvey Stewart and John
Silva, who had planned to rob a bank in Sour Lake, Tex., and make their getaway
on a freight train. These two men, lifelong criminals, were old prison friends
of Mr. Nacy's uncle, who did not like his nephew's cooperation with the police.

According to Detective Weiner, after detectives in New York City received
information from an unnamed source last spring that Mr. Nacy might have been
involved in the Queens murders, Mr. Sehon cooperated with Detective Weiner and
his partner on the case, Detective George Arnold of the 110 Precinct. Mr. Sehon
supplied details of what his nephew had told him about the crimes and helped
them track down the gun.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, DECEMBER 25, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1064 words




International    A2-11


A truce between Iran and Iraq will be enforced by the U.N. Security Council, its
members said. The statement marks a sharp narrowing of previous differences
between Washington and Moscow over how to carry out a peace plan.    Page A1



A rebel attack in Nicaragaua on three northeastern towns was the contras'
largest and most successful military operation of the war, according to a
reporter's evidence and the accounts of soldiers and citizens.    A1



News Analysis: Israel's conflict is regarded by Israelis as a public relations
problem and by Palestinians as a triumph. After two weeks of riots, Israel is
being depicted as Goliath and the Palestinians as David.    A1



Unrest has taken a toll on tourism in Bethlehem, where just a handful of
customers visited souvenir shops and tourists had to stand in line for up to
half an hour before being searched to get into Manger Square.    A6

U.S. Jews objected to the way Israel's use of gunfire against Palestinians was
faulted by the State Department. But the U.S. continued to advocate non-deadly
methods of riot control.

    A6



A Soviet charity movement has emerged with the coming of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's
policies. Philanthropy is losing its stigma, and wide response reveals a
reservoir of untapped generosity.    A1



A penchant for ''crackers'' sweeps England every Christmas. The crackers,
cylinders that snap loudly when that range from the merely bad to the truly
dreadful.    A1



The U.S. withdrew Chile's privileges to sell certain products in the United
States duty free, citing purported violations of worker rights. The sanction was
seen as part of American pressure on Chile's military Government to become more
democratic.

    D1



India's leading Tamil politician died, introducing a new uncertainty in India's
efforts to end the fighting in Sri Lanka. The politician, M. G. Ramachandran,
was Chief Minister of the state of Tamil Nadu.    A3

Brazil is still without a constitution 10 months after the members of the
Constitutional Assembly were elected. The immediate result has been to prolong
the political deadlock that is paralyzing Brazil.    A9



New videotape of hostage

    A2



Ethiopia aid lags, groups say

    A3



Rabat Journal: Hassan's troubles

    A4



Vietnam's red tape, rock and flip-top cans

    A11



National    A12-28, B10-11



Interstate calls will cost less beginning on New Year's Day. A Federal
Communciations Commission order will reduce long-distance telephone rates by
$750 million a year.    A1



Squeaky Fromme is still missing after more than 100 officers searched the
mountains for the escaped prisoner who was serving a life sentence for
attempting to assassinate President Ford.    A12

Gary Hart should get matching funds from the Government for his renewed
Presidential campaign, the Federal Election Commission audit division
recommended. But angry vendors still want to be repaid for their help in the
1984 race.    A1



The repeal of Florida's tax on personal and professional services is having an
impact on states that monitored the progress of the tax, from enactment with
bipartisan support last spring to crushing defeat two weeks ago.    A12

,

A roundup of 112 children by state troopers because of allegations of child
abuse in Island Pond, Vt., in June 1984 is the subject of a civil suit brought
on behalf of one of the children.    A18



C.I.A. officials will appeal the action taken against them in the Iran-Contra
affair, Administration officals said. The C.I.A. chief, William H. Webster, will
rule on the appeals of at least three of the five officials dismissed or
disciplined.    A19

Hospital beds are increasing in New York more than in other major cities to
provide care for patients with AIDS and related diseases, according to a
national sampling.    B10



Westwood Journal: Drawing line for teen-agers and parents

    A12



Loans spur Christmas spending in Dakota towns

    A14



Disposal of nuclear waste to start next year

    A15



U.S. puts off plan to outlaw leaded gasoline

    A16



More Americans are moving to new homes

    A17



Rehnquist postpones effect of ruling on gay rights

    A18



Stress disorder found more often in veterans

    A20



Doctors' attitudes lag behind patients'

    A21



A changing Naval Academy

    A28



Army of volunteers respond to AIDS crisis

    B10



Washington Talk    A24



The environment becomes a diplomatic issue

Regional    B1-8



A rise in racially-motivated acts has been reported since the Howard Beach
incident last year. Police records show 419 incidents in the first 11 months of
1987, compared with 209 in the corresponding period in 1986.

    B1



A black will most likely be chosen as the new Schools Chancellor, members of the
New York City Board of Education say, unless the lone white candidate is seen as
substantially better than two black contenders.    B4

Three small buildings will be razed on East Fourth Street,threatening its
neighboring landmarks, the Old Merchant's House, a museum from the last century,
and the Skidmore House, from the mid-1800's.    B3



A developer tied to Andrew Cuomo has an array of real-estate holdings and shuns
publicity. He and Mr. Cuomo have been charged with violating Federal regulations
in attempting to take over two Florida savings institutions and drain their
assets.    B6



Yonkers refuses to buy private land through eminent domain to build public
housing, as ordered by a Federal judge. City lawyers said the order was
unconstitutional.    B4



Villagers criticized new windows in Scarsdale's schools, when a modern metal
design replaced old-fashioned wood frames. Residents feel it violates the
building's architectural integrity.    B1



Christmas in New York is endlessly diverse    B1.

Reputed Gambino crime figure refuses deal for release

    B3



Murder suspect ins custody suit

    B4



Neediest Cases    B8


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam's Red Tape, Rock and Flip-Top Cans

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1332 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


A year after a new political leadership took charge in Hanoi, promising to
stimulate the economy, end corruption and open the country to the outside world,
Vietnamese and foreigners report serious obstacles on almost every official
front.

But in the private sector, many Vietnamese are stepping forward to stake their
capital on small businesses, betting that the new Communist Party leader, Nguyen
Van Linh, will not be deflected or slowed in his drive for social and economic
change. Mr. Linh became the party's general secretary last December.

A Practicing Capitalist

Chau Hon is one such entrepreneur. A baker in Cholon, this city's Chinatown, he
was once pursued by the police for practicing capitalism. He now runs five
successful private bakeries -three have opened since August - supplying both a
state food corporation and lucrative local markets. He thinks the Government has
found the right formula.

Not everyone agrees. To a visitor returning after only a few months to Ho Chi
Minh City, the former Saigon, there seem to be more sharply defined opinions on
the leadership and direction.

Some southern Vietnamese, still struggling to return to the living standards of
two decades ago, are bitter at how little has changed in a year. And diplomats
in Hanoi caution that Mr. Linh may not yet have full control, and that there may
be a power vacuum if not a power struggle in some areas.

On the other hand, many people in and out of the Government here are in an
upbeat mood, often because daily life is more fun.

''The Government always used to say, 'No dancing!' '' a bright-eyed, flush-faced
young woman said over the din from a tape deck at a riverside hotel. ''Now
everything is O.K.''

She was attending not just a ballroom dancing class, but one organized by a
state-run hotel, where she is a sales clerk in the tourist shop. Her co-workers
- some of the women decked out in Western dresses and high-heeled shoes,
fashionable again in recent months - were working hard after hours in the
hotel's conference room to master some elementary steps.

Puffing Imported Cigarettes

Elsewhere, potted palms are hosed down outside restaurants in the morning. Rock
bands play inside at night to the puffing of imported cigarettes and the gulping
of gallons of local beer, now sold in attractive, flip-top cans.

At the same time, traditional cultural activity is widely encouraged.
''Vietnamese culture crystallizes the soul, talent and morality of the
Vietnamese people and is the spiritual strength of the Vietnamese nation,'' a
recent Politburo directive said.

Though heavy on pushing Communist rectitude, the directive also told
intellectuals and artists to ''broaden cultural intercourse with developing
countries and Western countries in order to acquaint our people with the
diversified cultures of the world.''

But most Vietnamese lack the wherewithal to internationalize; few books,
magazines or films from outside the Soviet bloc circulate here. And many people
still fear the consquences of too much familiarity with foreigners and their
ideas. The hard-liners could come back, they say. In some places, they never
went away.

Bureaucrats continue to thwart or even sabotage changes in Government
operations, foreign trade companies and diplomats say. Foreign investment has
not poured in, only partly because of a delay in introducing a long-promised
investment code.

High Hopes vs. the Bureaucracy

Foreigners who have looked at drafts of the legislation say it will be only a
beginning. Yet Vietnamese officials talk about huge resort developments, oil
refineries and food-processing factories in a country without adequate
communication and public services.

Speaking with reporters recently about his expectations of a contract with Club
Med or other international resort developers, the a tourism official mentioned
casually that the foreigners might be asked to build the necessary roads to the
beaches first.  By BARBARA CROSSETTE HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam - A year after a
new political leadership took charge in Hanoi, promising to stimulate the
economy, end corruption and open the country to the outside world, Vietnamese
and foreigners report serious obstacles on almost every official front.

But in the private sector, many Vietnamese are stepping forward to stake their
capital on small businesses, betting that the new Communist Party leader, Nguyen
Van Linh, will not be deflected or slowed in his drive for social and economic
change. Mr. Linh became the party's general secretary last December.

Chau Hon is one such entrepreneur. A baker in Cholon, this city's Chinatown, he
was once pursued by the police for practicing capitalism. He now runs five
successful private bakeries -three have opened since August - supplying both a
state food corporation and lucrative local markets. He thinks the Government has
found the right formula.

A Dissenting Opinion

Not everyone agrees. To a visitor returning after only a few months to Ho Chi
Minh City, the former Saigon, there seem to be more sharply defined opinions on
the country's leadership and direction.

Some southern Vietnamese, still struggling to return to the living standards of
two decades ago, are bitter at how little has changed in a year. And diplomats
in Hanoi caution that Mr. Linh may not yet have full control, and that there may
be a power vacuum if not a power struggle in some areas.

On the other hand, many people in and out of the Government here are in an
upbeat mood, often because daily life is more fun.

''The Government always used to say, 'No dancing!' '' a bright-eyed, flush-faced
young woman said over the din from a mammoth tape deck at a riverside hotel.
''Now everything is O.K.''

She was attending not just a ballroom dancing class, but one organized by a
state-run hotel, where she is a sales clerk in the tourist shop. Her co-workers
- some of the women decked out in Western dresses and high-heeled shoes,
fashionable again in recent months - were working hard after hours in the
hotel's conference room to master some elementary steps.

Puffing on Imported Cigarettes

Elsewhere, potted palms are hosed down outside restaurants in the morning. Rock
bands play inside at night to the puffing of imported cigarettes and the gulping
of gallons of local beer, now sold in attractive, flip-top cans.

At the same time, traditional cultural activity is widely encouraged.

''Vietnamese culture crystallizes the soul, talent and morality of the
Vietnamese people and is the spiritual strength of the Vietnamese nation,'' a
recent Politburo directive said.

Though heavy on advice to pursue Communist rectitude, the directive also told
intellectuals and artists to ''broaden cultural intercourse with developing
countries and Western countries in order to acquaint our people with the
diversified cultures of the world.''

But most Vietnamese lack the wherewithal to internationalize; few books,
magazines or films from outside the Soviet bloc circulate here. And many people
still fear the consquences of too much familiarity with foreigners and their
ideas. The hard-liners could come back, they say. In some places, they never
went away.

High Hopes vs. Red Tape

Bureaucrats continue to thwart or even sabotage changes in Government
operations, foreign trade companies and diplomats say. Foreign investment has
not poured in, only partly because of a delay in introducing a long-promised
investment code.

Foreigners who have looked at drafts of the legislation say it will be only a
beginning. Yet Vietnamese officials talk about huge resort developments, oil
refineries and food-processing factories in a country without adequate
communication and public services.

Speaking with reporters recently about his expectations of a contract with Club
Med or other international resort developers, the a tourism official mentioned
casually that the foreigners might be asked to build the necessary roads to the
beaches first.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Study Finds Stress Ailment Mostly in Veterans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 24


The full-blown symptoms of a stress disorder that is marked by emotional numbing
and nightmares are more likely to occur among Vietnam War veterans than among
victims of muggings, rapes and other forms of violence, a study published today
concludes.

A random survey found that Vietnam veterans who were wounded in combat were the
only group in which the ailment, post-traumatic stress disorder, was relatively
common. About 20 percent of those questioned suffered its symptoms.

Among the general population, 1 percent had symptoms, according to the study,
which was published in The New England Journal of Medicine. Among civilians
exposed to physical attack and Vietnam veterans who were not wounded, 3.5
percent were found to have the disorder.

First Study of Cross-Section

The disorder was previously studied largely by focusing on war veterans and
victims of other violent encounters. The authors of the latest work attempted to
see how common the disorder is among a cross-section of the population.

''We didn't have much information prior to this and didn't know what to expect
in terms of the proportion of people from the general population who would
develop symptoms in response to trauma,'' said Dr. John E. Helzer of Washington
University, who directed the study.

The study was based on interviews conducted in St. Louis. Individuals who had
been subjected to severe and sudden stress were said to have the disorder if
they re-enacted the experience or relived it through dreams and thoughts and if
they suffered emotional numbing that made it impossible to care for others. They
also had to show at least two of a list of other possible symptoms that included
jumpiness, trouble sleeping, guilt, difficulty concentrating, avoidance of
anything that made them remember the trauma or worsening of symptoms if anything
happened that resembled it.

Dr. Helzer cautioned that only 64 Vietnam veterans were among the 2,493 people
surveyed, so the percentage who suffered the stress disorder may not precisely
mirror the proportion nationwide who have the problem.

Result of Veterans' Effort

Post-traumatic stress disorder was formally recognized in 1980 by the American
Psychiatric Association, in part as a result of a drive by veterans groups to
recognize a ''post-Vietnam syndrome.''

Among the study's findings were these:

* No combat-related symptoms were reported by veterans of wars other than
Vietnam .

* The most common cause in women was physical attack, including rape. Other
events cited by women were discovering a husband's affair, being poisoned and
having a miscarriage.

* The most common symptoms were nightmares, jumpiness and trouble sleeping.

* Half of men with combat symptoms had the signs for more than three years.

* Sixty-nine people surveyed had been beaten or mugged in the one and a half
years before the survey. Only 3 percent met the criteria for the disorder,
although 19 percent had at least one of the symptoms.

* Of the 64 Vietnam veterans in the survey, 15 were wounded in combat, while 28
had fought but were not injured. Among those wounded, 20 percent had the
disorder, and 60 percent had at least one symptom.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Courage at Christmas

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 546 words


A chill wind swirls through the rubble-strewn empty lots. A block away stand
some gutted brick tenements, hollow as skulls. Across 160th Street, a forlorn
little branch library sticks up out of the desolation. But here, in the old
public school now called Argus Community, there is life.

There aren't many worse places than this corner of the South Bronx and there
aren't many people laid lower than the young men on the third floor. They are
addicted to drugs and are homeless and suffer mental problems. Yet here they
sit, polite and neatly dressed, in the old classroom they call their family
living room, talking about Christmas.

One young man - his initial is G. - won't ever forget last Christmas. He spent
it in jail, for assault. ''I was in a cell by myself. The guard came along and
threw in a sandwich. He said, 'Merry Christmas.' '' C., knees tight and hands
folded in his lap, says softly that he spent 10 Christmases in jail, and another
in Vietnam.

''I was here last Christmas,'' says B., a tall man in his 30's. ''The year
before I lived in a garage and almost froze. I was doing $50 or $75 a day in
drugs and still wasn't satisfied.'' He's been at Argus for 14 months, ''and I've
been drug free the whole time. No time since I was 17 could I ever say that.''

Argus, supported by public and private funds, has for 20 years been helping
juvenile delinquents, drug abusers and other lost souls. This effort to reach to
the bottom of the bottom is Argus IV. The 16 young men in the living room are
half the present population. They could be the kind of men who swagger down the
subway stairs, breathing machismo. But there's little bluster in this circle.
These men display something surprising: vulnerability.

W., neat and carefully spoken, tells of going home last Christmas to find chaos;
no one cared enough to pay the light bill. At age 10, his father sexually
molested him. At 16, he discovered his mother with a needle in her arm. His
sister introduced him to crack.

A. is a muscular young man with tattoos and ropy knife scars on his arms. ''I
haven't felt this good about myself in eight or nine years,'' he says. ''Last
Christmas, I was in the penitentiary.'' In other years, ''I always had to get
high, high, high. Got so bad that once I shot bleach. I ended up in the
psychiatric ward. I couldn't move - couldn't hardly move my eyes. Now, I've
gained 36 pounds in eight months.''

Since coming to Argus IV, other residents also note progress, even entertain
fragile hopes. O., for instance, thinks maybe he can get back his old job as an
electrician's helper. At the moment, however, what's most on everyone's mind is
Christmas. Wednesday, Delores Cooley and her volunteer helpers cooked up a
holiday feast. Today, some residents will go out on pass to see relatives and
friends, others to a drug- and alcohol-free disco.

There is remarkable intensity on the faces of Pedro Navarez and other staff
members as they listen. They give daily meaning to good will to men. Yet what
stands out even more sharply is the openness - the courage - of the residents.

''This is the first Christmas in a long time that I've been sober,'' says S.
with an enormous smile. ''It's a big help,'' he says, gesturing around the
circle, ''to have my family.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Private Behavior, Public Responsibility

BYLINE: By James Reston; James Reston is senior columnist of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 728 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


There is obviously still a lot of confusion in the country about the proper role
of public officials. The new idea this Christmas (the gospel according to Gary
Hart) is that an official's public and private lives - his policies and morals -
can be separate, that his personal monkey business is nobody's business and that
all the folly and mischief are caused by the snooping scoundrels of the press.

The old idea of Christmas Past was quite different.

''Those in high places,'' Walter Lippmann wrote during another period of drift
and hallucination, ''are more than the administrators of government bureaus.
They are more than the writers of laws.

''They are the custodians of a nation's ideals, of the beliefs it cherishes, of
its permanent hopes, of the faith which makes a nation out of a mere aggregation
of individuals. They are unfaithful to that trust when by word and example they
promote a spirit that is complacent, evasive and acquisitive.''

In his Presidential campaign of ''new ideas,'' this is the old idea Gary Hart
forgot. It is admittedly a high ideal. But 1987 has not been very kind to people
who thought this ideal entirely dead.

Ask Mike Deaver. He was the keeper of the swinging door at the White House, who
thought he could parlay his friendship with the Reagans into a personal fortune
and drink to his success on the side. In the process, he lost his job and his
fortune and now faces three years in jail.

Or ask Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North and Rear Adm. John M. Poindexter. They proved
you can be poor and personally moral but still ruin an illustrious career with
good intentions, bad judgment and contempt for the Congress.

Lying and shredding official evidence was no virtue in 1987, and acting in the
name of the President without his written consent was no excuse. So like Mr.
Deaver, the colonel and the admiral had nobody to blame but the press, which is
fast becoming the last refuge of the guilty.

The American press didn't cover itself with glory either in 1987, and not
because it accepted Hart's invitation to follow his after-dark adventures. It is
supposed to inform the people of events that influence their lives but, it was
scooped on the Iran-contra scandal and surprised on the runup to the Wall Street
crash - the two biggest stories of the year.

Hart's view is that the press should draw a clear distinction between an
official's public responsibilities and his private character. Not only 1987 but
much of modern history suggest that the private character of public officials
influences their decisions on the public's business.

It was Richard Nixon's private character that led to the secrecy and finally to
the deceptions that cost him the Presidency. It was Lyndon Johnson's personal
ambition - ''I will not be the first President to lose a war'' - that led to the
disasters in Vietnam. And it was President Reagan's personal ideology that
trapped him in the deal he said he would never make, of trading arms to Iran for
hostages.

Looking back on this tumultuous century, it is clear that personal character and
personal judgment cannot be separated from great and tragic events. Hitler and
Stalin are the most dramatic illustrations, but even the personal decisions of
the Western leaders at Versailles to fight World War I to the unconditional
surrender of Germany contributed to the rise of Communism in Russia, Fascism in
Italy and Nazism in Germany.

Even so, Hart is now telling us at the beginning of the Presidential election of
1988 that we should study his ideas and forget his judgment, and the surprising
thing is that this rubbish has brought him to the top of the Democratic
popularity polls.

Lippmann had some advice for voters on this point, too. ''All depends,'' he
said, ''on the code of conduct that is fashionable. . . . For that reason, a
civilized society must demand of those who have the ambition to lead it a higher
standard. In the realm of morals the example set by the prominent is decisive. .
. . The people are looking for new leaders, for men who are truthful and
resolute. They are looking for leaders who will talk to the people about their
duty, and about the sacrifices they must make and about the discipline they must
impose upon themselves, and about their responsibility to the world and
posterity.''

Let us hope he was right and that they may not look in vain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Changes and a Challenge for Naval Academy

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: ANNAPOLIS, Md., Dec. 24


Midshipmen at the Naval Academy no longer have to march from class to class as
they once did. They walk across campus, singly or in groups, like ordinary
college students.

Lights no longer go out precisely at midnight in Bancroft Hall, the dormitory
for all 4,600 midshipmen.

Physical hazing of plebes is prohibited. Upperclassmen may skip breakfast to
cram for an examination. There is more leave time and more freedom in choosing
classes. Chapel attendance is no longer mandatory.

In short, life at the 145-year-old institution on the banks of the Severn River
is not what it used to be.

Are all these changes indications that the academy, as Navy Secretary Navy James
H. Webb Jr. said recently, has ''lost its guts''?

Not in the view of William Busick, a retired Navy captain who has observed the
academy for 48 years, first as a midshipman, then as an officer stationed here
and now as director of the United States Naval Academy Alumni Association.

''I've seen this institution for a long time,'' Captain Busick said in a recent
interview. ''It gets better and better.''

Mr. Webb, a 1968 academy graduate, created a stir with his comments about
changes at the academy in a speech to the midshipmen in September.

In the Vietnam War, ''when the military was being torn apart by vicious
criticism, this institution apparently either lost its guts or its esteem,'' he
said.

Time to Tighten Up

It is time to tighten things up, Mr. Webb told the midshipmen, from the summer
indoctrination for new plebes to their graduation.

Captain Busick dismisses the complaints with a mixture of humor and bemusement.
''Jim's just like all the rest,'' he said. ''Every class thinks it was the last
one to have a hard time.'' But he said he does not understand Mr. Webb's use of
the words, ''lost its guts.''

The Naval Academy was changing before Captain Busick arrived in 1938 as a plebe
and has changed since, he said. Most changes, he added, were the natural
evolution of an institution adjusting to new conditions, new demands and new
technology, including nuclear-powered vessels.

Capt. Edward Kristensen, a 1965 graduate who returned this year as deputy
commandant of midshipmen, discovered there had been many changes over the years.

Some were simple, like a later ''lights out'' time for sophomores and juniors
and no mandatory ''lights out'' for seniors.

An academic overhaul was undertaken in 1969. Midshipmen, who until then had
followed generally the same course of study with few elective courses, are now
allowed to major in various areas of study, including English, history and
economics. The number of required courses was reduced.

Competing With Academe

The academic changes were made when applications for entrance to the academy
were dropping and the dropout rate was increasing. The changes apparently
worked, officials said. Voluntary resignations declined, and applications
increased.

''We have to offer a majors program,'' Captain Kristensen said. ''We have to be
able to compete with other colleges and universities.''

The curriculum changes brought about another break with tradition, the practice
of midshipmen marching to classes. Captain Busick said: ''People say, 'Why don't
you march to class?' If you don't have everybody going to the same place, you
can't have them march off together.''

In his speech, Mr. Webb said he was particularly concerned with the lack of
intensity in the plebe indoctrination.

Captain Kristensen acknowledged that the plebe program ''does not have the
physically demanding aspect it had when I was a plebe.'' He added: ''You don't
have plebes doing pushups in the shower. You don't have plebes doing some of the
things that used to be called hazing.''

But Captain Kristensen said plebes are still subjected to great pressures in
their summer indoctrination so they ''will develop an understanding of what it
means to work under stress.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies

BYLINE: By ELEANOR BLAU

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 936 words


New Brezner Comedy

Having just produced two critically acclaimed, offbeat comedies -''Throw Momma
From the Train'' and ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' -Larry Brezner is at it again
with something called ''Bay Window.''

It will feature Billy Crystal, co-star of ''Throw Momma,'' as Ray, a family man
increasingly curious about the doings of some new neighbors. ''He thinks they're
killing people,'' Mr. Brezner reported from Los Angeles, ''and there is just
enough evidence to keep him obsessed.''

For instance, they seem to have been burying something in the backyard. And the
wig of a missing man is found in their house. ''Plus they're a little
weird-looking,'' Mr. Brezner said, ''kind of European standoffish,
not-quite-alive people.''

The obsession begins when the fellow next door, a troublemaker, alerts Ray to
the supposedly strange goings on.

Soon, the producer said, ''Ray doesn't sleep at night, he hears sounds, he's
more and more crazy, with bags under his eyes and unshaven,'' and he keeps
saying to his unconvinced wife, ''I'm telling you. . . '' He succeeds in, among
other things, accidentally blowing up the suspects' basement.

This entanglement is quite different from the one the actor faces in ''Throw
Momma,'' in which a would-be mystery writer (Danny DeVito) mistakenly assumes
they've made an exchange murder pact a la ''Strangers on a Train.''

Mr. Brezner, besides producing, is a partner in a personal management firm that
has represented such celebrities as Woody Allen and David Letterman, as well as
Robin Williams, who stars in ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' as an unconventional
armed forces disk jockey.

Only Mr. Crystal has been cast so far in ''Bay Window,'' written by Dana Olson.
The Imagine Productions film, to be distributed by Universal, will be directed
by Rod Daniel (''Like Father, Like Son''). Shooting is expected to begin beween
March 15 and April 1.

'Judith Hearne,' at Last

When an agent offered Jack Clayton the screenplay for ''The Lonely Passion of
Judith Hearne,'' his just-released film based on Brian Moore's novel of that
title, the British director replied, ''You must be joking.''

Mr. Clayton, whose previous films include ''Room at the Top'' (1959), ''The
Pumpkin Eater'' (1964) and ''The Great Gatsby'' (1974), had been trying for 25
years to option the work. But other directors kept optioning it first, including
''my dear late friend John Huston,'' he said. They never filmed it, apparently
because the story, about a devout Irish spinster, was not considered very
commercial.

The spinster (Maggie Smith) moves into a Dublin rooming house, where a man just
back from America (Bob Hoskins) fosters her romantic interest in him, hoping she
will finance a business scheme.

''It's a wonderful study of loneliness and also of loss of faith,'' Mr. Clayton
said the other day. He was in town to promote - reluctantly - the film (''I'm a
shy person,'' he said). With backers including Handmade Films, and with
one-third the normal salaries for Mr. Clayton, Ms. Smith and Mr. Hoskins, the
less-than-$4 million film was shot in seven weeks, considerably fewer than the
10 or 12 weeks the director usually requires.

This involved inconveniences, including a downpour as Ms. Smith and Mr. Hoskins
were filmed sitting outside a nursing home. A makeshift canopy kept them dry but
amplified the sound of the rain, Mr. Clayton recalled, adding that he could not
fathom the wizardry with which his cameramen and sound-mixers obliterated the
weather.

The 66-year-old director had seen at least 10 other screenplays of the novel
over the years (''I won't tell you whose, that would be unkind,'' he said), but
Peter Nelson's was the first, he said, to capture the book. However, Mr. Clayton
worked with him to alter its shape, and to add a finale, with Mr. Moore's
approval. The book ends with Judith still in the nursing institution, as
pictures of her aunt and of Christ are put on a mantelpiece to make the place
feel like home. The film ends with her departure from the institution.

''It's not because I'm against sad endings,'' Mr. Clayton said. ''But in film I
love developing characters. In the book, she starts and finishes at the same
point.'' In the film, he said, she winds up ''a much freer woman than when she
started.''

Tibetan Ritual as Art

A rare documentary on a Tibetan Buddhist ritual - filmed in the Mount Everest
region of Nepal, rather than in Tibet itself - opens tomorrow at the Film Forum
2, 57 Watts Street.

Mindful of the recent clashes in Tibet between monks and Chinese troops, the
film maker, Richard Kohn, said the work, ''Lord of the Dance/Destroyer of
Illusion,'' shows ''what has been lost in Tibet since the Chinese destroyed a
tremendous number of monasteries and suppressed religion, starting in the
1950's.''

Indigenous Tibetans as well as refugees live at the Himalayan site of the
three-week Mani-Rimdu festival that Mr. Kohn filmed. ''It's one of the last
places where there is a Tibetan society undisturbed but available for study,''
said the film maker, who lived in Nepal for five years with the help of grants
including a Fulbright.

''I was interested in the way art was used in the ritual and in the ritual
itself as an art form,'' said the 39-year-old Mr. Kohn, noting an early interest
in art films: ''I was a New York kid who grew up in the Bleecker Street
Cinema.''

Mr. Kohn, now in Berkeley, Calif., is completing a dissertation on the ritual
for a doctoral degree at the University of Wisconsin. The annual event in Nepal,
he said, invokes inner and supernatural forces to celebrate compassion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jack Clayton

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 26, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL ASSEMBLY HANDED SETBACKS TO U.S. AND SOVIET

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 875 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 24


The United States and the Soviet Union both suffered setbacks on matters of
importance to them at the United Nations during the General Assembly session
that ended this week, diplomats say.

The Reagan Administration, its prestige here weakened by unpaid dues to the
world organization, failed to get its way on United Nations budget procedures,
which American diplomats considered the most important item in the General
Assembly.

The Assembly overwhelmingly adopted a $1.77 billion budget for the next two
years. It ignored American objections to the spending package as well as
American demands that the budget should be approved unanimously, in line with
the changes approved last year.

Moscow Policy Condemned

Moscow did no better. After an unusual display of support for the United
Nations, including the payment of more than $200 million in arrears, the Soviet
Union was still overwhelmingly condemned by the General Assembly for its
intervention in Afghanistan and its support for Vietnam's military occupation of
Cambodia.

Moreover, Moscow's plan for recasting the United Nations Charter to create what
it calls a comprehensive international system of peace and security received
tepid support from third-world nations.

A watered-down resolution supporting the Soviet proposal was approved, with 76
nations voting in favor and only 12 Western nations opposed. But 63 countries,
mainly in the third world, abstained, and many of them said the Soviet plan
seemed vague and potentially threatening to the United Nations.

'Triple Failure' Is Seen

''We saw impressive unity around Afghanistan and Cambodia but many doubts about
the new security order,'' the American representative, Vernon A. Walters, said
after the Assembly.

''The first year of Mikhail Gorbachev's U.N. initiative has ended in a triple
failure,'' another Western delegate commented, referring to the Soviet leader.

Under a package of budgetary and administrative changes adopted last year, the
United Nations budget for 1990-91 should be adopted unanimously and must include
a contingency fund limiting additional spending by the General Assembly.

The Administration, with the support of many other countries, wanted the
Assembly to start carrying out the new measures in the 1988-89 budget as a
gesture of good faith.

While only Israel voted against the new budget, the United States, Australia and
Japan abstained, preventing a consensus. They complained that spending levels
were still too high and that the budget lacked safeguards against add-on
spending.

''Full and early implementation of these reforms would have helped rebuild the
confidence of all member states in the U.N.,'' Richard C. Nygard, the American
Mission's budget expert, told the Assembly in explaining his abstention.
Australia's chief delegate, Richard A. Woolcott, said, ''We're on the road to
reform, but we haven't gone far enough yet.''

The United States suffered another setback when third-world nations succeeded in
expanding the body that drafts the budget, the Committee on Programming and
Coordination, from 21 members to 34. In the American view, that will make the
committee unwieldly and more subject to third-world influence.

American officials said they did not see those setbacks as catastrophic for
their efforts. But they expressed fear that such reversals would encourage
American critics of the United Nations to believe that the third world is not
sincere about changing budget procedures and thus in effect ending its dominance
by giving the United States a veto over spending.

''I've no realistic hope reform will succeed,'' said Charles M. Lichtenstein, a
former deputy American representative here and now a senior fellow at the
Heritage Foundation, a conservative-oriented research organization in
Washington.

An important reason why the United States failed to get its way fully on budget
procedures, many diplomats said, is that it did not carry out its promise to pay
its full assessed share in United Nations dues in return for last year's
agreement.

Congress has now agreed to treat the United Nations and all its specialized
agencies more generously than the Administration had expected, although that was
not known by the General Assembly in time to influence the outcome of the budget
debate.

U.S. Paying $160 Million

American officials said they believed the United States would pay about $60
million this year on top of the $100 million it has already paid toward its
annual dues of $212 million. The United States still owes $140 million from last
year.

By contrast with the United States, the Soviet leadership has been showing
unusual support for the United Nations this year. In his Pravda article on Sept.
17 outlining his idea of a comprehensive system of peace and security, Mr.
Gorbachev foresaw an enhanced role for the United Nations in solving regional
conflicts and maintaining peace.

Shortly afterward the Soviet Union paid more than $200 million in arrears,
including money owed for past peacekeeping operations it opposed.

But the gestures did nothing to soften international criticism of Soviet policy
toward Afghanistan and Cambodia or to win more third-world support for Moscow's
vision of a new security order.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vernon A. Walters, American delegate to the United Nations
(NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 26, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

At a Sandinista Camp, A Bit of Home for Troops

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 631 words

DATELINE: ASTURIAS, Nicaragua


The Sandinista rest camp on the shores of Lake Apanas is primitive by American
standards. A concrete volleyball court and a wooden guard shack are the only
signs of permanence. The rest of the camp is made up of makeshift canvas and
plastic lean-tos and tents hastily erected in a muddy field.

There is another feature about the camp that would seem strange to anyone
familiar with American military rest-and-recreation areas in a combat zone. The
Asturias camp is crowded with women, children and old men, all sharing the same
shelters and meals as the soldiers.

An 800-member Sandinista unit had just come into the area after fighting the
contras for two months in the surounding hills. They would have a period of rest
and resupply, before returning to battle. But none of the soldiers would leave
the camp to go home on leave during their stand-down from combat. Instead, their
families had come to visit them. Hundreds of Nicaraguans of all ages had
journeyed for days by foot, horse and overburdened truck and bus from throughout
the country to visit their relatives here for a few days.

Nicaraguan officials were vague as to how and why the practice of familial
visits rather than home leave came about. But it is no secret that the desertion
rate in the Sandinista army is high, and keeping the conscript soldiers under
military control rather than allowing them to go home may reduce the number of
deserters.

Guitars and Hard Rock

Melodies from strumming guitars and hard rock blaring from transistor radios
compete with the noises of chickens and pigs that roam freely throughout the
camp. In time, the animals will become part of a family dinner during the
three-day visit.

The camp, nestled in the coffee country of rugged Jinotega Province, was thrown
together a day earlier by the men of the Simon Bolivar Battalion when they came
in from the field to find their families awaiting them.

An officer said the unit had had 13 firefights with the contras since they went
into the mountains in October. A medical aide, who had five months of training
as a medic before he joined the battalion, said the battalion had no battle
casualties during their operations, but did have some soldiers sick with
malaria.

The battalion political officer asserted that his unit killed seven contras in
their two months of patrolling, but said they had taken no prisoners.

Carry Automatic Rifles

The Simon Bolivar Battalion is one of 13 such units organized and trained to
combat the hit-and-run guerrilla tactics of the contras. The battalion is
lightly armed by conventional standards. The soldiers carry Soviet-made AK-47
automatic rifles and are supported by nothing heavier than mortars and machine
guns. The unit is designed to move swiftly and fight independently.

One of its company commanders is a 20-year-old lieutenant, Alejandro Amador
Mendoza. The officer said he joined the unit five years ago and worked his way
up to command about 200 soldiers. The officer was reluctent to discuss his
battalion's tactics with an American correspondent, but was eager to know about
American anti-guerrilla tactics in Vietnam.

He was surprised to learn that much of the fighting in Vietnam was at night. He
said neither the contras nor the Sandinistas make any attempt to attack or
ambush each other during darkness.

A senior noncommissioned officer, identified only as Pacharaco, was eager to
talk about his experiences and how the battalion stalks the contras and then
tries to surprise them with an attack. Pacharaco has been in 70 battles with the
contras and has been wounded on several occasions. He was clearly a hero to the
younger soldiers of the battalion, who listened in admiration as he told the
visiting American of the battalion's combat performance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Nicaragua indicating Lake Apanas (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 26, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Security Precedes Credibility

BYLINE: By CALEB CARR; Caleb Carr is co-author of a forthcoming book on American
security.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 776 words


By calling this week's round of contra military activities ''very encouraging,''
the Reagan Administration has completed the cycle of short-sighted foolishness
that began two weeks ago with Managua's announcement of a new Nicaraguan arms
buildup.

Washington's latest statements confirm widespread suspicions that the United
States intends to sabotage the Central American peace initiative.

On a deeper level, such statements offer sad proof that the United States'
preoccupation with strengthening its credibility as a great power has now become
so obsessive that it obscures its truly vital security interests.

This preoccupation with credibility has been evident in America's behavior
throughout the world in the years since our withdrawal from Vietnam. But no
region has felt its effects more strongly than the Western Hemisphere.

The assertion of United States influence in Latin America has been portrayed by
a wide range of United States leaders as crucial to the success of our
undertakings in Europe, the Western Pacific and eastern Asia.

President Reagan summed this up when he said in 1983 that, should American
efforts to combat hemispheric Marxism fail, ''our credibility would collapse,
and our alliances would crumble.'' In other words, United States credibility in
the Western Hemisphere is inseparable from our overall strategic safety.

In fact, no such inseparability exists. In the pre-nuclear world, when power was
measured in conventional military terms, a base of foreign operations in this
hemisphere could threaten our security. The nuclear age seriously weakened the
links between the genuine security interests of the United States and those of
Latin America. And rapid advances in nuclear technology, most notably that of
submarines and cruise missiles, in the last 25 years have severed such ties
altogether.

Today, no senior American or Soviet military official seriously believes both
nations can engage in a conventional conflict that would not rapidly turn
nuclear. In such an event, Soviet submarines that cruise freely off our coasts
could inflict as much damage on our country as any Soviet installations in Cuba
or Nicaragua.

Unless our leaders seriously believe that the local conventional forces of newly
Marxist nations pose an actual threat to our political and territorial
integrity, it would appear that our commitment to hemispheric anti-Communism is
motivated not primarily but solely by our obsession with credibility.

The need to demonstrate credibility, in other words, has become the principal
rationale for costly and controversial programs. The realities of strategic
security (in this case, the absence of a genuine threat) have played little if
any role in the formulation of policy.

Nor is our preoccupation with credibility limited to Latin America. A few years
ago, we joined in a policing action in Lebanon that resulted in tragedy. We were
never told just how the Lebanese civil war directly affected the security of the
United States.

We have undertaken commitments in Afghanistan and Angola - nations that are at
best of secondary interest to America - mainly to dispel any notion that we are
less assertive than the Soviet Union. In the Persian Gulf, every day we risk not
only naval disaster but war to defend the security interests of allies reluctant
to bear the major burden of protecting their vital interests. We should place
the greater portion of our efforts where our actual security interests, rather
than our credibility, are at stake. Instead of giving priority to a quixotic
commitment to Nicaraguan, Angolan and Afghan ''freedom fighters'' (whose
behavior exhibits little attachment to the principles of liberal democracy), we
should put more energy into negotiating a reduction of conventional forces in
Europe, looking for ways to engage the Soviet Union in new economic and security
arrangements in the Far East and vigorously pursuing talks with Moscow on deep
cuts in long-range strategic nuclear weapons.

Credibility is doubtless in the national interest of the United States, but it
must always be subordinate to the pursuit of genuine American security. A nation
can, after all, project a credible image of power without having the political
or military strength to back it up: Witness France in 1940.

On the other hand, a nation may lack international credibility and still be
secure enough to pursue its interests beyond what most consider possible:
Witness Prussia's thorough humiliation of Napoleon III in 1870.

In sum, credibility should not be identified with security. To do so is to
seriously confuse priorities, which endangers others and ourselves.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Thailand Facing Unexpected Refugee Influx

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 528 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 26


Thailand, through which hundreds of thousands of Indochinese refugees have
passed since Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos were taken over by Communist Governments
in 1975, is facing unexpected new influxes of asylum-seekers, according to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

More than 11,000 Vietnamese boat people have arrived in Thailand this year - a
165 percent increase over 1986's total. At least 1,000 of them have come ashore
this month. Refugee officials are at a loss to explain the sudden exodus, the
largest since the early 80's.

Most of the new refugees are reported to be ethnic Vietnamese - not the ethnic
Chinese who dominated earlier waves of migrants. Many are students, skilled
laborers or craftsmen, or other nonagricultural workers.

A refugee-processing center here is trying to find homes for about 800
unaccompanied minors - children under 18 - sent to sea by their families.

This week, the Thai Government has begun moving 10,000 hilltribe people living
illegally in the Ban Vinai camp near the Mekong River town of Pak Chom to
another settlement to the northwest at Chiang Kham, where they will be screened
to determine if they qualify for refugee status.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees office here, under a July 1985
agreement, will observe the screening of the Hmong, the first thousand of whom
were moved on Sunday. The Thai Government says it plans to move about 1,000
every two days for the next two weeks. Ban Vinai has about 40,000 registered
refugees, almost all hilltribe people.

Refugee officials, who welcome the screening process as a step forward from the
forced repatriations of some earlier arrivals, think that most of the Hmong will
qualify for refugee status. This will greatly increase the burden on Chiang Kham
camp. More than 8,000 refugees were living there at the end of October - in
housing designed to accommodate 6,000.

Severe Drought a Factor

The migration of the Laotian hilltribes, who often move as entire villages or
clans, is thought by aid workers here and in Laos to be related in part to a
severe drought that has reduced food supplies. Representatives of several
international organizations say that if more food aid were going to Laos, the
flight of Hmong might have been blunted.

There is also speculation that some Hmong leaders have abandoned hope of a small
armed resistance toppling the Vientiane Government, now under the control of the
Pathet Lao Communist movement. Many Hmong supported the United States during the
Vietnam War, when Washington was engaged in trying to stop the Laotian
Communists as well as the North Vietnamese, who were using Laotian territory.

Lowland People in Camps

American officials are preparing to increase resettlement of Laotian hilltribes
next year. But most refugee officials do not believe that this promise alone has
lured people out of the hills of Laos.

In addition to the Laotian hilltribe people now in Thailand, more than 20,000
''lowland'' or ethnic Lao are also in separate refugee camps in Thailand.
Efforts to send home the minority of them who want to return have been slowed by
the Laotian Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW: THE YEAR'S BEST;
Bull Market for Movies and Screens

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2263 words


THE MOST IMPORTANT MOVIE news this year wasn't movies but business. More movies
than ever went into release this year than at any time in recent memory.
Distributors of video cassettes became an important source of production money.
Box offices boomed, but often with movies that were interchangeable
(''Robocop,'' ''Stakeout,'' ''Lethal Weapon,'' ''Extreme Prejudice''). Theater
chains were acquiring other theater chains so fast, so heedlessly, that it
seemed possible one of them might accidentally acquire itself.

Not all of 1987's box-office hits were undeserving. Adrian Lyne's ''Fatal
Attraction'' is not exactly ''Marnie,'' but it has a lot of slick style and
delivers just the kind of entertainment that's promised. The year's best comedy
featuring a camel, Elaine May's crazily underrated ''Ishtar,'' became the victim
of its own publicity and big-budget backlash, which, I predict, will be
forgotten in the future (see below).

The year's most majestic anticlimax must be ''Cry Freedom,'' directed by Sir
Richard Attenborough (''Gandhi''), the sort of worthy movie that appeals to
one's conscience while sticking its hand in one's pocket. The year's worst
movie? It's been erased from the memory bank.

Bernardo Bertolucci's ''Last Emperor'' seems to be haunting my mind with more
vividness than I would have expected when I first saw it. It's not because of
its travelogue aspects. The 360-degree ''wrap-around'' movie at China's pavilion
at Disney World is a good deal more comprehensive in this respect.

''The Last Emperor'' covers more than 50 years of modern Chinese history by
focusing on the life of the one key figure who affected history the least. It's
just possible that Mr. Bertolucci knew what he was doing: no single movie could
dramatize so much history in any comprehensive way. By sticking to the story of
Pu Yi, the passive, unremarkable, last Manchu ruler of China, the film makes us
curious about everything that's going on in the outside world involving Sun
Yat-sen, Chiang Kai-shek, Chairman Mao and the others.

''The Last Emperor'' is a negative epic. It teases the memory as much for what
it doesn't show as for what it does. It's not on the 10-best list, but it's
something a lot of people should want to see.

Among the other deserving curios of the year are Suzanne Osten's ''Mozart
Brothers,'' the very funny Swedish sendup of an opera-hating, avant-garde
theater director in the process of staging ''Don Giovanni''; ''Swimming to
Cambodia,'' Spalding Gray's feature-length stage monologue, as preserved in the
film directed by Jonathan Demme; and Claude Berri's ''Jean de Florette'' and
''Manon of the Spring,'' one epic Marcel Pagnol film split into two two-hour
parts - to its own detriment.

Not many documentaries reached theater screens in 1987, but among those that
did, there were two splendid films about great film makers, ''Filming 'Othello,'
'' Orson Welles's own, somewhat doctored recollection of how his 1951 classic
was fabricated, piecemeal, and ''Jean Renoir - the Boss,'' a film interview,
conducted by Jacques Rivette and Andre S. Labarthe, in which the master talks
about the conception and shooting of ''Rules of the Game.'' They are musts for
all film students.

A must for any student of human nature, or of Les Blank, is Mr. Blank's lyrical
''Gap-Toothed Women,'' in which women discuss the slight space they have between
their two upper front teeth, and how that space has affected their perceptions
of life. Mr. Blank is an American original.

For one reason and another these films did not make this year's 10-best list.

Those that follow, in alphabetical order, did:

''Barfly.'' Taking a spare, obscene, funny screenplay by Charles Bukowski, the
poet laureate of America's misbegotten, Barbet Schroeder, the French
director-producer, makes his American film debut with a movie that's a small,
classic, one-of-a-kind comedy. Mickey Rourke stars as the Bukowski surrogate
figure, a boozing, courtly poet who lives on the edge of sanity and Los
Angeles's skid row. He and Faye Dunaway are most affecting as alcoholic lovers.
They're two unseaworthy skiffs that pass in the night after a series of brief,
alternately noisy and gentle collisions.

The movie is not about alcoholism, which it observes without pity, and without
taking any high-toned moral stand. ''Barfly'' is about the spirit that survives
in even the grubbiest bodies, in the grubbiest environments, inside a society
where cleanliness, and two cars, are next to godliness.

''The Dead.'' John Huston's last film, based on the James Joyce story, is also
one of his greatest. Donal McCann and the incomparable Anjelica Huston are a
Dublin (circa 1904) couple whose serene marriage is ruthlessly re-evaluated in
the course of a single evening. The movie, written by Tony Huston, builds in the
way of the story, through the accumulation of mundane details observed during a
holiday dinner party, ending with a series of revelations that reach from
middle-class Dublin to the outer banks of the universe.

Though small in physical scale, ''The Dead'' may be the biggest film Huston ever
made. Coupled with the director's next-to-last film, the roller-coaster ride
titled ''Prizzi's Honor,'' it demonstrates the remarkable virtuosity of the man
whose career began in 1941 with ''The Maltese Falcon.'' It's the unequivocal
''don't-miss'' movie of the year.

''Empire of the Sun.'' Steven Spielberg's high aspirations come very close to
realization in this very moving, grandly staged adventure-epic about a boy and
his war. The boy is Jim, played with uncanny presence by Christian Bale, 13. The
war is the Japanese occupation of Shanghai, where, until Dec. 8, 1941,Jim has
lived the comfortable colonial life with his English parents.

The movie is big in all the right ways. The scenes of civilian chaos preceding
the occupation of Shanghai are stunning. It's also so intimate that it makes
comprehensible Jim's admiration of his Japanese captors, during his crucial,
harrowing years in the internment camp. Tom Stoppard did the excellent
adaptation of J. G. Ballard's autobiographical novel. Supporting the
star-performance by Mr. Bale, in whom Mr. Spielberg discovers the wit and guts
of the young Jean-Pierre Leaud, are John Malkovich and Miranda Richardson, among
others.

The movie appears to have been edited in a hurry - there are awkward gaps in the
narrative line - but it's still a large winner.

''Full Metal Jacket.'' Stanley Kubrick examines the methods by which ordinary,
mostly decent young men can be turned into killing machines. The war just
happens to be the late disaster in Vietnam, and the victims just happen to be
United States Marine Corps recruits. However, without generalizing, the film's
meaning is clear: this is the way that wars go.

Adapted by Mr. Kubrick and Michael Herr, from a novel by Gustav Hasford, the
film initially looks to have been made by two different directors from two
different screenplays. ''Full Metal Jacket'' requires the audience to make leaps
in continuity and reasoning that pay off with its sorrowful ending. The
uniformly fine cast includes Matthew Modine, Vincent D'Onofrio and Lee Ermey,
who's unforgettable as a Parris Island gunnery sergeant.

''House of Games.'' David Mamet, the idiosyncratic, Pulitzer Prize-winning
playwright, makes a self-assured debut as the idiosyncratic director of his own
screenplay, a seriocomic melodrama about con artists. Lindsay Crouse (Mrs.
Mamet) and Joe Mantegna star as, respectively, a psychoanalyst and an ambitious
hustler who offers to show her the ropes. The movie proceeds as if it were a
poker game. As the cards are dealt, the stakes are raised until the point where
no one can afford to withdraw.

Though the game is serious, everybody is bluffing, including Mr. Mamet from time
to time. The director's visual style and pacing are as Mamet-like as the
writer's dialogue, which is as it should be. (It sometimes sounds as if the
entire screenplay was written in italics.) ''House of Games'' is entertaining,
bossy and original.

''Housekeeping.'' Adapted from the Marilynne Robinson novel, this is Bill
Forsyth's first film made entirely outside Scotland. It's an exuberant,
disorienting comedy about two orphaned teen-age sisters and their different
reactions to their odd Aunt Sylvie (Christine Lahti). The time is the 1950's and
the place a small town in the Rockies called Fingerbone. Aunt Sylvie is more
than odd. She's a hobo. Against her will, she agrees to settle down, for a
while, to act as guardian to her nieces. The results are funny and, to most of
us who appreciate commonplace order, hair-raising.

The teen-age sisters are played with believably sweet intensity by Sara Walker
and Andrea Burchill.

If there is justice in heaven, Miss Lahti and Anjelica Huston will be the major
contenders for this year's best-actress Oscar.

''Radio Days.'' Woody Allen is in top form in this freewheeling homage to the
great, golden days of radio. The film takes the form of a family comedy, though
it's frequently interrupted with wonderfully irrelevant anecdotes in which Mr.
Allen gives us the inside dope on the fictitious (but usually recognizable)
celebrities of the day. Seth Green plays Woody-the-boy with gravity, common
sense and skepticism. Mr. Allen narrates.

Dianne Wiest, Mia Farrow, Diane Keaton and Josh Mostel are among the more
prominent performers. As in all of Mr. Allen's films, it's not the length of the
role that counts, but the role itself. Miss Keaton comes on only at the end, to
sing, absolutely straight, ''You'd Be So Nice to Come Home To.'' Bliss.

''Tampopo.'' Juzo Itami emerges as one of Japan's most ebullient satirists with
this, his second film, but the first to be released in this country. Actually,
it was a tossup whether ''Tampopo'' should be on the 10-best list or ''The
Funeral,'' Mr. Itami's first film, which was released here after ''Tampopo.''
Both are equally wise and funny. ''Tampopo'' may be slightly more adventurous in
the way it manages to mix up the story of an aspiring noodle maker, Tampopo
(played by Nabuko Miyamoto, who is Mrs. Itami), and a lot of random comments on
the manners and mores of contemporary Japan.

That Mr. Itami is not a two-shot director is demonstrated by his new comedy, ''A
Taxing Woman,'' shown at this year's New York Film Festival. It's still awaiting
a commercial release.

''Tin Men.'' Barry Levinson, the man who made ''Diner,'' has a keener ear for
the hilarious banalities of American speech than any other film maker around
today. He's also an expert director of serious comedy that doesn't take itself
too seriously. The time is 1963 and the place is Baltimore (again). The film is
mostly about the lunatic feud between two rather sleazy salesmen of aluminum
siding, one suave and cool (up to a point), played by Richard Dreyfuss, the
other (Danny DeVito) a hyperventilating kook. Under the skin, they are brothers.

Both actors are very funny as the sort of American males who, though they talk
about women all the time, are much more comfortable pitted against other males.
Barbara Hershey is terrifically patient as the woman who is more or less tossed
from one to the other.

''The Untouchables.'' When I first heard that the old television series was
going to be rehabilitated as a big-budget melodrama, I groaned. The groan was
premature. As written by David Mamet and directed by Brian De Palma, this
''Untouchables'' is superior mass-market entertainment, fast, witty and
appropriately shocking in the thoroughly conventional way of crime films.

Robert De Niro, as Al Capone, isn't on-screen all that much, but the performance
is so big it dominates the movie and gives Kevin Costner, who's excellent as the
true-blue Eliot Ness, someone to play off. However, Sean Connery will not be
upstaged by either. His performance as a maverick (that is, honest) Chicago cop
is the spine of the movie.

The 10 runners-up, in no special order of preference are:

Elaine May's ''Ishtar,'' which possibly should have been made on a Hollywood
back lot, but is no less funny for having been shot in North Africa;
''Matewan,'' John Sayles's evocative folk ballad about a West Virginia coal
miners' strike back in the days when, in unity, there was strength and, in
strength, the promise of a better life.

Also, Margarethe von Trotta's ''Rosa Luxemburg,'' another political film (but
far more sophisticated than John Sayles's look back), with Barbara Sukowa as the
determined Rosa; ''Broadcast News,'' a charming romantic comedy, featuring some
hilarious digs at television news as entertainment; ''Orphans,'' Alan J.
Pakula's smart adaptation of Lyle Kessler's play, notable for the performances
of Albert Finney, Matthew Modine and Kevin Anderson.

Also, ''Dark Eyes,'' Nikita Mikhalkov's exhilarating pastiche of four Chekhov
stories, with Marcello Mastroianni front and center; ''River's Edge,'' Tim
Hunter's brutal recollection of teen-agers in the land of the alienated and the
emotionally dislocated; Alex Cox's ''Walker,'' a jazzy, intentionally
anachronistic biography of a 19th-century American adventurer running wild in
Nicaragua, with Ed Harris; ''Good Morning, Vietnam,'' in which, for the first
time in movies, Robin Williams gets a chance to demonstrate his full comic
talents, under Barry Levinson's appreciative direction, and ''The Whales of
August,'' Lindsay Anderson's gift to two great actresses, Lillian Gish and Bette
Davis, who should thank him, Mike Kaplan (the producer who put it all together)
and their lucky stars.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of scenes from ''House of Games'' (Mike Hausman); ''The
Untouchables'' (Zade Rosenthal); ''Radio Days'' (Brian Hamil); ''Tin Men'';
''Barfly''; ''Full Metal Jacket''; ''Housekeeping''; ''Empire of the Sun'';
''Tampopo''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW: THE YEAR'S BEST;
CABLE FLEXES ITS OPTIONS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1749 words


THIS WAS THE YEAR WHEN THE LONG-heralded promise of more meaningful viewing
options for the home audience began coming into clearer focus. Independent
stations continued to get livelier. Home recorders and video cassettes became
more entrenched as viewing alternatives. And, with Fox Broadcasting, there is
even a fledgling effort to create a fourth network. But by far the most
significant advances could be claimed by cable television. According to the
Cable Advertising Bureau, basic cable systems passed the 50 percent mark in
reaching the country's 88.4 million TV households. In cable households with
pay-TV, 42 percent of viewing time was spent watching cable, while 49 percent
went to ABC, CBS and NBC. A mere 10 years ago, the three networks could claim
more than 90 percent of the nation's home audience.

In addition, some recent reports indicate that during the first several weeks of
1987's fall season, the networks lost 10 percent of their combined share of the
home audience as compared with the same period the year before.
Commercial-television executives are quick to point out, of course, that part of
the reason for the decline could be attributed to the new ''people meter''
methods of compiling ratings. Whatever the reason, the larger point is that
viewers' options are continuing to expand and the public is learning to use
them.

As it happens, I have my own fairly reliable system of verifing these options.
While compiling year-end lists of the best programs over 16 years, I initially
came upon a scene dominated by network television. Gradually, though, a stronger
public-TV schedule came to compete equally, in terms of overall quality, with
the far wealthier broadcasters. As recently as last year, cable - or to be more
precise, pay-cable - hardly mattered in the sweepstakes of quality and/ or
significance. But suddenly this year, the list of commendable programs available
on cable has grown dramatically, ending up just about equal in length to those
for commercial broadcasting and public television. The sheer increase in
quantity is little short of startling. No doubt about it: Cable is making itself
felt and not just as a conduit for uninterrupted, unedited theatrical-release
movies.

On the other hand, perhaps because of the spur of increased competition, viewers
of network fare have had a reasonably entertaining year. Reeling from the
disaster of its $40 million mini-series ''Amerika'' and still trying to salvage
the expensive variety show ''Dolly,'' ABC did score nicely in the weekly-series
category with this season's most winning new hour, on Wednesdays: ''Hooperman,''
starring John Ritter as a San Francisco police detective with the added chores
of running an apartment house and caring for a nasty little dog, and ''The
'Slap' Maxwell Story,'' with Dabney Coleman as a conniving sports columnist with
a personality that could give Hooperman's dog a run for the money.

''Slap'' was created by Jay Tarses, as was ''The Days and Nights of Molly
Dodd,'' which did so well on NBC in a summer trial run that it will undoubtedly
be back on the schedule soon. In it, Blair Brown's Molly demonstrates that life
does not necessarily end after a divorce in one's 30's. Both ''Slap'' and
''Molly,'' incidentally, are wryly funny without the benefit of laugh tracks,
this year's most impressive indication that commercial TV may at last be willing
to grow up or at least let its audience grow up.

CBS weighed in with three of the most interesting new series: ''Beauty and the
Beast,'' a contemporary reworking of the classic tale, weaving fine performances
by Linda Hamilton and Ron Perlman into often effective scripts touching on some
of today's more unpleasant realities, such as the homeless; ''Frank's Place,''
starring Tim Reid as a Boston college professor who inherits a New Orleans
restaurant and its entire staff of opinionated characters (again, no laugh
track), and ''Wiseguy,'' by far the flashiest of the new action shows, this one
starring Ken Wahl as a tough Federal lawman working undercover to infiltrate
various criminal rackets.

As for the series brought on line by Fox Broadcasting, still in the early stages
of trying to create a fourth commercial network, only ''The Tracey Ullman
Show,'' starring the energetic British entertainer of a thousand guises and
voices, displays a consistent ability to be inventive.

Elsewhere on the network schedules, movies and specials, though inevitably
packed with commercial breaks, succeeded in several instances. NBC's
''Nutcracker: Money, Murder and Madness,'' still another TV version of the
Frances Schreuder story (CBS got there earlier but not as powerfully with ''At
Mother's Request''), afforded Lee Remick the opportunity to give the best female
performance of the year as a woman convicted of persuading her sons to kill her
wealthy father.

Also for the based-on-fact ledger, CBS posted two outstanding entries: ''Murder
Ordained,'' starring Keith Carradine, JoBeth Williams and Terry Kinney in the
story of a murderous minister, tautly directed by Mike Robe, and ''Echoes in the
Darkness,'' Joseph Wambaugh's painstaking re-creation of what came to be known
as Philadelphia's ''Main Line'' murder case, a Gothic tale of almost
unbelievable deception and horror.

And then, also on CBS, the venerable ''Hallmark Hall of Fame'' underwent some
welcome rejuvenation with splendid adapations of two stage plays: ''Pack of
Lies,'' by Hugh Whitemore (whose drama ''Breaking the Code'' is now playing on
Broadway), and ''Foxfire,'' by Hume Cronyn and Susan Cooper, topped with a
luminous performance by Jessica Tandy. Both presentations posted strong ratings.

Limping along for still another year with no workable solution to its budget
problems in sight, the public-TV system was able to produce a few shows of
exceptional note. Two were excellent tapings of stage productions performed
before live audiences: ''Dialogues of the Carmelites'' on ''Live From the Met,''
and ''House of Blue Leaves'' on ''American Playhouse.'' The ''Wonderworks''
series for young audiences offered a sensitive adaptation, directed by Calvin
Skaggs, of Katherine Ann Porter's ''Fig Tree.'' And WNET's ''Jazz Tonight''
series presented, among other fine pieces, Carlos Ortiz's documentary ''A Latin
Jazz Legacy,'' a biography of the great Cuban musician Frank Grillo, better
known as Machito.

But the showpieces of the public system's schedule continued to come from
abroad, mostly from England. Consider this trio on ''Great Performances'':
''Monsieur Quixote,'' a modern reworking of the Cervantes tale, with Alec
Guinness having a grand old time as the knight errant, now a simple village
priest, and Leo McKern as his Sancho Panza, now the Communist mayor; ''December
Flower,'' directed by Stephen Frears (''My Beautiful Laundrette'') and offering
a touching portrait of an aging woman (Jean Simmons) and her strange, elderly
aunt (Mona Washbourne), and ''Quartermaine's Terms,'' Simon Gray's play done to
perfection by a cast headed by John Gielgud and Edward Fox.

While Mobil's ''Masterpiece Theater'' was having a generally lackluster year,
except for the current ''Sorrell and Son,'' Mobil's ''Mystery!'' was suddenly in
vintage territory with such first-rate adaptations as the Dorothy L. Sayers
trilogy in which Lord Peter Wimsey meets and woos the reluctant Harriet Vane,
depicted with awesome assurance by Edward Petherbridge and Harriet Walter, and
Agatha Christie's delicious Miss Marple stories, bringing back once again the
definitive portrayal by octogenarian Joan Hickson in the title role.

Among other choice morsels: ''Yosser's Story,'' on WNET's ''Channel Crossings,''
providing a bitter drama about unemployment in the north of Margaret Thatcher's
England, and ''Buster Keaton: A Hard Act to Follow,'' a three-part documentary
by Kevin Brownlow and David Gill, the team also responsible for ''The Unknown
Chaplin.''

Over on basic cable, imports also account for the bulk of quality to be found on
the Arts & Entertainment Network, something of a commercial alternative to
public television. Some A&E highlights, all from England: the documentary
''Chasing a Rainbow,'' a biography of the legendary entertainer Josephine Baker;
''The Life & Loves of a She-Devil,'' a dramatization of the Fay Weldon novel,
with an extraordinary performance by Julie T. Wallace in the title role; ''The
Search for the Double Helix,'' making the true story behind the discovery of DNA
not only fascinating but understandable, and ''Blunt,'' with Ian Richardson and
Anthony Hopkins being positively riveting as the British spies Anthony Blunt and
Guy Burgess.

On cable's pay services, the in-house movies showed encouraging signs of
maturing into something other than second-rate copies of what was already being
exploited in theatrical releases. Home Box Office, for instance, had
''Mandela,'' a sympathetic biography of the jailed South African leader, and
''Long Gone,'' a sometimes touching, often uproarious saga of a bush-league
baseball team. Neither project was likely to be touched by a major Hollywood
studio looking to box-office receipts; both productions made substantial
additions to the HBO schedule.

Taking a cue from the feature films ''Platoon'' and ''Full Metal Jacket,'' HBO's
three one-acters entitled ''Vietnam War Story'' turned out to be far more
incisive than the new CBS series ''Tour of Duty.'' And HBO's ''Intimate
Contact,'' made in England and featuring still another superb performance from
Claire Bloom, was far more graphic and enlightening about the subject of AIDS
than anything offered on the commercial networks.

Other pay-cable winners: Gary Shandling on Showtime, finding the ideal sitcom
vehicle for his comic talents, and ''Elvis '56'' on Cinemax, which traced a
single year in the life of superstar Presley, was brilliantly pieced together by
the documentarians Alan and Susan Raymond. And impressive gains continued to be
registered in the presentation of stand-up comedians (from Roseanne Barr on HBO
to Louie Anderson on Showtime to Ann Magnuson on Cinemax) and in music specials
(''Paul Simon's 'Graceland,' '' on Showtime, ''A Blues Session'' on Cinemax and
''Cyndi Lauper in Paris'' on HBO).

Clearly, the cable picture is getting brighter. A distinctive personality is
evolving. The commercial networks certainly have good reason to be downright
uneasy about the future. But, all options considered, viewers are likely to come
out on top.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Lee Remick in ''Nutcracker: Money, Madness, Murder''; John
Ritter in ''Hooperman''; Claire Bloom in ''Intimate Contact''; Ron Perlman in
''Beauty and the Beast'' (Tony Esparza) (pg. 31); Alec Guinness and Leo McKern
in ''Monsieur Quixote'' (pg. 32)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

When the World's Growth Slows

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2731 words

DATELINE: PARIS


WORLD economic growth has been shrinking and shrinking, but so gradually - and
so inexorably - that economists have grown accustomed to the numbers. Yet a
stark tale emerges when those numbers are added together year after year and
their impact is examined.

There is an academic ring to the words ''slower international economic growth.''
But translated into human terms, these words lose their textbook abstraction.
They mean longer unemployment lines from the north of England to northern Ohio
and fewer opportunities for 16-year-olds from Pasadena to Paris. In the
developing world, they mean something even more painful: malnourished children,
ramshackle housing, high rates of infant mortality. Together, they weave a quilt
of many interconnecting colors, and that is the only way they can be looked at:
Economists have long recognized that slower world growth hurts everyone, from
the richest nations to the poorest and that all are bound together.

The numbers are telling: In the 1950's and 1960's, the global economy grew by
about 5 percent a year, sending living standards galloping forward in much of
the world. In the 1970's, growth fell to slightly above 3 percent, and in the
80's it has slipped to about 2.3 percent. The outlook for the next few years is
for a continued slide.

The slowdown is having serious effects on expectations and living standards in
much of the world. For the average American worker, the slowdown in growth has
meant that real income has not risen since 1973. In Europe, growth has been so
slow that the jobless rate has soared to over 11 percent. For the debt-plagued
nations of Africa and South America, this slowing trend has pushed per capita
income 15 percent below the levels of 1980.

Yet, as 1988 dawns, many economists believe the world faces a rare opportunity
in economic history. For the first time, they say, the leading industrial
nations might have the power to reverse the slowdown, mainly because of an
unusual confluence of circumstances. Inflation and budget deficits have been
tamed in many nations. Corporate profits are healthy and interest rates are
lower than they were a few months ago. Several important technological
breakthroughs, such as fiber optics and superconductors, are waiting to be
spread through the world; big technological advances often push growth by
creating new opportunities and jobs.

''The conditions for going back to 3 to 4 percent growth in the world economy
are actually better now than they have been at any time since the 1960's,'' said
Stephen Marris, senior economist with the Institute for International Economics
in Washington.

YET if the leading industrial nations fail to work together to help reduce trade
imbalances and push growth upward, some economists warn of serious trouble
ahead. The world's fragile financial markets could take another deep plunge,
they say, dragging down the world economy. If growth rates continue sliding, the
trend could usher in an era of downward mobility, forcing people to work harder
just to stay in the same place economically. If economic growth falls below the
1 percent population growth in much of the industrial world, people will have to
struggle to keep their living standards from falling.

Such an era of frustrated expectations could heighten tensions in the industrial
world and political instability in the third world. In developing countries, it
could exacerbate an already grave situation: As per capita income declines,
poverty increases from one year to the next.

''This slowdown makes it particularly difficult for the really poor countries to
grow,'' said Angus Maddison, author of several books on world growth rates and
professor of economics at the University of Groningen in the Netherlands.
''Their growth is intertwined with the industrial world. They should be catching
up to us and growing faster, but they are having problems because our growth has
slowed.''

TECHNICALLY, growth is defined as the increased output in a nation's goods and
services, covering everything from housing to hospital care. Many factors - from
technology to economic policies - can help growth, or hinder it. Just as it
seemed natural that growth would take off after World War II, as consumer demand
was unleashed and economies were rebuilt, it also seemed inevitable that growth
would fall from those heady levels.

But in recent years, other, more political factors have contributed to the
further slowdown. Today, some economists argue that a few nations - particularly
West Germany - have been overzealous in their fight against inflation, and that,
in the process, they have sacrificed global economic growth.

Many economists are clearly chagrined that leaders of the industrial world do
not seem terribly alarmed about the slowdown. ''The most dangerous thing is the
gradual acceptance that if all we have is 2 percent growth, that's O.K., without
thinking that for many people real earnings will remain basically unchanged
throughout their lifetimes,'' said Jean Baneth, director of the World Bank's
international economics department. ''That will be very different from the
societies we built in the 1950's and 1960's, where there were expectations of
improvement.''

Although some economists say the 25-year period after World War II was
extraordinary because growth levels far exceeded historic norms, they say there
is no reason why growth rates in the 1990's cannot move closer to levels of the
1960's.

Getting there from here will not be easy, however. In the last five years, a
stubborn third world debt crisis has slowed growth in both developing and
industrial nations. The United States, once an all-powerful locomotive that
pulled weaker economies along with it, has been plagued by huge trade and budget
deficits that it seems unwilling to reduce as fast as the rest of the world
would like. And West Germany, Europe's most powerful economy, is so nervous
about increasing inflation that it does not want to stimulate its economy nearly
as much as other nations want.

In recent years, many governments tried to fight inflation at the expense of
growth. Now, economists say, they must shift gears and focus more on promoting
growth - using policy vehicles that could range from more government spending to
investment incentives - while keeping inflation under control.

The huge trade imbalances, which have roiled stock and foreign exchange markets
since mid-October, must be cut before the world can move into a smoother - and
faster - growth period.

MANY economists say that unless stronger steps are taken to slash America's
$155-billion trade deficit and Japan's and West Germany's huge trade surpluses,
markets will remain unstable and interest rates will rise. That could lead to a
sharp economic downturn, making it hard for growth in the 1990's to outpace
growth in the 1980's.

''What is holding us back from achieving faster growth,'' Mr. Marris said, ''is
we have to correct this incredible disequilibrium, and it will be very difficult
to do that while avoiding a recession.''

Mr. Marris was one of 33 prominent economists from 13 countries who signed a
statement earlier this month calling on Washington, Bonn and Tokyo to take more
decisive actions to reduce trade imbalances. The economists said Washington
should try to cut domestic demand and imports further, and must go beyond its
recent deficit reductions. It must, they say, cut its $150 billion deficit by an
additional $40 billion a year for several years.

The economists also urged West Germany to raise imports and accelerate and
expand tax cuts scheduled for 1990. And they urged Japan to push domestic demand
growth above 4 percent a year.

Although most economists agree on what these three nations must do, they say
improved world economic growth could become a hostage to domestic political
constraints. Bonn and, to a lesser degree, Tokyo, fret that greater stimulus
will mean increased inflation and angry voters. In an election year, Washington
worries about how voters will react to higher taxes or more budget cuts.

''Coordination means each would have to do what's good for the world economy,
but they don't want to do it,'' said Lester Thurow, an economist and dean of the
Sloan School of Management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

The oil shock of 1973 is often called the turning point when world economic
growth started to slow. But other forces were already at work.

Consumer demand was explosive after World War II. In North America, Europe and
Japan, families rushed to buy homes, cars and televisions, helping to create a
golden era of sustained growth. Europe's economy forged ahead as it rebuilt. And
Europe and Japan bounded ahead as they adopted many of the advanced technologies
that the United States had monopolized. This meant huge investments as well as
great strides in productivity and growth.

Simultaneously, major tariff reductions, brought about by successive rounds of
multilateral negotiations, produced a trade boom that was a catalyst for growth.
By the early 1970's, however, the factors that fostered strong growth were
largely played out.

Then came 1973. OPEC nations quadrupled the price of oil, and the oil shock cut
into purchasing power, hit corporate profits and created a wave of uncertainty
that slowed investment. It also produced a recession in the United States and
the first post-war recession in Europe.

''That created a globalization of economic problems,'' said Rudiger Pohl,
professor of economics at Hagen University in Germany.

About the same time, the world was rocked by another economic shock: the
decision to abandon fixed exchange rates in favor of floating ones. Many
economists said companies began hesitating before they invested, even when
demand and profits were strong, because they feared future exchange rate
fluctuations.

Many conservative economists - and even some liberal ones - say the development
of the so-called welfare state in many industrialized nations also placed a
brake on growth. Productivity growth and investment were discouraged, they say,
by the increase in regulations on industry as well as higher taxes that
supported more generous social programs.

Higher taxes, higher inflation, greater uncertainty from oil shocks and exchange
rate volatility all contributed to a declining rate of investment. Business
investment had long served as a powerful flywheel that kept growth humming even
when consumer spending slowed. Sluggish investment reduced the flywheel effect,
cutting growth and raising the volatility of the world economy. That provided
another disincentive to investment, which hurt productivity growth. Rising
productivity is vital because it allows for faster economic growth without
inflation.

DURING the 1970's, governments began an about-face, trying to slow growth in
order to stamp out inflation.

Then came the 1979 oil shock. Creeping inflation began galloping; fighting it
became a priority worldwide. Governments slammed the brakes on growth - in ways
that ranged from curbing spending to raising interest rates.

''In the 1960's, governments were willing to push against capacity more than
they are today, and there was a kind of optimism about the inflationary
consequences, a feeling that inflation could be limited or that it could be
lived with,'' said Georges de Menil, an economics professor at Paris's Ecole des
Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales. ''That feeling has changed profoundly
throughout the industrial world. That is one reason why growth is not faster
than it is today.''

But according to Professor de Menil, today's slower growth - provided growth
continues - might be smarter that the go-go growth of yesteryear because it is
less inflationary and therefore more sustainable.

Nevertheless, many economists see several underlying problems with the
slow-growth, anti-inflation approach. In particular, they say, the fight against
inflation is causing economic growth to fall short of its potential. ''There
have been restrictive fiscal policies in many countries, especially Germany,''
said Professor Pohl. ''That has made global demand weak, and that has been one
of the causes of the growth slowdown over the past five years.''

In the 1960's, the United States, Japan, France and many nations embraced
policies to keep demand strong. In the United States, the Vietnam War
contributed to big spending at the same time that the nation was spending
heavily on social programs.

Now many countries - especially West Germany - seem to be trying to keep demand
modest to help hold down inflation. For many governments, the emphasis has been
on the supply side - reducing regulations, taming unions, lowering taxes - in
order to encourage investment. Some economists say that even with supply side
stimulus, companies still may not feel enough incentive to invest because they
do not expect much growth in demand.

''There is a vicious cycle,'' said Mr. Baneth of the World Bank. ''Business does
not have confidence in long-term growth, and because of their lack of
confidence, they're not creating the capacity which would allow long-term growth
in a stable, non-inflationary environment.''

Professor Maddison, who used to be one of the top economists at the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, said conditions were right for pushing
the world economy to perform closer to what he says is its growth potential of 4
percent a year.

''One thing is clear: The world economic situation is much less inflationary now
that it had been,'' he said. ''The time is ripe to experiment with more active
demand management.''

Another problem that many economists see with the anti-inflation fight is that
Europe and Japan have taken one approach and the United States took another.
After the 1979 oil shock, Europe and Japan adopted policies of fiscal
consolidation, slashing budget deficits and cutting the ratio of their budgets
to their gross national product. Meanwhile, in Washington, the Federal Reserve
Board jacked up interest rates to help whip inflation and the Reagan
Administration pushed through huge tax cuts that produced gargantuan budget
deficits.

Taken together, these disparate approaches sent the dollar soaring and generated
a huge American trade deficit and enormous German and Japanese trade surpluses.

''These policy mess-ups create much more skepticism about the power of
government to do anything good about the economy and about long-term growth in
demand,'' said Andrea Baltho, an Oxford University economist who has written
extensively on world growth.

Many economists say that reconciling the disparate approaches to fighting
inflation, thereby reducing trade imbalances, would help lead to faster growth.
Resolving the third world debt crisis would also be a boon to growth, they say.

''Brazil, Argentina, a lot of these countries used to be very dynamic
economies,'' said Richard Portes, director of the Center for Economic Policy
Research in London. ''But because everyone is worried about having to bail out a
few banks, we have not yet taken the bold steps needed to bring the less
developed countries back to being dynamic contributors to world growth.''

EFFORTS to correct all these problems - to pave the way for faster growth - have
been made harder by another pronounced change in the world economy: the decline
of the United States as the world's premier economic power. This has been caused
by many factors: the economic rise of Japan and the Pacific Rim, America's huge
borrowings, the once-strong dollar's damage to America's manufacturing base, and
the increasing ease of transfering manufacturing technology from industrial
countries to developing ones.

The end of American hegemony means Washington can no longer singlehandly correct
the world's economic ills. ''After World War II, the U.S. had 50 percent of the
world G.N.P. and could play locomotive for the world whenever growth slowed,''
said M.I.T.'s Dean Thurow. ''Now the U.S. is down to 23 percent of world G.N.P.
and can't play locomotive.''

As a result, there is a greater need for the three leading industrial powers -
United States, Japan and Germany - to work together to furnish the leadership
that Washington once provided. But how likely is that?

''Coordination,'' Dean Thurow said, ''is very easy to say, very easy to praise,
but very difficult to do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings ; charts of the average annual rate of change for gross
products or gross domestic products for all O.E.C.D. countries; periods '60-'68,
'68-'73, '73-79, '79-85, '86, '87*, '88*, '89* (*projection) (Source: O.E.C.D.)
(pg. 1); average annual rates of change for gross domestic products, for U.S.,
Japan, West Germany, France, Britain; for 1960-68, 1968-73, 1973-79, 1979-85
(Source: O.E.C.D.) (pg. 24)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN JUDGES MUST KNOW MORE THAN LAW

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words


AFTER a four-year jury trial, probably the longest in United States history, a
court in Belleville, Ill., decided in October that 65 citizens of a small
Missouri town had not been harmed when a chemical used as a wood preservative
was spilled in a 1979 railroad accident. Nevertheless, the jurors awarded the
plaintiffs $16 million in punitive damages against the manufacturer, the
Monsanto Company, for not ridding its product of dioxin, a potentially dangerous
contaminant, and failing to warn the public about it. By the time this seemingly
contradictory verdict was rendered, $22 million in legal costs had been
consumed. Why did it take so long and cost so much to reach the decision? Are
the courts competent to handle complex scientific matters?

The Belleville jury reached what is generally regarded as a scientifically
plausible decision. In another recent case, however, Wells v. Ortho, Judge
Marvin Shoob of the United States District Court in Atlanta decided that a
contraceptive jelly was responsible for a child's birth defects. Scientists
generally agree that the contraceptive jellies now on the market do not cause
birth defects. Yet the Federal appeals court declined to review the case, as did
the United States Supreme Court. As an editorial in The New England Journal of
Medicine observed, these decisions ''are of great concern to the medical
community because they indicate that the courts will not be bound by reasonable
scientific standards of proof.''

When technical disputes make the legal system creak and groan, the suggestion is
sometimes made that special scientific courts be established or that judges
become more learned in science. ''The time may have arrived when specialized
judges with scientific training are a necessity,'' Daniel E. Koshland Jr., the
editor of Science, wrote earlier this year. ''We are living in an increasingly
technological society, and increasing numbers of lawsuits involve matters in
which a rudimentary knowledge of science is essential.''

But other critics of the judicial system believe that the problem lies less with
the numeracy of the judges than with their ability to make effective use of the
expert witnesses hired by each side. It used to be that these witnesses had to
prove to the court that their expertise was recognized by their peers. But in
l974 the Federal rules of evidence were relaxed to let almost anyone appear as
an expert witness. Since juries often find it hard to distinguish the real
experts from the unqualified ones, an enormous burden falls on judges to make
the distinction.

They perform the task with uneven success. In the contraceptive case, Judge
Shoob, sitting without a jury, carefully evaluated the credibility of the expert
witnesses on each side and discounted some of them because they had conflicts of
interest. But he ultimately made a decision repudiated by the scientific
consensus. In the Belleville case, Monsanto said it believed that the trial took
so long because the judge allowed too much extraneous material to be heard. The
judge, Richard P. Goldenhersh, blamed delaying tactics by the defendant's
attorneys.

Another cause of judicial inefficiency is the cumbersome dynamics of the tort
system. Personal injury lawyers work for a contingency fee, taking their share
of any damages. While that is the only way many plaintiffs can afford a day in
court, the possibility of huge awards raises the stakes for both sides and makes
cases drag out longer.

Balancing Empathy and Reason

In instances of personal injury, attorneys know that a jury's heart will often
go out to a victim, however weak the evidence. Lawyers recently began to win
damages against the maker of Bendectin, a morning-sickness drug alleged to cause
birth defects, even though the Food and Drug Administration considers it safe.
Merrell Dow quit producing the drug and put up $120 million to settle an
avalanche of cases. But some of the plaintiff's attorneys wanted even more and
went back to court. They lost, but only because the judge asked the jury to
decide first if Bendectin caused congenital deformities and, if so, what the
damages should be. The jury concluded that Bendectin does not produce birth
defects.

Still, confronted with the need to evaluate scientific evidence, juries and
judges often reach decisions that seem perplexing. In a suit brought against
seven chemical companies that made Agent Orange, Vietnam veterans claimed that
they had been exposed to the herbicide's dioxin impurity and, many years later,
developed cancer and passed along birth defects. In 1984, Judge Jack Weinstein
of the United States District Court in Brooklyn persuaded the companies to buy
themselves out of protracted litigation with a $180 million settlement.

When the veterans' lawyers, about 1,000 strong, filed to claim $40 million for
themselves, the judge slashed their fees to $9 million, asserting that they had
failed to prove Agent Orange's culpability. Yet he ordered the settlement to be
distributed anyway. The decision benefited the veterans and, ultimately, the
chemical companies. Many legal experts said it was probably the best compromise
the present system would allow, yet it - like the Belleville case - defied a
premise of tort law, that compensation for injury be based on proof of
causation.

That such problems could be avoided by having scientific panels review evidence
for the courts has often been suggested but without result, said Robert T.
Berendt, a lawyer for Monsanto. ''There's no question that these are difficult
issues,'' he said, ''but they could be better managed with more judicial
involvement in making evidence understandable to a jury, and by requiring proper
qualifications before experts could testify.''

''Judges must be much more aggressive in evaluating testimony,'' said Kenneth
Feinberg, the special master assigned by the court in the Agent Orange case.
''If not, the result is injustice because any expert can get on the stand and
make a case.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Who's Really to Blame for Dull Textbooks?

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 321 words


To the Editor:

As a historian, I agree with Jack Valenti's charge that history textbooks are
dull (''About Historians Who Can't Write,'' Op-Ed, Dec. 11). This is
particularly true of those used in junior and high schools.

However, Mr. Valenti misunderstands the reason for these ''drizzly history
texts.'' His charge that historians can't write is false. More to the point,
authors of these texts are not allowed to write stimulating, intriguing books
for teen-age students.

Take, for example, the Vietnam War: no matter how one feels about the episode,
it clearly is one of the most interesting events in American history. Yet, a
survey of high school texts used in Texas demonstrated that not one mentioned
that it might have been considered a civil war, that the United States used
Agent Orange and bombed nonmilitary targets, that our ally South Vietnam
collapsed and that America lost the war. One popular text did not even mention
the 10-year war. And Americans talk about Russians rewriting history.

Are these deletions in texts because historians don't know about Vietnam?
Hardly; they have written a library of stimulating books on the conflict. The
reason for neglecting the topic - and the reason for dull texts - is the same:
parents.

Parents want conservative values, family values (or whatever one calls
censorship) taught in high school. They place pressure on wimpy school board
members, who order books for their district or have a say at the statehouse.
Publishers want to make money and order editors to take out the blue pencil.
Anything ''controversial'' is scratched. The result is so dull, so homogenized,
that kids sleep through chapters on Camelot.

Sorry, Mr. Valenti, historians can write. It is the parents of teen-agers,
however, who are afraid of what we might say.

TERRY ANDERSON
Associate Professor of History
Texas A. & M. University, College Station, Tex., Dec. 11, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI ARMY TOLD OF CAMBODIA PERIL

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 355 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 19


A Vietnamese military officer writing in an army journal has acknowledged that
Hanoi's soldiers are waging ''fierce and complicated'' psychological battles in
Cambodia.

''The enemy's psychological warfare has intensively poisoned the Cambodian
people, cadres and troops,'' Col. Nguyen Huu Dinh wrote in a recent issue of the
army journal, Tap Chi Quan Doi Nhan Dan. ''The poison has caused definite
harm.''

Colonel Dinh described what he called a ''sophisticated and insidious'' campaign
to undermine the Government and the military by three guerrilla groups.

The guerrilla groups are the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, the army
of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the Pol Pot faction of the Cambodian Communist
movement, the Khmer Rouge.

Diplomats estimate that Vietnam has about 140,000 soldiers in Cambodia.

Colonel Dinh's article expresses implicit concern about the weakness of Phnom
Penh's forces in the face of nationalist propaganda and subversion, suggesting
that they were more vulnerable than either Phnom Penh or Hanoi has been willing
to acknowledge.

'Defame Our Country'

The article asserted that psychological warfare in Cambodia was aimed at
splitting the alliance between Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos, and particularly the
''militant solidarity'' between the Cambodian and Vietnamese forces.

The article accused the guerrillas of making ''every effort to conduct
slanderous propaganda against Vietnam, to distort facts and defame our country''
by contending that Vietnam wanted to assimilate Cambodia and Laos and plunder
Cambodia's resources.

The article said that the guerrillas were working to subvert local military and
police forces loyal to the Phnom Penh government. ''They have used money and
gold as bribes to plant their men to work as drivers, logistical personnel,
messengers, typists and so forth,'' it said. ''Taking advantage of the
negligence of our friends, they have used money to buy identity papers for
infiltrating their men into various training schools. They have persuaded the
soldiers of our friends to desert their units for home or to defect to the
enemy's side.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Singapore Curbs Asia News Weekly

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 27


The Government of Singapore this weekend restricted the circulation of one of
Asia's most influential publications, the weekly Far Eastern Economic Review.

The Government of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew said Saturday that the magazine
''had consistently published distorted articles on Singapore.''

Beginning Tuesday, the English-language Review, a general Asian news magazine
published in Hong Kong, will be allowed to sell only 500 copies in Singapore,
where its circulation was reported to have been about 10,000.

The move follows other efforts in Southeast Asia to restrict the press.
Malaysia, which closed four newspapers in October, recently tightened its press
laws to give the Government almost total control of the printed and electronic
press.

Visa Problems for Journalists

Indonesia, which also closed several publications over the last year, regularly
censors or withholds foreign publications. In Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore,
visas for foreign journalists are often withheld or denied.

Among the free-market Southeast Asian nations, only Thailand and the Philippines
allow a free press. There are no independent publications in Vietnam, Laos,
Cambodia or Burma.

Because English is the working language of Southeast Asia, foreign publications
are widely read in the non-Communist countries. Where newspapers are tightly
controlled, these foreign publications often serve as sources of independently
reported local news, and this brings them into conflict with governments.

The restrictions on the Review were apparently ordered because of a disagreement
between the Government and the magazine over recent reports about some of the
key figures in what the Government calls a Marxist plot uncovered last spring.
The Government says the magazine was reporting unsubstantiated accusations from
a priest who fled Singapore for Australia in June after the detentions of
advocates of social change.

The magazine's editor, Derek Davies, has answered the Government charges
publicly in print, saying that the Review is committed to publishing all sides
of the dispute.

The Government has also withheld the granting of a visa to a Review
correspondent for nearly eight months.

The restriction against the Review follows similar moves over the last year by
Singapore against Time magazine, The Asian Wall Street Journal and Asiaweek
magazine, under a September 1986 amendment to the Newspaper and Printing Presses
Act. The amendment permits the Government to punish a publication by cutting its
revenue and visibility if it was deemed to have interfered in domestic affairs
with ''slanted reporting.'' The restriction order on Time was subsequently
lifted.

A Government publication said last year that the amendment was intended ''to
prevent them from manipulating public opinion on local issues for financial
gains.''

Press Group Criticizes Curbs

In June, a delegation of the World Press Freedom Committee visited Singapore to
discuss the restrictions with the Government. A statement on behalf of
journalists from 40 countries said:

''Singapore's image as a dynamic nation with impressive economic growth and a
highly literate population is sadly tarnished by a curbing of the circulation of
publications with whose exercise of editorial prerogatives the Government
disagrees.''

Government spokesmen insist Singapore is not restricting the free flow of ideas
and point out that 3,700 foreign publications circulate freely in Singapore.
Several international publications have regional printing plants there,
including The Economist and The International Herald Tribune.

But at the same time, Singapore does not ''aim to approximate U.S. practice as
an ideal,'' Lee Hsien Loong, Trade Minister and the son of Prime Minister Lee
told newspaper publishers at a conference in Helsinki in May.

''We are the best judges of our own interests and needs,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Foes of Contra Aid Are Grasping at Straws

BYLINE: By Robert S. Leiken; Robert S. Leiken, editor of two books on Central
America, is a visiting scholar at Harvard University.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 886 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


The dramatic disclosures by the Sandinista Defense Minister, Humberto Ortega
Saavedra, and by Maj. Roger Miranda Bengoechea, the Sandinista defector, have
opponents of aid to the contras grasping at straws.

General Ortega himself impulsively confirmed Major Miranda's testimony to
reporters and others in Washington that the Sandinistas plan to build up their
army to 600,000, have an agreement with Moscow to obtain advanced aircraft and
are training Salvadoran guerrillas to operate ground-to-air missiles.

That set sympathizers printing out excuses faster than usual and about as
plausibly as the hilarious pathological liar on ''Saturday Night Live.''

''It's not a protocol with the Soviets,'' goes one apologist response, ''just a
Sandinista wish list.'' Yeah, that's it - it was their ''Christmas list.''

I interviewed Major Miranda alone for two and a half hours. According to Major
Miranda, who was once General Ortega's right-hand man, the ''wish list'' was
drawn up in Managua in September by a high-level Soviet, Cuban and Nicaraguan
working group, just as were previous protocols negotiated by this tripartite
commission. Major Miranda, who until October sat on the Sandinista Party's
90-man Central Committee, says that the protocol's signing in Moscow early next
year was a foregone conclusion.

''The Sandinistas didn't really mean it,'' runs another argument. ''It's just a
contingency plan, a worst-case scenario if the contras get aid.''

But the Sandinista military plan Major Miranda brought with him assumes an
imminent cutoff of American aid and the contras' ''total defeat during the
period 1988-90.'' Both of these assumptions may, of course, prove optimistic.
Major Miranda's disclosures have shortened the odds against the resumption of
aid, and the rebels themselves have just culminated their best year with a
coordinated surprise attack against Sandinista military installations.

Nonetheless, most of the projected Sandinista military buildup, including the
acquisition of MIG-21 aircraft, is programmed for after the defeat of the
contras. And while they were conspiring with the Russians and Cubans, the
Sandinistas were also colluding with the Panamanian strongman, Gen. Manuel
Antonio Noriega, to transfer arms to the Salvadoran rebels.

Moreover, the protocol with the Kremlin was negotiated after the Central
American presidents signed the peace plan put forth by Costa Rica's President,
Oscar Arias Sanchez, in Guatemala last August. It is also in obvious conflict
with the four-nation Contadora draft treaty for mutual arms reduction, and
President Arias has declared that it is a ''clear breach'' of the spirit of his
plan.

Far from a ''contingency plan,'' the protocol would only deepen a military
relationship with Moscow that began two months after the Sandinista revolution
when five Soviet generals covertly visited Managua.

This is not the first time General Ortega has been embarrassed on the subject of
the Sandinistas' relationship with Moscow. In 1981, his speech stipulating that
''Marxism-Leninism . . . guides our revolution'' and that Nicaragua is part of
''the socialist camp, with the Soviet Union in the vanguard'' was leaked in West
Germany. Like the Government documents recovered after the United States
invasion of Grenada, documents that revealed a relationship between Grenada and
the Soviet Union, the documents Major Miranda brought envision a long-term
Soviet economic, military and political role in Nicaragua.

''They're paranoid,'' goes another apology. ''They're defensive.'' Yeah, that's
the ticket - they're building a defensive army.

True, only right-wing crackpots believe the Sandinistas would be stupid enough
to send occupying armies to neighboring countries right under Washington's nose.
But Major Miranda told me the Sandinistas have a ''dialectical'' conception of
their military buildup. He says that in the long term they are unshakably
committed to a ''Soviet Central America,'' the slogan on Sandinista internal
documents since the 1960's. Their strategy today is modest: to assist guerrillas
mainly by training and arms transfers. But once the contras lose, they plan to
upgrade their support. Major Miranda says the Sandinistas believe their
activities eventually will provoke a reaction in the United States. However, by
then they will have built a formidable ''defensive'' army that antiwar activists
can cite to avert ''another Vietnam.''

Major Miranda added that the Sandinistas hoped to turn Central American
governments against the United States and are also prepared to bomb targets in
unarmed Costa Rica and to take American hostages.

Not to worry, General Secretary Mikhail S. Gorbachev told President Reagan in
the Rose Garden. He'd stop sending arms to the Sandinistas. Yeah, that's the
answer: ''Let Gorby do it.'' But Major Miranda told me: ''Gorbachev had to know
about these plans when he was here. The Soviet chief of military mission in
Nicaragua would not agree to deliver MIG-21's without his knowledge.''

Under Mr. Gorbachev, the Soviet Union has downplayed its verbal support for
radical governments, even as it escalates material support for them. It would be
foolish not to pursue talks with the Russians about Nicaragua. But it would be
even more foolish to base policy on this slender straw.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 97 words


Surgery Preserves Potency
A new technique for surgery in prostate cancer that does not sever certain
nerves is moving into widespread use as doctors find it can often avoid
impotence. Page C3.

Good News for Gary Hart
His Presidential campaign was declared eligible to receive Federal matching
funds, with the first installment expected next week. Page A17.

Hanoi's Economic Policy
Vietnam has announced an economic policy that in effect abandons centralized
planning in favor of managerial decision-making at the factory level in state
enterprises. Page A4.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Loosens Central Economic Reins

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 28


Vietnam has announced a sweeping domestic economic policy that in effect
abandons centralized planning in favor of managerial decision-making at the
factory level in state enterprises.

Vietnamese press and radio reports say the policy also introduces worker
incentives, quality control, shareholding, an expanded banking industry and wage
scales linked to productivity. It is to take effect Jan. 1.

While some of these concepts have been discussed and occasionally allowed to
operate over the last few years, Vietnamese officials and diplomats say that the
decision is the most comprehensive economic policy change since the unification
of Vietnam in 1975.

''After nearly a decade of exploration of the realities, now a new structure of
management has been formed,'' the Vietnamese Communist Party daily newspaper,
Nhan Dan, said in an editorial Dec. 16. The policy pronouncement, read in
installments on the Government's domestic radio service, has since been collated
and translated for the British Broadcasting Corporation's monitoring service. No
date was given for the decision.

Leader's Grip Seems Tighter

The publication of an economic plan comprehensive enough to include everything
from how to handle capital depreciation to the need for day-care centers in
factories appears to indicate the strengthening of the hand of Vietnam's party
leader, Nguyen Van Linh, who has been in office a year.

Mr. Linh, along with Vo Van Kiet, the Government's chief economic planner and
others in the new hierarchy, have been advocating the ''renovation'' of
Vietnam's economy through the use of unorthodox methods. But there have been few
positive results because, diplomats suggest, the country is devoid of economic
expertise and still subject to intervention, if not sabotage, by hard-line
Marxists.

Earlier this month, when the party's Central Committee met, it heard gloomy
reports of acute problems on economic, social and security fronts. Vietnam, cut
off from Western assistance by its occupation of neighboring Cambodia and
entirely reliant on the Soviet bloc for aid, is among the world's poorest
nations.

Today, Mr. Kiet, who is also a Deputy Prime Minister, told the National Assembly
that Vietnam was losing the battle to feed its growing population. He said the
food available to each person had dropped by 8 percent since 1985, when low
consumption levels of needed nutrients had already begun to cause widespread
malnutrition.

The changes in economic policy reflect similar rethinking in the Soviet Union,
but Vietnamese officials are defensive when asked if Moscow had demanded an end
to the inefficiencies and corruption that have ''squandered'' Soviet aid, by
Hanoi's admission.

Vietnamese say the parallel policy changes are coincidental, and point to
experiments in free-market economics in what was formerly South Vietnam in the
early 1980's, shortly after its conquest by the North. Those experiments -
really extensions of South Vietnam's traditional ways of doing business - were
suppressed by hard-liners in Hanoi led by the party leader, Le Duan, and his
successor, Truong Chinh. Mr. Linh was purged from the Politburo in 1982 for his
support for ''southern'' methods.

Vietnamese see the move now toward decentralization, the end to subsidies and
the beginning of cost accounting, bank financing and other free-market practices
as the product of a confluence of thinking in Moscow and Hanoi.

The Talents of the People

Vietnam, its officials say, still has major problems of underdevelopment to
overcome. But Vietnamese officials and diplomats say they are aware of the
inherent abilities of the people, demonstrated by their economic success as
exiles.

The party daily Dan referred to the need to ''liberate all the potential'' and
to ''create energy'' among the Vietnamese. The new economic code, for example,
will allow Vietnamese workers to go to international trade fairs for ''market
research.''

It will also allow workers to submit ideas for improved production and employers
to hire and dismiss workers free of political pressures.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of workers sorting fish (NYT/Barbara Crossette)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 986 words


International    A2-9


 The dollar plunged to new lows, prompting a statement from the White House that
the Reagan Administration remained opposed to a further drop in the dollar's
value.    Page A1


 Economic analysis: The dollar's fall and the differences in views of what its
proper level should be shows how hard it will be for the industrial nations to
lay to rest the uncertainties in the currency markets.    D17


 Currents in Nicaragua's society appear to have affected the people deeply and
to have made this holiday season heavy with suffering and poverty. The society
is swept by exhaustion, apathy and bitterness.    A1


 News analysis: An embargo on Iran is being moved forward as the United States
and the Soviet Union seem on the verge of wary diplomatic cooperation.    A1


 Israeli leaders are openly upset at the news coverage they have received
abroad, particularly in the United States, during more than two weeks of
Palestinian disturbances in which at least 21 protesters were shot to death by
the army.    A3


 A Palestinian news agency, Palestine Press Services, often breaks stories about
shootings and rioting in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Western and Israeli
reporters rely on it to keep abreast of the story.    A3


 Afghanistan killed 1,603 guerrillas in a battle to reopen the road leading to
the besieged city of Khost, the Soviet-backed Afghan Government said. Insurgents
denied the report, and said Soviet paratroopers were trapped in Khost.    A9


 Angola is moving to free markets. It is part of a wider move toward the West by
a Government that only a few years ago tried to become the first African member
of Comecon, the economic union of the Eastern bloc.    A6


 Corruption in drug industry is focus of Bombay inquiry    A2


 Buenos Aires journal: Tilting at telephones    A4


 Vietnam loosens central economic reins    A4


 South African helicopter seized    A9


National    A10-17, B4, B8


 Raising the speed limit to 65 m.p.h. from 55 on rural roads that meet the
standards of the Interstate highways won Congressional approval. The measure was
attached to the spending bill passed last week.    A1


 A Roman Catholic AIDS policy paper that gave qualified approval to teaching
about condoms has effectively been put on hold. The nation's Catholic bishops
have decided to reopen the issue when they meet next June.    A1


 Women in the 1988 campaigns for President have a range of senior positions.
Many observers describe this as a breakthrough year because of the roles that
the women have assumed.    A1


 An argument among philosophers over the nature of their studies is taking
place. It has sown discord within the ranks of the American Philosophical
Association, a group that is engaged in the task of the foundations of Western
thought.    A1


 A snowstorm over the Midwest left up to a foot of snow, forcing airlines to
cancel flights and sending cars sliding off icy highways. The storm had
staggered the western Plains.    A10


 Bills for drunken-driving suspects for police time and manpower associated with
their arrests will be given out starting next month by the city of San Jose,
Calif., even if the suspects are never found guilty.    A10


 An Eastern Airlines DC-9 cracked its fuselage when it made a hard landing, and
dragged its tail nearly 7,000 feet along a runway, officials said. The jet was
carrying 105 people, 3 of whom were slightly injured.    A10


 Why do people dream? The answer to that question is one of the objectives of
new research on the stage of sleep called REM, for rapid eye movement. The
research is leading scientists to new insights about chemistry of the brain.
C1


 Nevada journal: Farmers settle up on their debts    A10


 Fund established for girl with 5 tranplants    A11


 Killer of Rhode Island boys sought    A12


 7 slain and 4 wounded in Arkansas    A12


 Extension of Louisiana college rights pact at issue    A13


 Hart's campaign eligible for Federal matching funds    A17


Washington Talk    B4


 Strauss becomes the capital's leading wise man
 A new look at religious freedom
Regional    B1-3


 Yonkers must desegregate schools and build subsidized housing to overcome
decades of ''intentional racial segregation,'' a Federal appeals court ruled.
The decision affirmed a lower court's landmark ruling.    A1


 Decision seen as removing obstacle to bias remedy    B2


 1988 will arrive one second late. The world's timekeepers, in order to keep
their official atomic clocks in step with the earth's irregular rotation, have
decreed that a ''leap second'' be inserted between 1987 and 1988.    B1


 The Transit Police headquarters in New York City were broken into over the
weekend, the authorities said. Some members of the department are under
investigation amid allegations they made false arrests.    B3


 A woman convicted in a 1981 robbery of a Brink's armored car in Rockland County
has been transferred from New York to a Federal prison in Arizona because she is
considered an escape risk, officials said.    B1


 One black victim of an assault that the police termed as racially moti-vated
likened the attackers to ''a wolf pack'' intent on hurting or killing their
victims. The attack was by white youths in Brooklyn.    B3


 Children riding all-terrain vehicles have accounted for about half the 883
deaths reported to be related to the vehicles since 1982, officials say. Federal
officials moved last week to regulate the sale of ATV's.    B1


 Stock market collapse jolts prep schools in New York    B1


 Diver rescued off Staten Island    B3



Neediest Cases    B3


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Business and Health;
Rehabilitation In Head Injuries

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 817 words


THANKS to medical-evacuation methods perfected in the Vietnam War and
neurosurgery in specialized hospital trauma centers, tens of thousands of
Americans survive brutal highway and other accidents that would have meant
certain death only a decade ago.

But the human and economic consequences are nonetheless horrendous. At least
70,000 of the injured, most of them young men in their teens and early 20's, are
permanently disabled each year.

To help these people, and thousands of others whose independence can be partly
restored, a fast-growing industry of rehabilitation centers and outpatient
programs is springing up.

''Head injury rehabilitation is probably the fastest-growing niche of the
health-care industry,'' said Jerry Balter, an analyst at Robertson Col man &
Stephens, which has raised capital for some of the companies. ''It is an
industry with enormous growth potential,'' said Carl Sherman, an analyst at
Oppenheimer & Company.

About half the injuries result from automobile accidents, according to the
National Head Injury Foundation, an advocacy group that was started in 1980 by
relatives of some victims.

The damage is particularly heavy during holiday weekends. Last week, 373 people
died on the highways from 6 P.M. Wednesday to midnight Sunday.

Fewer than 10 percent of those classified as seriously injured will return to
''competitive employment,'' according to Dr. D. Nathan Cope of the National
Rehabilitation Hospital in Washington.

The largest rehabilitation companies are New Medico, a privately held Lynn,
Mass., chain, with about 1,000 head injury patients in 15 states; Greenery
Rehabilitation Group Inc., with headquarters in Cambridge, Mass., and nine
facilities; the National Medical Enterprises chain, and Continental Medical
Systems, based in Braintree, Mass.

Total charges may be $400 a day in a rehabilitation center, as against $800 to
$1,200 in a hospital.

Patients are sent from acute-care hospitals, many still in a coma, said Gerard
M. Martin, chief executive of Greenery. ''When they come out of the coma, they
are put on a rehabilitation regimen,'' he added. ''It is a long and arduous task
that may take six months or two or three years.''

Some of the milder cases graduate to ''post-acute rehabilitation,'' according to
Michael Girsham, president of Neurocare Inc., a small privately held company in
California. They live in residences staffed by therapists, and join ''real
world'' programs: Accompanied by a therapist, patients relearn such basics as
taking a bus, going to the bank, cooking and - eventually - working at
undemanding jobs.

Mr. Balter of Robertson Colman estimated that 1987 revenues for the head injury
rehabilitation industry were $750 million to $800 million and might grow to $1
billion in 1988. National Medical Enterprises, which also has acute-care
hospitals and psychiatric facilities, is listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Greenery and Continental are Nasdaq over-the-counter stocks.

Very few insurance policies include an obligation to pay for rehabilitation,
according to Robert E. Anderson of the reinsurance division at the Northwestern
National Life Insurance Company in Minneapolis. Nevertheless, he said, most of
the 50 insurance companies reinsured by Northwestern would agree that ''a
quality head injury program is of value, and they would recommend it.'' William
C. Wallace, medical rehabilitation coordinator for the State Farm Mutual
Automobile Insurance Company in Bloomington, Ill., agreed. ''People who come out
of specialized centers ultimately do better,'' he said. ''We know it is
cost-effective.''

Big money is at stake. Heidi Hansen McCrory, a spokeswoman for the National Head
Injury Foundation, said the lifetime cost in lost potential income and expenses
of caring for a brain-damaged 20-year-old had been estimated at $4 million.

''We are certainly an advocate of head injury rehabilitation, within
parameters,'' Mr. Anderson said. ''We have to look at what is best for the
individual and for the insurance company. A lot of rehab falls outside the
bounds of a normal policy,'' he added. Decisions are based on estimates of
whether an individual will benefit medically.

Federal health programs do not pay for long-term rehabilitation. ''Because of
the cost, they don't want to recognize the needs for long-term-care
rehabilitation of this young, traumatically disabled population,'' said Marilyn
Price Spivack, president of the head injury foundation.

However, the Government does finance studies of the process by which patients
learn to use the remaining, undamaged parts of the brain.

On another front, the foundation seeks to increase public understanding -
especially among prospective employers and fellow workers - of the often-erratic
behavior of the injured. The hope is to help them to resume independent careers,
particularly in small, relatively calm businesses.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1987


SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 732 words




International


The dollar plunged to new lows against major currencies, prompting a strong
statement from the White House that it opposed any further drop in the
currency's value. The pressure on the dollar's value became so intense that the
Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan and other central banks bought dollars to
support the currency, according to traders. Officials admitted that the dollar's
weakness reflects both confusion by traders over the Administration's commitment
to stopping any further decline and the realization that any policy tools the
White House could employ to buttress the dollar are, at best, modest. [Page A1.]
In light trading on the currency markets, the dollar slid to new lows, and gold
rose in New York to $487.75 an ounce, up $1.25. [D14.]

The dollar's slide shows how hard its stabilization will be no matter how
coordinated the policies of the seven trading partners. And huge differences
remain about what the proper level of the American currency should be. [D17.]

Japan approved a budget of $461 billion for 1988 that provides the biggest
spending increase in six years. Senior officials said the overall 4.8 percent
increase was evidence that they were responding to demands from overseas to
stimulate the economy. [D1.]

Angola is shifting to free markets, as part of a wider move toward the West by a
Government that only a few years ago tried to become the first African member of
Comecon, the economic union of the Eastern bloc. [A6.]



Markets


The Dow Jones industrial average plummeted 56.70 points, to 1,942.97, its
biggest decline since Dec. 3, when it fell 72.44 points. Analysts attributed the
drop primarily to the dollar's fall. Broader market indexes also fell sharply.
[D1.]

Note and bond prices declined modestly in light trading, with little
participation by institutional investors or speculators outside the major
securities firms. Analysts said the price changes were not indicative of any
trend among institutional investors but rather were the result of short-term
trading strategies. [D12.]

Cattle futures advanced the 1 1/2-cents-a-pound daily limit before losing part
of their gains. [D14.]



Companies


Santa Fe Southern Pacific accepted a $1.8 billion offer from Rio Grande for its
Southern Pacific railroad. The deal must be approved by the I.C.C., but not by
stockholders, some of whom were very unhappy. Santa Fe had turned away a
competing bid of at least $2 billion from Kansas City Southern and an offer from
its unions to match any other bid. Railroad analysts forecast that the merger
plan would precipitate much litigation, a major proxy fight for control of Santa
Fe and widespread opposition from a number of fronts. Six months ago, the I.C.C.
had ordered the company to sell one of its two major lines. [D1.]

Rorer sweetened its offer for A. H. Robins, the pharmaceutical company with
$2.48 billion in liabilities to thousands of women who claim they were injured
by its Dalkon Shield birth control device. Robins's board received the news as
it met to consider bids from Rorer, American Home Products and Sanofi. [D1.]

First Chicago and Wood Gundy ended their agreement to form a partnership amid
questions about the health of the Canadian investment firm after the October
stock market plunge. [D1.]

Computervision will consider Prime Computer's takeover offer of $390 million.
Computervision's stock jumped on news of the offer, which was made Sunday, and
closed up $4.25, at $13.25. [D4.]

Trustcorp will pay nearly $200 million for Summcorp, a bank holding company in
Fort Wayne, Ind.. Trustcorp is a financial services company based in Toledo,
Ohio. [D4.]

Computer Memories will merge with DIC Animation City, the producer of such
television cartoon shows as ''Alf'' and ''Real Ghostbusters,'' in a $75 million
stock deal. [D4.]



Today's Columns


Medical-evacuation methods perfected in Vietnam and neurosurgery in hospital
trauma centers have helped tens of thousands of Americans survive brutal
accidents. A fast-growing industry is springing up to serve these survivors.
Business and Health. [D2.]

Avon Products has paid a $2 annual dividend since 1983. Most analysts think the
dividend is secure for now, but its safety is like a shadow that keeps lingering
over the stock. Market Place. [D6.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 30, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Nation's Homeless Veterans Battle a New Foe: Defeatism

BYLINE: By TAMAR LEWIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1557 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX


Hundreds of homeless people live in the park behind the sprawling shelter here,
where blue tents line the fence and fires flicker all night in steel drums. Tent
31, where Jay Martin lives, is decorated with a small American flag, an ironic
reminder of Mr. Martin's war service and his failure to find a way into the
mainstream of American life in the 11 years since his return.

Mr. Martin feels betrayed by his country and angry that since the Vietnam War he
has been unable to find a good job or a place to settle down. ''My parents
always told me vets get a preference,'' he told a visitor recently.

One-Quarter of Homeless

Instead, he and hundreds of thousands of other veterans have got a life of
drifting from one shelter to another, sleeping in doorways or under bridges.
From a quarter to a third of the homeless people in most parts of this country
are veterans, according to studies by researchers in nine regions. In a few
cities, including Phoenix and Baltimore, the number is closer to half.

The Veterans Admimistration provides many benefits, including educational
assistance, job training, disability compensation, pensions, readjustment and
job counseling, housing loans, and medical care. But few of the homeless
veterans receive all the benefits they are entitled to.

This year, several advocates for the homeless filed a suit to force the veterans
agency to reach out to homeless veterans. The suit charges that despite the
swelling population of homeless veterans, the agency has no comprehensive
program of reaching out to them and has slashed the number of its benefit
counselors.

Estimates of homeless veterans range from 230,000 to more than 750,000, about
two-thirds of whom served since the beginning of the Vietnam era. Some
sociologists and historians say that since it was mostly the poor and uneducated
who were drafted to fight the Vietnam War, it should come as no surprise that so
many are now on the margins of society.

Veterans are homeless for much the same reasons as others on the streets: a
growing shortage of low-cost housing; less demand for low-skilled jobs; an
increasingly fragmented family structure; drug, alcohol and mental problems, and
the deinstitutionalization of psychiatric patients. Although it is hard to
distinguish the different groups of homeless, experts say that homeless veterans
are older, more likely to be white, and more likely to have psychiatric problems
than other homeless people.

While every war has its casualties, experts say the Vietnam experience created
special problems because of the lack of consensus about the rightness of the
war.

''Vietnam veterans have never been able to resolve the questions that a person
needs to answer to have a healthy psyche, like, 'What did I do that for?' and
'What was the fighting about?' '' said Michael Leaveck, a spokesman for the
Vietnam Veterans of America.

Jeers Instead of Cheers

Then, too, the war left many veterans with alcohol or drug problems, or the
mental illness called post-traumatic stress disorder. According to the Vietnam
Veterans of America, one-third of the homeless veterans have substance abuse
problems and another third have mental or physical disabilities.

Many veterans who seemed to be functioning well overseas developed serious
problems when they came home and confronted jeers instead of the laurels they
felt they deserved. ''I saw the signs saying 'Baby Killer' and a lady at the
airport spit on me,'' said Mr. Martin. ''I don't care whether we won or lost the
war, I was there, I did my part, and I should get something for it.''

Many of the veterans who are now homeless held a series of entry-level jobs in
the 1970's.While many say they were always concerned about their lack of
advancement, they stress that they were able to support themselves in their
first years back.

But with the recession of the early 1980's, even low-paying jobs became hard to
find. Since then, a serious shortage of low-cost housing has pushed thousands of
veterans onto the streets. While minimum-wage jobs are now abundant, the
higher-paying manufacturing jobs many veterans would like have become
increasingly rare.

''Most guys, when they first got out, could get a job, even if it was a job that
wasn't going anywhere,'' said Shelbert Johnson, a Vietnam-era veteran, who lives
and works at the Volunteers of America's shelter in Cleveland. ''But when the
economy got tight, the jobs dried up, and for a guy like me, who doesn't have
vocational training, there's nothing out there anymore. It's my hope against
hope that I can stay here long enough, and establish enough of a track record,
so that I can go to an employer with a real good recommendation, and someone
will take me on.''

''You can't tell the boss you're living in a shelter,'' said Mr. Martin, who has
been everything from a garage man to a bumper-jack maker since his discharge.
Two years ago, he tried to re-enlist, but was rejected as too old.

Angry Aftermaths of Wars

Every war since the American Revolution has left some veterans homeless and
angry. The most famous protest by veterans was the 1932 ''Bonus Army,'' a
Washington encampment of 15,000 World War I veterans. They became such a
political embarrassment that President Hoover ordered tanks, infantry and
cavalry to drive them out. World War II veterans had an easier time of it,
thanks to the G.I. Bill of Rights in 1944.

''By Korea,'' said Marjorie Robertson, who has written about veterans'
homelessness, ''veterans' rights had eroded to some degree, and by Vietnam, the
level of benefits had dropped substantially.''

Many homeless veterans say that the V.A. has treated them badly and made them
feel that only middle-class veterans could be helped.

Complaints of Endless Forms

''I went down to the V.A. when I first got here, and they said if I had an
address and a telephone and a car, they could help me get a job,'' said Charles
Sphar, at the Phoenix shelter. ''I said I didn't have those things, and they
said, 'That's it, we can't help you.' ''

Others complain of filling out endless forms and waiting months to see if aid
will be forthcoming.

The court papers in the pending lawsuit against the V.A. cite a Boston study
showing that less than 20 percent of that city's homeless veterans receive
agency benefits, a Los Angeles study indicating that only 2 percent were
receiving veteran's medical benefits, and surveys of three Washington shelters,
where most of the homeless veterans had neither been reached by agency officials
nor received any benefits.

The V.A., which has moved to dismiss the lawsuit, says that the homeless are a
poor sample by which to measure its efforts.

''These are people who have sifted down to the bottom of the system,'' said
Bonner Day, a spokesman for the agency. ''Everything the V.A. does is to keep
veterans from being homeless. Finding that homeless veterans don't think the
V.A. helped them is like going to a hospital for amputees and finding that
people don't like dancing.'' #20% of Beds Vacant He says no veteran need be
homeless. The agency's ''domiciliary program'' has 7,000 beds in 17 locations,
20 percent of them vacant, he said, and is to add 525 beds in 10 cities.

Mr. Leaveck, of Vietnam Veterans of America, says such beds will not have much
impact.

''Homelessness is the symptom, not the problem, and domiciliary beds are an
expensive way to treat that symptom,'' he said. ''You can feed people, change
their linens, and put a roof over their head, but unless you do counseling and
rehabilitation, you aren't addressing the real problem. There are very few
homeless veterans who are job-ready and need nothing more than a place to
live.''

In 1983, New York City began the first large outreach program to homeless
veterans, sending benefits counselors to the men's shelters each month. As a
result, more than 100 homeless veterans got financial assistance from the V.A.
in 1984, and more than 175 got employment or education assistance. New York also
took the lead by opening a shelter just for veterans in October.

Aid From Fellow Veterans

''For many homeless veterans, other veterans can provide one of the few positive
contacts they have,'' said Louisa Stark, president of the National Coalition for
the Homeless.

The Volunteers of America in Cleveland has an emergency shelter for homeless men
and, one flight up, a 25-bed unit just for veterans. According to Mr. Johnson,
the men in the veterans unit fight less, and make friends faster than those in
the emergency shelter. ''We get guys who have nightmares, guys who have
flashbacks about killing, but everybody understands about that,'' he said.

Many veterans say they are more comfortable with their own kind.

''I'd like to be around people who've been through the same things I've been
through,'' said Bruce Kepley, a homeless veteran who has been hospitalized with
psychiatric problems eight times since his 1981 discharge. ''And I need work,
any kind of work. I can't get a job doing what I was trained to do - no one
wants an armed killer.''

Mr. Kepley pauses: ''The war is never over. You drink one too many beers and it
pops up. The jets fly too low, and I jump. Sometime, I hope to settle down
somewhere where I won't be reminded of what I've seen. But I really don't see a
future for myself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Jay Martin serving coffee to a fellow Vietnam vet (pg. A10)
(NYT/Tim Koors); Shelbert Johnson, a Vietnam vet (pg. A10) (NYT/Barney Taxel)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 30, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

American Economy Is Reported Shifting To Exports to Grow

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1352 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 29


The American economy, long dominated by its free-spending consumers, is rapidly
being transformed into one whose growth depends heavily on producing goods for
foreign markets.

This shift, which economists say has become clearly visible in the last several
months, has far-reaching implications. In the long run, it is the mechanism by
which the nation will sooner or later redress its longstanding payments deficit,
the amount by which what the United States buys from abroad exceeds what it
sells.

In the short run, this shift appears to be the key to avoiding a recession as
the economy heads into its sixth straight year of expansion, the longest since
the 1960's, during the Vietnam War.

Although the highly publicized monthly trade statistics suggest otherwise, the
United States has made significant progress, beginning about a year ago, in
raising exports and curbing imports other than oil, Reagan Administration
officials and most private analysts maintain.

Export volume rose at an annual rate of 18 percent during the first nine months
of 1987, and the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company estimates that the real net
deficit will tumble by more than 27 percent in 1988, to $95.3 billion, after
falling nearly 10 percent in 1987. As a result, industrial output is rising and
companies are hiring more factory workers. ''This represents a major trend that
will dominate the economic environment through the early 1990's,'' asserted
Mickey D. Levy, senior vice president at Philadelphia's Fidelity Bank. ''It
replaces the strong consumption and deteriorating trade deficit pattern that
prevailed from 1980 through 1986.''

This improvement comes on both the export and import sides of the trade deficit
as measured in volume. This tally directly relates to economic activity:
production and jobs.

By contrast, the deficit as expressed in ever-depreciating current dollars,
which hit a record $17.6 billion in October, is considered a poor indicator of
trade flows, regardless of how eagerly the markets await the figures.

Slowing in Consumer Sector

The increasing robustness of the trade sector comes, not coincidentally, at the
same time that the consumer sector has begun to slow. Both these trends were
evident well before the stock market plunge of mid-October.

American consumers have found their real incomes growing slowly -partly the
result of higher prices for oil and other imported goods - as they saw their
debts rising and their savings drawn down to levels even more meager than usual.
The dive in stock prices subsequently shook consumer confidence but, as
reflected in sales figures since then, apparently not enough to cause alarm.

The overall result is that the trade engine has kicked in to provide new
momentum just when the consumer spending engine began to sputter. This
development, many economists believe, may keep the economy running at a
respectable pace and prevent an election-year recession.

'Dramatic' Improvement

In the latest issue of its Morgan Economic Quarterly, Morgan Guaranty declared:
''Just as robust domestic spending in 1985 and 1986 did not translate into a
booming economy because of the country's trade deterioration, even substantial
softness in domestic spending does not necessarily mean economic weakness in the
current environment of dramatic trade improvement.''

In fact, the bank added, before October the vigorous trade sector was ''more
than offsetting'' the domestic-spending weakness and, as a result, the economy
was accelerating. Third-quarter growth of the gross national product, first
estimated at an annual rate of 3.8 percent, has since been raised to 4.1 percent
and then to 4.3 percent.

While the improvement in trade appears to be firmly rooted, other areas may
prove unnervingly erratic next year and consumers and business may be able to
make few safe assumptions.

''I think '88 is going to be a year of stumbling and staggering growth,'' said
Donald H. Straszheim, chief economist for Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, an arm
of the investment banking and brokerage house. Financial markets, he added, will
be highly volatile, with ''updrafts and downdrafts, euphoria one week and
despair the next.''

In spite of big advances in analyzing dynamic relationships with computers,
economic forecasting has fundamental limitations. Economists can only make
educated stabs at such basics as what will happen to the price of oil, how fast
the trade deficit will improve or how much psychological damage was inflicted by
the evaporation of half a trillion dollars from investors' portfolios.

The stock plunge caused most analysts to lower estimates of next year's growth
in the gross national product, but some have since restored part of the
markdown. The widely shared expectation is that the economy will slow sharply in
1988 but that an election-year recession will be avoided.

The most common professional guess, however, is that the G.N.P. -the economy's
total output of goods and services - will grow about 60 percent as much as this
year's moderate expansion, not yet finally determined, of about 3 1/4 percent.

The 51 participants in a poll conducted by Blue Chip Economic Indicators, a
newsletter, put next year's G.N.P. growth at 1.9 percent, fourth quarter
compared with fourth quarter and after removing the effects of inflation.

Among members of the National Association of Business Economists, a consensus
shows the economy growing by 2 percent on the same basis. However, this survey,
taken around Thanksgiving, when fears about the stock market fallout remained
high, also found 43 percent predicting that the next recession would begin in
1988.

For its part, the Reagan Administration last week projected 2.4 percent growth,
a target that assumes, among other things, stepped-up expansion by other
countries and a Federal Reserve monetary policy more accommodating than it has
been in most recent months.

The Administration also projects that the Consumer Price Index will decline
about half a point, to 4.3 percent, over the coming year while the unemployment
rate averages 5.8 percent, the rate that now prevails.

Industrial Strength Cited

Some analysts regard this as little more than another year of ''muddling
through,'' but few dismiss the importance of the shift associated with the
turnaround in trade. ''Starting this year, the mix of the muddle has changed,''
said Edward Yardeni, director of economics for Prudential-Bache Securities.
''Consumer spending growth has weakened and industrial activity is stronger.''

Other factors, however, are buffeting the economy, with highly unpredictable
results. Among the unknowns is whether, assuming oil prices ease, the decline
will be enough to offset the inflationary effects of the still-slumping dollar
and wage pressures arising from tight labor markets in some parts of the
country, especially in New England.

There is also the question of whether the Federal Reserve - all its governors
having been appointed by President Reagan - will be as quick to detect and
counter a pickup in inflation during a Presidential election year as it would in
other years.

Beneficial Effects

If American consumers retrench, this would tend to have the beneficial effects
of curbing imports and increasing savings that would then be available to help
finance a Federal deficit now substantially financed by foreigners. But this
retrenchment could tip the economy to the brink of recession, generally defined
as two consecutive quarters of contraction in the G.N.P.

Weighing what is known, projections, imponderables and hunches, many analysts
would probably agree with a summation of pluses by Lawrence A. Kudlow, a former
Reagan Administration economist now with Bear, Stearns & Company, the New
York-based investment firm.

''Inflation is moderate, tax rates are low, interest rates are declining, budget
spending is restrained, speculative fevers have been removed, there is no
sustained credit crunch and international tensions are easing,'' he wrote
recently. Thus, he said, ''a 'soft landing' is far more probable than
recession.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs of G.N.P. growth, '86-'87; changes in inflation, Jan.-Nov.;
trade deficit, Jan.-Nov.; increase of industrial production, Jan.-Nov. (Source:
Commerce Dept.; Bureau of Labor Statistics) (pg. D5)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 30, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Sihanouk Says Talks Must Be in North Korea

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 203 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Dec. 29


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the leading Cambodian rebel figure, said today that he
would hold peace talks only in North Korea. The statement appeared to rule out a
meeting scheduled next month in France.

After their first reconciliation talks Dec. 2 to 4 in a Paris suburb, Prince
Sihanouk and Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia agreed to hold negotiations Jan.
27 in St.-Germain-en-Laye, near Paris.

In a handwritten note, Prince Sihanouk said today that he would meet Hun Sen
only ''at my residence in North Korea, at which neither the press, nor the radio
nor the television will have access,'' as was the case in December.

The Prince said he would pursue the talks with Hun Sen, whom he called the
representative of Vietnam, so as not to let the slightest chance for
reconciliation escape. Cambodian rebels have been fighting the
Vietnamese-installed Government for nine years.

After their first talks, the two men called on other factions involved in the
conflict to join them in talks in France in January and in Pyongyang, North
Korea, in April. Since then, however, Prince Sihanouk has reversed himself
twice. He called off the French meeting, rescheduled it, and has now apparently
canceled it again.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 30, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Seminars on News of 1968

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 222 words


Some of the people who made news in 1968 and some of the journalists who were
covering them will take part in four days of seminars beginning Jan. 12 at the
Mark Goodson Auditorium, 2 Columbus Circle.

Topics in the seminar, sponsored by the Museum of Broadcasting, include ''The
Counterculture,'' ''Vietnam and International Affairs,'' ''The Conventions and
Presidential Election,'' ''The Assassinations of 1968'' and ''Television
Programming in 1968.''

Among the journalists, network officials and former politicians taking part will
be Morley Safer, Harrison E. Salisbury, Dan Rather, Gloria Emerson, Ike Pappas,
Bill Plante, Liz Trotta, Jeff Greenfield, Harriet Van Horne, Robert Trout, Mike
Wallace, Sander Vanocur, Abbie Hoffman, Jack Newfield, Eugene J. McCarthy,
Ramsey Clark, John V. Lindsay, Frank Mankiewicz, Osborn Elliott, Herb Schlosser
and William Leonard. The moderators for each session are Burton Benjamin, former
vice president and director of CBS News, and Tom Wicker, a columnist with The
New York Times.

Two sessions, each lasting an hour and a half, are planned on Jan. 12; ''The
Counterculture'' will be at 12:30 P.M. and ''Vietnam and International Affairs''
will be at 5:30. Other seminars will be at 12:30 P.M. Jan. 13 to 15. Admission
to each seminar is $7; tickets are available at the museum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 31, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HERS

BYLINE: By Lady Borton; Lady Borton is a writer who lives on a farm in Ohio. She
was the assistant director of the American Friends Service Committee project in
Quang Ngai, South Vietnam, from 1969 to 1971. Her book, ''Sensing the Enemy,''
was published by Doubleday in 1984.

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 863 words


''YOU might better torch the place,'' Roy said.

It was an April morning 15 years ago.

Roy ran his finger around the sun-bleached outline of a pocket watch in his
overalls as he leaned against the giant elm that shades my porch. He watched as
I replaced yet another broken window. For years, Roy had stored hay in the
downstairs of this tumbledown farmhouse.

My farm is tucked into its own valley in the hills of Appalachian Ohio.
Southeast Ohio, with its coal fields and red clay hills, shares geography and
culture with nearby West Virginia. I don't think of myself as owning this land,
even though my name appears on the plat map. The valley owns itself. I pay the
taxes and tend its soul.

I can't see another house. A circle of one mile diameter, with my house as its
center, includes no other people. Yet I feel less alone here than when I lived
in Center City in Philadelphia.

Everyone up the hollow is related to everyone else, except me. We all raise beef
cattle, selling the calves each fall. We do this work separately, farm by family
farm, yet we also do this work together in a web of relationships as intricate
as the hollow's genealogical chart.

Willie keeps his elevator in my barn; I borrow the elevator to bring in my hay.
Roy's son-in-law Walter needs more pasture; I need more hay. We trade. Walter's
cousin Hazel and her husband, Otto, need barn space. I need tractor work in hay
season. Another deal.

''I bet you have nothing in writing,'' my dad says, respect in his voice. An
administrator, my father values the written agreement. He also realizes that
sometimes your word is enough.

Once, my lead cow was due to calve when she dislocated a hip. Maybelle was a
pet. She liked me to rub the inside of her ear.

Maybelle calved easily, but afterward wouldn't stand for the newborn to nurse. I
wrapped my arms around Maybelle's neck and tugged; I pried with a crowbar under
her flank. In despair, I called Hazel. It was Friday night. I knew the men were
at the Golden Horn Saloon.

Hazel arrived with her children, Jerry, then 14, and Flora, 10. Shortly
afterward the men appeared. Otto threw a halter around Maybelle's neck and
pulled. Walter grabbed Maybelle's tail and tugged. Hazel, Jerry, Flora and I
pushed our hands under Maybelle's back and hefted. She rose. We held Maybelle
aloft while her calf tottered about, trying to nurse on one set of overalls,
then another. When he found Maybelle's tit, the thick smell of warm milk filled
the barn.

Living with animals takes me closer to birth. It takes me closer to death. I
would have kept Maybelle and carried water to her. But she grew weaker after
giving birth, and she was suffering. There was nothing to do but take her to the
butcher.  Three days later, I packed my VW bus to the roof with lean, white
packages and drove home, wrapped in their desolate smell. I sold the meat to
friends at cost. Even though I raise animals, I'm a vegetarian. This is out of
preference, not principle. I do eat meat when I'm a guest. But during the
cheerful conversation at such meals, I'm apt to be thinking of how it felt to
rub the velvety, finger-shaped groove inside Maybelle's ear.

Over the years, my neighbors have watched (and commented) as, tar bucket in
hand, I roped myself to the chimney to patch the roof, as I dug a new outhouse
hole, jacked up the house, ran electrical wires and plumbing pipes and tinkered
with my VW. They see me as fiercely independent. I know different.

The weather bureau was clocking the wind at 68 miles an hour the other evening
when I went to the barn. I was tossing out hay when I heard a loud, ominous
rattling. I didn't have to look for the cause.

Like sailors, we farmers are always telling tales, casting ourselves as the hero
and fool. We do this to entertain and to alert. Roy had often told me how he
saved that barn roof during a twister. Because of him, I knew what to do.

With wire cutter and flashlight and bracing wire, I scrabbled from the hay onto
an oak beam that spans the century-old barn. I felt like I was inside a drum
set. The gale lifted the tin sheets and beat them together like cymbals. The
gusts had already flipped back one sheet of tin. Glancing up through the gaping
hole, I could see the darkening sky, the clouds swirling.

Balancing two stories up on a foot-wide beam, I poked a piece of wire through a
nail hole in the billowing tin. I reached up through the hole in the roof,
caught the end of the wire and brought it down toward me. I twisted the two
strands together around a rafter.

Stretching, I tried for another nail hole with another piece of wire. The tin
flapped out of reach. By now it was dark. I knew to give up. I left for the
house. I didn't feel defeated. I deserved help. ''Bring your flashlight,'' I
said into the phone. Otto and his son Jerry climbed with me way up into the
rafters. With the three of us and, yes, with Otto's extra height and brawn, we
pulled in the roof.

Did I offer to pay Otto and Jerry? No. Nor will I, though I gave them a good,
heavy-duty flashlight for Christmas. Their responding is part of one more deal.
They store hay under that roof. What do I get in return? Neighbors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
