
                               1 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
THE CONSTRAINTS OF POWER

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 897 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Dec. 31


It hasn't been a good year and there is little to offer beyond blind hope as
assurance that l982 will be much better.

Still, there are realistic consolations on which to base some confidence that it
won't be much worse.  The most important is the sign that the world is less
likely than was once the case to stumble into major war. In a recent interview,
NATO's Secretary General Joseph Luns, a man who knows history and has a quick
hand for ringing alarm bells, drew that conclusion despite existing tensions.

Some wars have happened more by accident than by design. The Franco-Prussian war
was provoked by insult. No one, Mr. Luns pointed out, could have delivered such
a scathing attack on an important power, as Israel's Prime Minister Menachem
Begin did recently on President Reagan, in those days without expecting trouble.
Mr. Begin abused the immunity of the weak, but he was ignored.

World War I came about through a tragic series of thoughtless, automatic
responses by powers that thought they had to demonstrate their dignity. World
War II was different. The evidence is that Hitler wanted to fight and was
bitterly disappointed when the l938 Munich appeasement conference deprived him
of an earlier excuse.

Now, though Mr. Luns is convinced that the Soviet Union is trying for the
benefits of victory without fighting, he is equally convinced that Moscow does
not want war. Neither, of course, does NATO. The risk of miscalculation exists,
but so does a salutary awareness of the danger.

This may be even more true for public op ini on in East and West thanit is for
leaders. The sense of exhilaration and release that swept the British public
into war in l914 is no lon ger conceivable.

There may be people in undeveloped countries who still have a romantic ideal of
warriors and conquest, but fortunately they are not the people with the big
weapons. The real heroes now are the peacemakers.

In conseque nce, the limits of military might are becoming more evident. It i s
still used, sadly, and still causes unconscionable tragedy. The names of Poland,
Afghanistan, Cambodia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Ir an, Iraq, Somalia, Ethiopia,
Chad, Angola, Namibia are only part of the list currently bearing that witness.

But the list is also a testimony to how little can be won with force. Indeed,
the superpowers, armed to a degree the world has never seen before, seem to be
losing political and economic influence in the process. Striking fear no longer
brings respect.

For the U.S., the past year has brought some new lessons of the constraints on
power. My own view of Reagan Administration policies has been largely critical.
Yet there has been an evolution as the variegated will of the world has forced
some bends in Washington's initial belief that a willful American lead would be
enough to shape the behavior of friend and foe.

The first big foreign policy issue was El Salvador, advertised last February as
the ''test'' of Soviet-American relations. It isn't any more, though nothing
much has changed there. Far from welcoming new muscle-flexing to sop up the
humiliation of hostages in Iran and show rejection of the ''Vietnam withdrawal
syndrome,'' the American public showed a repugnance at trying to fight somebody
else's civil war that prevented any increase in the initial dispatch of some 50
military personnel.

The egocentric idea that Arab-Israeli quarrels could be swept aside to mobilize
the Middle East behind an American ''strategic consensus'' has faded away.
Neither President Reagan's assurances of warmer-than-ever friendship nor
Secretary of State Haig's warnings of Soviet evil intentions have solved any
problems.

The allies, for better or for worse, have shown that banging the table doesn't
change their sense of self-interest any more than waffling did.

Despite a whopping defense budget, the need to renew talks with Moscow on
limiting nuclear arms became undeniable. And the notion that the U.S. can oblige
a sea change in Soviet policy by beating the Russians in an arms race without
sacrificing its own economy is gaining only critics.

Now, despite Poland and added chills in East-West relations, President Reagan
sees some point in meeting the Soviet leader. An Administration spokesman said
recently that it was important, when error was risked, to err on the side of
caution.

None of the world's troubles have gone away, not to speak of the recession that
supply-side economics was supposed to cure. But there is some encouragement in
seeing them assessed with a more realistic understanding that what hasn't been
put in order takes more than a smile or a shout to fix.

The lessons of the real world have been expensive. It is a shame that they have
to be learned again and again. But the prospects may now be that they won't have
to be repeated in l982. That in itself would bring some relief. And if they
stimulate us to search for better and more constructive ways to use America's
power and find a safe and more congenial place in the world, they will have been
worthwhile.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEXT: THE ST. PIERRE SYNDROME

BYLINE: By John Kenneth Galbraith

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


-Those who say that our foreign policy is inconsistent and unpredictable have
one thing solidly against them.  That is our deep and reliable concern for
adverse political developments in small countries, both nearby and around the
world.  The objects of our concern change radically with the passage of time.
As surely as we grow weary of our occupation with one country, or as it comes to
seem a bit unnecessary or foolish, or as it encounters the problem that your
average American does not always know where the country is, then we can count on
alarm shifting to another.

That alarm is never over what bizarre, incoherent, or socially angry change
promises for the unfortunate citizens of the unhappy country; we now know that
Socialism and Communism with their large and complex public apparatus do not
work well in the poor countries of the world, as they also encounter grave
difficulties in as sophisticated a community as Poland. And we are coming
gradually to realize that Socialism and Communism as alternatives to capitalism
are irrelevant in the absence of capitalism. Our concern is always over the
strategic implications of the political change.

Those strategic implications are usually unspecified but always grave. And since
they are said to bear on our vital interests, no one wishes to disagree.  Just
20 years ago, it was Laos.  Weekly and sometimes daily briefings were given to
the more vulnerable journalists on the strategic threat of the Pathet Lao to the
Plain of Jars.  For a press conference, President John F. Kennedy learned the
full names of all the Laotians principally involved, a notable achievement.
Prof. Arthur Schlesinger, whose non-Communist credentials are adequate,
expressed the thought that Laos was not a dagger pointed at the heart of Kansas.
This was considered daring.  Laos has long since returned to the strategic
insignificance for unquestionably yearn.

In ensuing years, Zaire, once the Congo; South Vietnam, alas; Somalia and
Ethiopia, both at various times bastions of the free world and outposts of
Communism; Cambodia; the Yemens; and, in a very small way, the Seychelles--all
have been objects of strategic concern.  Like Laos, none has retained its
breathtaking urgency.

It is, however, in the last 12 months that all records have been broken both for
strategic anxiety and for the speed with which this has shifted from one small
country to another.  In rapid sequence, we have had concern for the threat from
El Salvador and Nicaragua, this combined with the recurrent menace of Cuba.  And
there has been grave concern about Angola and the massive world threat from Col.
Muammar elQadaffi and his limitless desert and his two million Libyans.

It is not my intention here to argue that there is something unworthy,
undignified, derogatory, or at a minimum, lacking in grandeur in a great country
squandering so much public emotion on its small neighbors or more distant
unfortunates.  Though I like to seem courageous, I try to protect all flanks, so
I do not wish now to arouse the anger or invite the scorn of the strategic
theorists.  And, as a practical consideration, our compulsion in these matters
is too great to leave any real hope for change.

What I propose for the new year is something more practical: Let us in 1982
settle on one clear and comprehensible strategic threat, stay with it, and leave
all the other little chaps alone.

The choice is obvious.  It is an outpost of Socialism on our own continent; it
is subject to the authority of a Government in which Communists have an active
role.  It lies squarely adjacent to the greatest trade route into the North
American continent, this being maritime access to the St. Lawrence River, the
St. Lawrence Seaway, the Great Lakes, including our own Lake Michigan.

It is St. Pierre and Miquelon, a French possession, on Cabot Strait (named for
earlier, non-Boston Cabots) on the main approach to the Gulf of St. Lawrence.
There are, effectively, not one but three islands in this most strategic of
outposts--Miquelon, Langlade, and St. Pierre.

In the Schlesinger phrase, they are not a single but a three-pronged dagger, and
it is pointed right across Nova Scotia and New Brunswick at the heart of Maine.
It is not known how many active Communists there are on this potential point of
aggression; one can be certain that in any convocation of 5,600 Frenchmen
(estimated population, 1971) there are some.

The islands were the first Free Frenc h terr itory seized by Charles de Gaulle,
in 1941, as he started his march t o power, and the action provoked a sharply
adverse strategic response from Washington at the time.  Yet older Americans
know how the port of St. Pierre exploited its strategic position in the yet more
distan t past--in Prohibition days, it was a major basing point and source of
logistical support for the rum fleet, as that considerable naval force was th en
known.

Concentration of our attention on St. Pierre and Miquelon will not arouse the
fear and opposition of our Latin-American neighbors as does our present
Caribbean policy.  The French and the Canadians undoubtedly understand our
compulsion in these small-country matters and are otherwise too sophisticated to
object.  It will seem a bit foolish that we will be expending so much rhetoric
and emotion on such insignificant territory. But that, we now know, is not a
consideration in the making of our foreign policy.
John Kenneth Galbraith, professor emeritus of economics at Harvard University,
is a former Ambassador to India.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW ANGRY PLAYWRIGHTS ARE TAKING CENTER STAGE

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2570 words


Turned up to a high pitch and filtered through a true writer's sensibility,
anger is once again proving to be a powerful force in the theater. Just how
powerful is being demonstrated by the proliferation of angry plays of all shapes
and sizes on New York stages this season -from the eight-and-a-half-hour
''Nicholas Nickleby'' on Broadway to Shirley Lauro's 25-minute ''Open
Admissions'' Off Off Broadway.

The anger comes in a variety of forms, too. While some of it is political anger
aimed at social injustice, much of it is personal, psychological or existential.
In his savage comedy ''Grown Ups,'' Jules Feiffer gives us a hero who decides to
expiate a lifetime of emotional grievances with his middle-class Jewish family.
Christopher Durang's ''Sister Mary Ignatius Explains It All for You'' begins as
a satire of Roman Catholic ritual and ends up crying out against the seeming
indifference of God. But whatever their variations in subject or attack, the
best of the new angry plays share a common purpose and achievement - to make the
audience squirm uncomfortably in its seats.

Anger, of course, is a timeless emotion in drama, and it's a dominant force in
the post-World War II theater. But its character can change a bit with the
times. In the most famous angry plays of recent decades, those produced by John
Osborne and the other angry young British men of the 1950's, the ire was aimed
at the very fabric of a society and its culture -at the stultifying,
classstratified England of Empire that was, indeed, soon to collapse. In the
angry American plays of the 60's, a time of the Vietnam war and urban unrest,
the rage was often aimed, directly or by inference, at public officials who
could be blamed for American foreign policy, racism or socio-economic
inequities: if a MacBird (as one President was caricatured) could be overthrown,
the world might be saved from its madness.

The new angry plays depart from those of th e British 50's and the American
60's, as well as from the optimistic , ''me decade'' culture of the benign 70's.
Now there is an anger of despair that tends to minimize the existence of
villains or heroes.  There is a sinking feeling, derived from a hard-earned
worldline ss, that problems, whether social or emotional, all but defy cle
ar-cut solutions. While there are still some playwrights who believe that good
men can save the world - such as the authors of the recent Jackie Robinson
musical, ''The First,'' and Bill C. Davis in his fine ''Mass Appeal''- they are
increasingly rare.

The anger in currency now is born not of liberal idealism, but of a deeply felt,
at times tragic sense of futility. This anger exists, of course, not only in
American plays but in those of contemporary Europe (most recently exemplified in
New York by Stephen Poliakoff's ''American Days'' and Franz Xaver Kroetz's
''Request Concert'') and even in Hollywood entertainments like ''Reds'' and
''Ragtime,'' in which firebrands like John Reed and Coalhouse Walker fall short
of their goals. Such works say a lot about how the world has changed in the past
decade or so - a disillusioning time during which virtually every brand of
ideology has had its chance and then failed to improve the quality of life, end
injustice or spread eternal happiness. If an angry play of the 60's made
theatergoers want to plunge into political activism or launch a rebellious
search for personal liberation, an angry play of the 80's may make you want to
go home and beat your head against the wall.

Certainly one felt fairly hopeless after seeing ''Open Admissions,'' which was
one of four one-act plays to be seen in the Ensemble Studio Theater's recent
''Best of the Marathon'' evening and may have been the most powerful single
half-hour of theater this fall. (It is expected to return, in an expanded
version, next season.) Miss Lauro's drama is a post-60's work in the most
literal sense: as the title indicates, her s ubject is the admissions program,a
product of 60's liberalism, that allows underprivileged students open access t o
urban universities. In the view of the playwright, whois a former t eacher, the
open admissions program is an unqualified disaster, but she holds no villains
responsible for it. Her two characters - a white instructor, Alice, and a black
student, Calvin -are both vict ims of social forces beyond anyone's control.

Calvin is the barely literate product of foster homes. He's taken advantage of
the open admissions policy because he genuinely wants to learn, to better
himself. Instead, he finds that he's learning nothing - even as he receives Bs
that allow him to pass easily to graduation. In ''Open Admissions,'' he goes to
his teacher's office to demand individual instruction: ''You got to teach me
something now!,'' he begs, tearing his school books apart and sobbing on the
floor. But what's Alice to do? A Shakespearean scholar who's overworked and
frustrated teaching large speech courses to anonymous masses of uninterested
students, she has no time or energy to save one boy who wants to be saved. She
barely has time to listen to Calvin's plea.

Who's to blame? It's not the underprivileged Calvin's fault that he's entered
college with only elementary reading and speaking skills. Nor is he to blame
that the open admissions policy has given him the false expectation that he will
now learn what he needs to escape the ghetto and find a job. It's not Alice's
fault that the college - and she - can't give Calvin what he deserves. And so we
see a teacher who can't teach and a student who can't learn, locked in a
nightmare that they didn't create and are powerless to stop - a nightmare that
reverberates throughout our society and will for years to come. Miss Lauro's
anger is so unflagging it left the audience winded by the final dimout. And
because we, like the playwright, see no obvious remedy to the tragedy of ''Open
Admissions,'' the anger remains bottled up inside us, unpurged.

The same feeling is generated by Charles Fuller's hugely accomplished ''A
Soldier's Play,'' at the Negro Ensemble Company.  Like the author's previous
work, ''Zooman and the Sign,'' which was set in a present-day urban ghetto, his
new drama, set among a black platoon on a Southern army base during World War
II, is about blacks who destroy themselves or one another. It's a play designed
to make blacks and whites equally uncomfortable, for Mr. Fuller's anger is aimed
at both.

The writer sees black fratricide -''the Cain and Abel story of the week,'' as he
chillingly calls it - as a symbol of larger currents of self-hatred within the
black community. He demands that the suicidal cycle end - that black communities
cease to be ''war zones.'' But, at the same time, Mr. Fuller feels that the
self-hatred can't end as long as blacks live within a society where, correctly
or not, they believe that the white majority regards them as second-class
citizens.

How is this vicious circle broken? Like Miss Lauro - or the creators of a film
like ''Prince of the City'' - Mr. Fuller offers no solutions, for the social
ills he dramatizes are the product of an entrenched social system that no
Supreme Court decision or legislative programs can magically eradicate. His rage
is at the world as it was, is, and is likely to be - and he can only howl in
horror. It's the same howl we hear - literally - at the end of Wendy Kesselman's
''My Sister in This House'' at the Second Stag e, in whichtwo sisters, working
as maids in a French hou sehold of the 1930's, finally lash out in murderous,
self-immolatin g violence against the repressive, class-ordered society that
denies them their freedom.

While it's a long voyage in time and place from the America of ''A Soldier's
Play'' and ''Open Admissions'' to the Victorian England of ''Nicholas
Nickleby,'' the Royal Shakespeare Company's dramatization of Dickens's third
novel evinces much the same kind of nihilistic anger. Or so it does in the
production's crucial final moments - in which the adapter, David Edgar, goes
further than Dickens did and reveals his true stripes as a contemporary,
politically minded (''The Jail Diary of Albie Sachs'') British playwright.

In the book, the story came to a true Victorian happy ending. The hero conquered
the two villains - the usurious Ralph Nickleby and the vicious Yorkshire
schoolmaster Wackford Squeers - and retired with his loved ones to a peaceful,
prosperous country homestead. In the stage version, that ending is repeated, but
is followed by a kicker of Mr. Edgar's own invention: in the midst of the
otherwise celebratory finale, Nicholas (Roger Rees) spots a starving boy who
resembles the Schoolmaster Squeers' fatal victim, Smike. The lights dim as
Nicholas cradles the pitiful child in his arms and stares down the audience with
an expression of bitter, barely supressed rage.

This new ending is far more downbeat than the one Dickens wrote in the 1830's.
Not unlike liberal idealists of the 1960's, Dickens believed that good guys like
Nicholas really could reform the world - and his ending left one content that
the hero had ended the tyrannical reign of Squeers and his ilk. (Indeed, in his
preface to the 1839 book edition of ''Nickleby,'' Dickens proudly noted that the
cruel Yorkshire schools had become nearly extinct since he first started writing
his nove l in serial form.) In Mr. Edgar's version, bycontrast, Nic holas has a
far more limited success. The final tableau says that, fo r all the hero's
efforts, there will always be another Smike to be r escued from the abuse of
another villain like Squeers: the world's p oor and helpless will always be
beaten by the bullies.  In place of w hat Orwell called Dickens's ''generous,''
optimistic Victorian ang er, Mr. Edgar gives us the modern, pessimistic anger of
impotence.

Taken out of the socio-political sphere and into a domestic one, such
pessimistic anger can be just as upsetting. That's what Jules Feiffer, one of
our most effective satirists, demonstrates in ''Grown Ups.'' In much of his
previous work, including his political cartoons and his quintessential 60's
black comedy, ''Little Murders,'' this writer has vented his spleen on national
leaders and the social havoc wrought by their public policies. In ''Grown Ups,''
the anger is different and runs deeper. This time, Mr. Feiffer looks inward and
finds a despair that seems bottomless.

The hero of his play is a man who has everything - a successful New York Times
reporter, Jake (Bob Dishy), with devoted, proud parents, wife and child. Jake
even has the freedom to express his political discontent by writing an angry
book about ''the moral and ethical disintegration of the American dream.'' But
as the American dream is disintegrating, so is Jake. The poison in that dream -
the false values of success - runs so deeply in both him and his family that it
has killed the love in his every relationship, not to mention his own sense of
self-worth. As Jake says at one point, if he didn't have a famous by-line, ''my
father would have trouble remembering my name.''

And while Jake, unlike a Willy Loman, recognizes the emptiness of his life, he
feels powerless to do anything about it. Writing his book - a journalistic
equivalent, one might say, of ''Little Murders'' - won't help. All he can do is
lash out at his loved ones and try to destroy himself. Mr. Feiffer's rage knows
no bounds and no release - it just keeps building until the final curtain cuts
it off. Unlike Edward Albee in ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?'' or even
Wallace Shawn in ''Marie and Bruce,'' he won't even allow his warring family a
semblance of a truce after the storm. We leave the theater feeling anguished
because the characters' arguments are still in full cry, their wounds still
open. Having spilled blood all over the pristine parquet floor of Jake's Upper
West Side apartment, Mr.  Feiffer refuses to mop it up.

Christopher Durang - like Mr. Feiffer, heretofore known mainly as a gifted
satirist (''A History of the American Film'') - has also written a breakthrough
play by making contact with his deepest sources of anger. The one-act ''Sister
Mary Ignatius,'' now on a double-bill with ''The Actor's Nightmare'' at
Playwrights Horizons, is about a dogmatic, repressive Roman Catholic
schoolteacher (Elizabeth Franz) who is giving her students a lecture about
heaven and hell. At first the play is a typically brittle Durang satire in which
the writer uses Sister Mary to make comic hay out of the catechism. But the work
changes its tone markedly in the second half, when Sister Mary's assembly is
suddenly invaded by some resentful former students. The students, now adults,
want to get even with their tyrannical ex-teacher by humiliating her in public.

Their method of humiliation is to demand that the nun explain how God could
allow them to be afflicted by such irrational tragedies as rape and cancer. The
students know that Sister Mar y can only answer them with clerical dogma, and
they assume suc h rationalizations will make her look silly. Yet Sister Mary
remains undaunted and smug - andshe's not the one who is humiliated. In the f
inal moments, her visitors are cowering, frightened children ag ain - for they
come to realize, as we do, that the Church's answers to their questions, however
pat, are the only ones they'll ever b e able to get. Indeed, once their anger at
Sister Mary is spent, the students must face the fact that they are barking at
the wrong antag onist. Their real rage -and Mr. Durang's - is aimed at God,
whose si lence to their suffering renders them more impotent than eve n the
autocratic Sister Mary does. At least the nun has her faith to tune out that
silence; her baiters don't have even that salvation.

If the unanswerable question posed by the students in Mr. Durang's play is the
most profound and timeless of all - ''If God is all powerful, why does He allow
evil in the world?'' - those social and political questions posed by his fellow
angry playwrights are also disturbing and also unanswerable. It is the
relentless ability to raise difficult questions, rather than to provide glib
answers to easy ones, that gives these writers their considerable power to
provoke. It's not always pleasant to watch their plays. They do make us
uncomfortable; they offer little escape. But, if we squirm as we hear these
angry voices, we're also forced to look harder at the world around us, to
question the assumptions of our lives - in other words, to feel the bracing
exhilaration of being challenged to think.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bob Dishy photo of Marilyn Rockafellow and
Calvin Levels photo of Elizabeth Franz photo of Adolph Caesar and Carter Smith
photo of Roger Rees

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BILL MOYERS- 'THE TRICK IS TO MAKE TV WORK FOR YOU'

BYLINE: By TONY SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2175 words


In the six weeks since he moved - for the second time in his career - from
public television to CBS News, Bill Moyers has delivered a dozen commentaries
for the morning and evening news on subjects ranging from the situation in
Poland to Christmas books; completed an hour-long documentary on Vietnam
veterans and begun another, about the underclass in the Reagan era; reported a
five-and-a-half-minute story for the evening news about political maneuvering on
an Alaskan pipeline bill, which inspired several hundred letters of praise, and
interviewed Saul Bellow for a lengthy profile that appeared on CBS's ''Sunday
Morning.'' In his spare moments, he has found time to promote one of the most
intellectually ambitious television projects in many years: a 17-part series
titled ''Creativity With Bill Moyers,'' that begins this Friday on public
television (WNET/Channel 13 at 9:00 P.M.) with a profile of the poet Maya
Angelou.

It is not the sheer volume of Mr. Moyers's work that makes him so unusual, but
the broad-ranging role he has carved out for himself. He has been, by turns,
student, teacher, reporter and preacher. In a medium more effective at
communicating images and impressions than ideas and insights, Mr. Moyers has
emerged as the one broadcast journalist who consistently wrestles with ideas, in
areas such as history, literature, philosophy and politics.

On the one hand, Mr. Moyers has inherited the mantle of Eric Sevareid at CBS,
and he is now the only broadcaster at any of the three networks doing regular
commentary for the evening news. At the same time, he has established himself as
a crusading reporter, in the tradition of Edward R. Murrow. During his first,
brief tenure at CBS - from 1976 to 1978 - he served as correspondent for
award-winning documentaries such as ''The C.I.A.'s Secret Army'' and ''The Fire
Next Door,'' about arson and crime in the South Bronx.

But Mr. Moyers has made his most distinctive mark with the extended interviews
and reported essays he did on public television during most of the past ten
years. While there are print journalists who range j ust as widely, Mr. Moyers
is one of th e rare broadcasters whose stature earned him the freedom to pursu e
his varied interests, and to command the air time to explore them i n detail. It
is not yet clear whether he will have similar freedom at CBS, but on ''Bill
Moyers' Journal'' he offered essays about sub jects as disparate as Watergate
and the crisis in Iran; interviewed politicians ranging from Secretary of State
Alexander Haig to Cal ifornia's Gov. Jerry Brown; and conducted long
conversations with leading men and women ofletters such as philosopher Mortimer
Adler, c ritic George Steiner, historian William Irwin Th ompson, poet Robert
Penn Warren and novelist Rebecca West.

The ''Creativity'' series is a logical extension of those conversations. Through
subjects like Miss Angelou, violinist Pinchas Zukerman, a group of inventors,
and students at the High School for the Performing Arts, Mr. Moyers tries to
explore the varied origins and expressions of the creative process. The programs
are meant to be informative and entertaining, but there is also a populist
message laced through them. Mr. Moyers argues that creativity is not merely
God-given, but can be nurtured. The individuals profiled in the series, he says
in his introductory remarks, are ''extraordinary but not so extraordinary we
cannot see ourselves in them.''

But just how well suited is Mr. Moyers' style of inquiry to television? It is
notable, for instance, that with exceptions such as Dick Cavett and Charles
Kuralt, virtually no one else in television is even working the same territory.
And to what extent does Mr.  Moyers consign himself to a certain frustration
when he chooses to sacrifice television's most powerful asset - the drama of
visual action -in order to explore issues that even he acknowledges can be
treated more substantively in print?

To Mr. Moyers, the challenge of television, public or commercial, is to use the
medium's visual and dramatic strengths to make ideas more accessible.
''Television is wholly different than print,'' he says. ''The printed page
conveys information and commitment, and requires active involvement. Television
conveys emotion and experience, and it's very limited in what it can do
logically. It's an existential experience - there and then gone. A producer is a
saboteur who tries to infiltrate the passivity of viewers and to create
impressions that are lasting.''

Ironically, however, none of the profiles in the ''Creativity'' series provide
as thoughtful or detailed a summation of Mr. Moyers's findings as his writing
about the subject, including an article he did for the Smithsonian magazine and
a paper he prepared for a planning session on the series.

In each of the televised profiles, Mr. Moyers eschews explanation, choosing
instead to let the subjects speak for themselves, and, wherever possible, to
have the camera record them in the act of creation. Indeed, as an interviewer,
Mr. Moyers is better at drawing out his subjects and synthesizing their ideas
than he is at fashioning original insights.

In the profile of Miss Angelou that launches the ''Creativity'' series, for
example, he remains mostly in the background. Yet, it is clear when Miss Angelou
speaks so movingly about growing up black in Stamps, Ark., - ''I was terribly
hurt and vastly loved in this town,'' she says -that the intimacy of her musings
grows out of a sense of ease with Mr. Moyers and a respect for the nature of his
inquiry.

Faced with a less articulate subject in a subsequent profile - Fred Smith, the
founder of Federal Express, the overnight package delivery service - Mr. Moyers
offers few of his own conclusions about the nature of entrepreneurial creativity
when Mr. Smith himself cannot.

The two profiles are also unintended evidence of television's power and its
limitations. When Miss Angelou is seen wandering through her hometown, the
visual drama speaks for itself. In the portrait of Mr.  Smith, there are no
arresting images to help tell the story, and its impact is that much less
compelling.

In moving from public television to CBS for a second time, Mr.  Moyers faces
another concern. Then, as now, he was lured to the network because it offered
broader reach and better newsgathering resources than public television. But the
risk is that in a commercial environment, he will sacrifce the freedom to do the
sort of serious programs that command smaller audiences. In his first stint at
CBS he was the correspondent on 17 hour-long documentaries, but decided to leave
anyway when he was unable to get a regular prime-time slot for the extended
essays and conversations that are his primary interest.

It is no still hard to imagine a commercial network devoting prime time to a
half-hour conversation with Mortimer Adler - a program that generated 12,000
requests for transcripts when Mr. Moyers did it on his ''Journal'' - or to a
series on the creative process.  Nonetheless, Mr. Moyers has returned to CBS,
partly because public television's financial problems made his situation
increasingly untenable there, and partly because he is hopeful that the growing
audience interest in news and information will make viable the forum that eluded
him in his earlier tenure at CBS.

If Mr. Moyers brings a sense of mission to his work on television, it is much
the same impulse that drew him, ea rly in his life, to the church, where he
studied to become a Baptist minister in his 20's; and then to politics, where he
served as a to p aide to Lyndon Johnson during his Presidency and later as de
puty director of the Peace Corps.

''I never thought of being creative when I was growing up,'' Mr.  Moyers says.
''What was drilled into me was to be a minister, in the secular sense , although
for a while I took it literally. My goal was to do good th ings or to help
others do good things. I see myself as an entreprene ur of ideas, not an
intellectual. Television is a whole new universe.  It gives you a dialogue with
Dubuque and Sacramento.  Raoul Burger (the Harvard law professor) once said to
me, 'Bill, I think you hav e the biggest classroom of any teacher I know.' ''

At the same time, television provides Mr. Moyers an arena in which to serve more
personal needs. ''I own and operate a ferocious ego,'' he acknowledges, and
through television he has gained not only a national forum but a considerable
measure of celebrity. By approaching his work as a form of public service, he
can enjoy both - the wide exposure and the applause - in good conscience. He is
quick to enumerate the people in high places and the everyday viewers who have
written in praise of his ''Journal'' - but always in the context of being
''useful,'' of ''having an impact.''

One of the first programs Mr. Moyers did on public television was about a
campaign by citizens in Mouth of Wilson, Va., to save a local river. When the
effort proved successful, in part because of the publicity his show generated,
Mr. Moyers felt he had found his calling.

''All roads led me to television,'' Mr. Moyers says. ''It was a place where I
could write, act, be engaged in the world of ideas, and where I could draw on my
background in government, news and even theology.'' To Mr. Moyers, his greatest
strength has always been as a collaborator and a catalyst. ''In 1964,'' he says,
''Lyndon Johnson asked me to coordinate 14 task forces to put together the Great
Society legislation. I wasn't as smart as a lot of the people in the group, but
I was able to meld a group of academics, bureaucrats and pragmatists and help
translate their ideas into action.''

Mr. Moyers balances conflicting motivations in his work. His belief in public
service compels him to take stands on those issues he considers important. But
he also evidences a deep desire to be appreciated, to avoid alienating even
those with whom he disagrees.  He takes great pride, for example, in the fact
that his ''Journal'' has been praised by critics from across the ideological
spectrum, including the right wing watchdog organization ''Christian Alert''.
That group last year named Mr. Moyers's ''Journal'' as the only show on
television to which it had no objections - despite the fact that Mr. Moyers had
been critical of right-wing evangelists on one segment of ''Journal'' and has
regularly taken positions abhorrent to the right, such as favoring the right of
women to choose abortion.

In this appeal to disparate constituencies, Mr. Moyers has proved himself deft
both as a performer and a politician. With his down-home accent, his fresh
scrubbed looks and his generally reasoned presentation of all sides in a
controversy, he radiates fairness, even when he quietly offers his views at the
end of an essay.

But Mr. Moyers's understated approach can have its drawbacks. His programs
sometimes lack the hard edge and intensity that come from passionate
partisanship. He asks intelligent questions, but he is rarely combative. In
part, that may be because Mr. Moyers is himself an insider, a man for whom the
system has worked, the son of a dirt farmer who worked his way up and acquired
establishment credentials that are quite formidable. In addition to his role in
government during the 1960s', he has served on corporate boards and he remains a
member of the establishment-dominated Council on Foreign Relations. In his own
community of Garden City, L.I., he is an active member of the church.

''I'm satisfied with the niche I've carved out,'' Mr. Moyers says.  ''I have a
body of work I'm proud of and people who appreciate it. In politics, you build a
consensus through the melding of constituencies, and I think I did that with the
'Journal,' too.  Viewers may not have liked every show, but over the course of a
season, each of them find something, and that gives you an accumulated
constituency. The only way I can explain the appeal of the ''Journal'' is that
people are turned on by ideas and by learning. It's only when the presentation
is dry, antiseptic and impersonal that they're turned off. The trick is to make
the medium work for you, and that's what I've got to do now at CBS. Ideas do
count, but not if they're reduced to being told in a minute-forty five.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bill Moyers

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPLIT AMONG ALLIES RUNS DEEPER THAN SANCTIONS

BYLINE: By FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1439 words


LONDON A British radio commentator, discussing President Reagan's announcement
of sanctions against the Soviet Union because of repression in Poland, expressed
some sympathy but added that, of course, ''we'' have a more subtle approach to
the situation.

That was one of the mildest expressions of the sharp difference between American
and allied attitudes regarding what to do about Poland. They ranged from firm
support for san ctions in France and Italy - though it was not clear if action
wou ld follow words - to evident disapproval in West Germany.

The new divide in the Western alliance came at a time when strains were already
intense, reflecting increasingly divergent reflexes on the two sides of the
Atlantic. Two years ago, when Soviet troops invaded Afghanistan, Washington
plunged to react without checking West European views. President Carter declared
his disillusion with Moscow and seemed to assume that nobody could disagree. But
it gradually became clear that the European assessment of Soviet motives and
intentions was not the same as Washington's. As a result, the Europeans were
reluctant to follow the United States lead.

Recognizing the problem, allied capitals have been consulting (with incomplete
results) for more than a year about how to avoid a similar ragged reaction if
the Red Army moved in Poland. But the tanks and the troops imposing martial law
aren't Russian, and that has left a wide gap once again in judgments of what has
happened.

The argument over whether, as Mr. Reagan said, Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski
responded to a Soviet demand or whether, as Bonn asserts, he saved Poland from a
worse fate, is in effect a nonstarter. There isn't that much basic difference in
the awareness that the Soviet Union is responsible for setting strict limits on
how the Poles may be governed, and that Soviet force stands ready to back up
those limits. However, the West has long agreed that it would not offer any
military help to insurgents in the East, a tacit acceptance of a Soviet right to
ultimate decision. The question, therefore, has been what other measures might
be taken and what consequences they might have. It can be argued that Western
sanctions would kill the last hope of moderation in Warsaw - surely the view
that Poland's Deputy Prime Minister, Mieczyslaw Rakowski, pressed on friends in
Bonn last week. Germans add that ''history'' (the Nazi destruction of Poland)
obliges a decent reticence on their part from exerting pressure across the
Oder-Neisse border.
Reagan Frightens Europeans

Humanitarianism can be dragooned to support urgings for action or inaction, on
grounds that the West cannot deprive ordinary Poles of food or, conversely, that
the West must not subsidize the regime responsible for the food shortages. But
the arguments, and the desire to accept or reject the official Warsaw position,
essentially tend to justify, rather than explain, more deeply held views.

They have to do with how the West can live with Soviet power and Communism
generally. The United States, especially under the Reagan Administration, has
taken a hard line - dangerously, say Europeans who fear it is leading to another
surge in the arms race, cold war and perhaps even a confrontation that could
lead to battle.  Washington seemed to think that a show of bold resolve would
buck up Europeans and strengthen the alliance. Instead, it frightened them.
Less than a month before the coup in Poland, when, with hindsight, it is clear
that it was already being planned, Mr. Reagan saw the need for reassurance and
delivered his first major foreign policy speech, pledging his determination for
peace.

But a long erosion of confidence in the wisdom of the American superpower had
already taken place. The Vietnam war was a major factor. And Mr. Reagan's
forceful rhetoric was not seen as a corrective to President Carter's indecision,
but as yet another example of American excess and unpredictability. Foreign
policy, for the rest of the world, doesn't come in distinct four-year packages,
wrapped by Un ited States politics.

That is part of what is meant by the claim to ''subtlety'' in Europe, where
experience has shown that sanctions might be provocative but that they seldom
exert direct constraint. This was demonstrated before World War II and again,
for Britain, during the long, porous embargo on Rhodesia. Political and economic
retribution do give bite to foreign policy. But they do not change decisions of
vital interest, except when applied with great vigor and unanimity, and over an
extended period.

The Arab oil embargo of 1973 can be seen as almost an extreme case. No Western
economic measure against the Soviet bloc could be as devastating as the threat
to cut off the West's petroleum. And yet, the embargo had only a gradual,
nudging influence on Western policy, reinforced by other strategic and Middle
East regional factors.

Responsible authorities in Washington are unlikely to have illusions about
sanctions. They know that these are largely a response to popular demands to
''do something.'' Sanctions send a message; they are not pointless. But the
point is: What message does the West mean to send?

At the moment, lack of allied agreement is sending the one encouraging signal to
Moscow in its period of trouble, what with Poland, continued war in Afghanistan,
the longstanding quarrel with China, and severe domestic economic difficulties.

One important reason is that German-Soviet rapprochement has gone a good deal
further than many Western observers realize. Chair man Leonid I. Brezhnev's
acceptance, during his r ecent Bonn visit, of Chancellor Helmut Schmidt as
''interpreter'' between Moscow and Washington, his promise to keep Bonn directly
informed of Soviet-American arms talks and to exchange hi gh-ranking military
visits was a postwar milestone. The end of th is road lies far beyond the
horizon, and doubtless Bonn and Moscow en visage quite different future turns.
But its existence already encou rages Bonn to prefer to see gray hope instead of
black despair in the partial and conflictingreports from Poland.
Impotence Amid Danger

Strictly West European reasons also restrain Bonn's partners from open
disagreement. The Common Market has suffered failures in coping with urgent
internal issues - the budget and agricultural policy.  Foreign affairs
coordination is its one recent claim to progress.  Members are loath to let big
gaps appear, even at the cost of friction with Washington. And France,
especially, is beginning to worry about braking Germany's flirt with the East
and stressing Paris-Bonn ties.

Other European-American quarrels have added edge to arguments against lining up
with Washington. Although not specifically concerned with Poland, they play a
part in tilting the judgment of people inclined to be wary about where
Washington is leading and what can influence Moscow.

Western economic strains play a role, but less so now that American interest
rates have begun to drop. All democratic leaders worry about domestic politics,
and recession weakens politicians and limits their foreign policy elbow room.

The Middle East remains a deeply troubling issue. If the Europeans can't find
solutions, it adds to their sense of impotence amid danger, and therefore
reinforces counsels of caution. On North-South issues, there tends to be even
less agreement than about East-West conflict. To the growing minority of
Europeans who see the Russians and Americans as parallel superpowers, the United
States role in Central America is scarcely less deplorable than Soviet action in
Poland.

The assumptions on both sides of the Atlantic aren't quite the same any more.
The facts in Poland may be clearer than some European leaders choose to notice.
But the context of reaction is more starkly upsetting than Washington seems to
have expected. Somehow, the differences will probably be bridged. But they will
leave one more item on the list of issues to be reconciled, if the alliance
which both require is to endure.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of Uncle Sam cutting a line on a Soviet ship
table of commerce with Moscow of the leading Western suppliers

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE FOOD WEAPON STILL WON'T WORK

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 517 words


To the Editor:

Once again the United States has chosen to use food as a weapon against an
adversary, this time the military regime in Poland.  While we are still debating
whether to reschedule Poland's principal and interest payments, the President
has already taken the decision to stop all food aid except what is currently in
the pipeline from private sources, not to send the $ 100 million in emergency
feed grains that had been committed and not to consider Poland's request for $
740 million in food aid over the next year until the military Government drops
martial law, frees those imprisoned in the crackdown and restores the legal
rights of the trade unions.§urely a reading of even the most recent history will
tell us that the denial of food affects not the government and armies of a
nation but rather its citizens, particularly the most vulnerable among them.

The Polish Government is close to bankruptcy, and we are denying food, not to
the people and farmers of an invading nation (however much we may see the hand
of the Soviet Union in the background) but to the Poles themselves, whose cause
we are supposedly defending.

As a long series of historical examples should have taught us - from the burning
of barns in Georgia during the Civil War, to the food blockade of the Central
Powers during World War I, to the siege of Leningrad in World War II, to ''food
interdiction'' in Vietnam and the blockade in Biafra - when a nation is
embattled and food is scarce, what there is will go to those in power, and
particularly to the soldiers.

Men with guns never starve. The ones who suffer are the most defenseless -babies
and young children, pregnant and nursing women, the elderly, the poor, and the
defiant men and women who have no weapon except their stubborn refusal to submit
to oppression.

Let us by all means use every economic weapon that will strike directly at the
Polish military regime, that can actually assist our friends. Let us deny the
Russians complex technology which their industry (and their armed forces) need -
including tractors, computers, chemicals and oil equipment.

But so long as the Polish Government or the church is ready to distribute food,
let us not leave the brave people of Poland without the food aid they and their
farm animals need to get through the bitter, and bitterly cold, winter that lies
ahead.

And if we need a further argument to resume food shipments, let us also remember
that our continuation of food aid to Egypt during the world food crisis of 1974
paid off handsomely in the end, in the friendship for and trust in America that
brought Anwar Sadat to Camp David.  JEAN MAYER Medford, Mass., Dec. 22, 1981 The
writer is president of Tufts University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: lette

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EVERYTHING BUT THE REASON

BYLINE: By TED MORGAN;
Ted Morgan, a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist, is the author of ''On Becoming
American'' and ''Maugham.''His new book, ''Churchill: The Rise To Failure.
1874-1915,'' will be published in 1982

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1603 words


EVERY SECRET THING By Patricia Campbell Hearst, with Alvin Moscow.  Illustrated.
466 pp. New York: Doubleday & Co. $17.95.

''FINALLY the only person who really knows tells what really happened,'' says
the ad. But that's precisely what Patricia Campbell Hearst's autobiography
doesn't do, because Patty Hearst, to this day, either doesn't know or doesn't
want to tell what really happened.

Oh, she knows the series of events - her kidnapping in Berkeley, Calif., in
1974; her confinement in a closet for 57 days by a group of gun-happy misfits
who called themselves the Symbionese Liberation Army, though the entire army
consisted of one black man, two white men and five white women; her decision to
join the group as her only means of survival; her emergence as Tania, the urban
guerrilla, who helped stick up a bank; her apparent conversion to the aims of
the group; her subsequent acts, which included another bank robbery and setting
bombs under parked police cars; and her eventual arrest, conviction and release.

All this is told with close to total recall, but one element is still missing:
Why, on the occasions when shewas left alone and could have escaped, did she
stay with her captors? She admits that she loathed them -she was forced to have
sex with all three of the men, while the women treated her the way the elder
sisters treated Cinderella.

Nor does she display much understanding of her kidnappers, who could be more
profitably studied as cases of personality disorder than as revolutionaries.
Their leader, Donald DeFreeze (Field Marshal

Cinque), a black ex-convict, spouted slogans about the dispossessed, but behind
his rh etoric there lurked the great American vice - the appetite for media
recognition. The media addict needs his fix , and what better way to guarantee
coverage on the evening news than to kidnap Patricia Hearst? Particularly since
the Symbionese Li beration Army's initial act, the murder of Marcus Foster, who
w as the first black school superintendent in Oakland, Calif., had ' 'sort of
backfired.'' Why had this flaky bunch assassinated a respected black leader?

With Patty Hearst, the granddaughter of William Randolph Hearst, they were on
firm ground. She was an appropriate symbol in the class war, and she gave the
group the notoriety it sought. For weeks afterward, according to Patty Hearst,
they were glued to their radios and television sets, gorging themselves on all
the attention.  The next step was to present her as a convert. Patty Hearst
turns into Tania, urban guerrilla. Wow, how about those headlines! By
manipulating a member of one of America's great media dynasties, DeFreeze was
able to buy into the power game. He was calling the tune. He was telling
Randolph A. Hearst to go out and feed the poor if he wanted his daughter back.
The charade ended when DeFreeze and five of his self-deluded cohorts were
trapped in a burning house and killed - a fitting death, televised live by all
three networks.

That left Patty and the Harrises, William and Emily, the Bonnie andClyde of the
clenched-fist set, to pick up th e pieces. Instead of abandoning the Harrises,
whom she hated for their bullying manner, Patty saved them from arrest. When
they were caught shoplifting in a sporting goods store, Patty, waiting outside
in their van, fired a submachine gun, which allowed them to escape. Why had she
acted against her own selfinterest? ''The only answer I could find that
satisfies me,'' Patty Hearst writes, ''which later was bolstered and reaffirmed
by expert opinion on the subject, was that I acted instinctively, because I had
been trained and drilled to do just that, to react to a situation without
thinking. ... By the time they had finished with me I was, in fact, a soldier in
the Symbionese Liberation Army.''

This was the defense used at her trial. She was brainwashed, the experts
affirmed; she was part of a growing aggregate of victims of mind bending, from
Jozsef Cardinal Mindszenty, who signed a written confession after only 35 days
of imprisonment in Communist Hungary, to those American prisoners in Korea and
Vietnam who cooperated with their jailers and sometimes remained behind when the
war was over.

The Government also had experts, who argued that Patty, a rebel without a cause,
had joined the S.L.A. voluntarily. There were unsavory intimations that she
might have enjoyed the sex in the closet. Each side trotted out its experts,
with their pat and predictable pronouncements, as if they had been recruited
from a Hire-an-Expert Agency.

These witnesses were part of the adversary process, drawing opposite conclusions
from the same psychological reports. As Patty describes herself, she was hardly
rebellious. If anything, she was by nature too submissive and obedient. Brought
up by strict parents, she was made to go to schools she didn't like and to
conform to a rigorous code of behavior. In college, she lived with Steven Weed,
her high school math instructor, substituting the authority figure of a former
teacher for her parents. She began to dislike Weed because he was not respectful
to his parents. But she went along with wedding plans, choosing silver patterns
while resenting her fiance.  One of the beneficial side effects of the
kidnapping was that it saved her from a marriage she did not want.

To compare her situation to that of American prisoners in Vietnam or to other
casualties of brainwashing seems to me to miss the point just as much as calling
her rebellious. Prisoners in Vietnam were thousands of miles from home, without
any possibility of escape; they suffered extreme physical mistreatment, and many
became broken in spirit and lost hope. Patty always had hope of surviving and
escaping, which is why, she says, she initially agreed to join the group - as a
ruse that would help her get away. She was mistreated, and indoctrinated, but
there was also a kind of playfulness at work: when she was let out of the
closet, having never seen her captors' faces, she was asked, amid giggles, to
connect each voice to each person. Even the sex helped her gain acceptance, for
it was regarded as the ''comradely'' thing to do to give in to sexual overtures.

At first, Patty complied with her captors out of fear and an instinct to
survive, but after a while she says she did so willingly. She could have called
her parents or gone home, but she did neither.  Was she brainwashed, or had she
simply adapted her normal pattern of behavior to a new setting, transferring
those qualities of submissiveness she had already shown toward her parents and
her fiance to the Symbionese Liberation Army? Just as she had been an obedient
daughter, returning the extra dollar the grocer gave her in change, just as she
had been an obedient fiancee, agreeing to marry a man she disliked, she now
developed a kind of allegiance to her kidnappers. ''I felt I owed them something
,'' she writes, ''somethinglike loyalty. '' This was after a woman had been
killed in a bank robbery in wh ich Patty was driving the getaway van. She was
''upset,'' bu t not enough to leave the aimlessly violent group - not because
she b elieved in what the group was doing, and not because shewas indoctrin ated
by lectures on Maoism, but because she had been made a member of the team and
wanted to perform as a team player. Shewas obeying h er mother's favorite
saying: If you start something, youmust finish i t.

Also, she was conforming to the principles of her father's corporate world: If
you work hard, you get promoted, you rise in the organization. When she was
picked to conduct gun classes for the other women, she felt a great sense of
accomplishment. ''For once,'' she writes, ''I was not the know-nothing idiot in
the group; for once, I was contributing something; for once, I was receiving
praise from my sisters.'' It seems to me that if Patty Hearst was brainwashed,
she was brainwashed from birth.

Patty went through the looking glass, into a world where the principles she was
brought up on and believed in found a distorted application. Field Marshal
Cinque's leadership qualities and tenacity would have been appreciated in the
corporate world, and William Harris's fearlessness and combativeness would have
found a natural outlet in the military. Cinque was killed and Harris is in jail,
but Patty, although directly involved in the gang's crimes, was pardoned by
President Jimmy Carter, and is now, thanks to the proceeds of her book,
reverting to a more traditional family pursuit, capital formation.

Miss Hearst (or Mrs. Shaw, as she is now known after her marriage to Bernard
Shaw, one of her bodyguards) still seems to be somewhat disingenuously pushing
her defense in a final appeal to the supreme court of a mass audience, but her
tale bears reading. For one thing, although her explanation is self-serving, and
although her impressions are filtered and arranged into narrative by her
co-author, Alvin Moscow, she doesn't fudge the facts. As Dr. Martin Orne, one of
the psychiatrists who examined her, put it: ''It was really quite remarkable.
Miss Hearst simply did not lie.'' For another, the book jolts us into an
awareness of the potential in this country for aberrant behavior. Sinclair Lewis
once wrote a novel called ''It Can't Happen Here,'' about a fascist takeover in
the United States. His book was unconvincing - the subject matter was beyond the
reach of the novelist's imagination. But Patricia Hearst's book - lived rather
than imagined - shows that whatever it is, however incredible, however
far-fetched, so long as it is a variant on human behavior, it can happen here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Patricia Hearst

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MORE AUTO THAN BIO

BYLINE: By ROBERT SHERRILL;
Robert Sherrill is the author of ''The Last Kennedy'' and other books

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words


GEORGE MEANY AND HIS TIMES A Biography.  By Archie Robinson.  Illustrated. 445
pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $18.75.

TEN years ago Joseph Goulden published ''Meany,'' his solid biography of George
Meany, president of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
Organizations. Although Mr. Goulden was not exactly rough, his biography did
include some of the doubts and criticisms that others had expressed about
Meany's leadership.  Meany didn't like that book at all, and he particularly did
not enjoy seeing in print some of the things he had told Mr. Goulden - such as
his description of Hubert Humphrey as a ''mush head.''

So in 1975, feeling the weight of mortality (he would die in 1980) and wanting
to leave behind a ''life'' whose creation he had controlled, Meany began a
collaboration with Archie Robinson, a friendly reporter with
------------------------------------------long experience at the The Detroit
News and U.S. News & World Report. Meany then edited all of their many taped
interviews. Mr. Robinson describes the resulting book as an ''authorized
biography,'' but actually there's more auto than bio here. The book is largely a
compilation of Meany's chronologically arranged recollections - long, long
quotes - with brief transitional passages supplied by Mr.  Robinson, who writes
more in the spirit of a vicar supplying marginal notes to holy writ than of a
biographer setting down the facts.

No doubt Meany would have approved the results (Mr. Goulden's book is not
mentioned in Mr. Robinson's bibliography). His heirs at the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
obviously do, for ''in commemoration of (the union's) centennial and in tribute
to the memory of George Meany,'' they have made copies of the book available in
a ''Special Labor Offer'' for bulk sale at cut-rate prices.

Since Meany did most of the talking, it's no surprise that the man who emerges
from these pages is uncompromisingly honest and patriotic to the bone, a smooth
labor politician, a persuasive lobbyist, a usually common-sensical fellow who
was anything but the Irish clod some people took him for.

That's how Meany saw himself.  And there was a good deal of accuracy in that
perception. When Meany became A.F.L. president in 1952, he transformed it almost
immediately from a lunch-bucket outfit to a potent lobbying and political force.
In that year the A.F.L. convention - under Meany's goading - endorsed a
Presidential candidate for the first time. And the next year, also for the first
time, the A.F.L. executive council kicked out a member union for doing business
with racketeers. And of course Meany must be given much credit for selling the
idea of joining the A.F.L. with the C.I.O. in 1955 as the only way to end
enormously costly - and mostly futile - inter-union raiding.

Meany's strength was that he was a superb born bureaucrat. He worked as a
plumber for the first five years of his union career, but at the age of 27 he
moved behind a desk, and that's where he operated for the rest of his life. That
talent was also the source of his great weakness, as this book, contrary to
Meany's intent, makes clear.

Though he scoffed at ''ivory tower'' theorists, ironically it was as a theorist
that he came in contact with the national adventures of his lifetime. The
classic bureaucrat, he dealt with them at one remove. He himself escaped war and
poverty. Although he was young enough and healthy enough to serve in World War
I, he stayed at home to support his mother and siblings, he said. The gritty,
often unsafe, occasionally desperate life of the American worker in the Great
Depression was something he did not share. He never walked a picket line, took
part in only one strike (against the United States Government to get higher pay
for plumbers on welfare jobs). His job was secure. He never came close to losing
an election.

A high school dropout, Meany seems to have felt an enormous insecurity around
''eggheads'' - or ''academic nitwits,'' as he sometimes called them. He did not
trust them, which is probably why he tried to persuade the A.F.L.-C.I.O. not to
endorse Adlai Stevenson in 1956. It was certainly one of the reasons he opposed
the candidacy of George McGovern in 1972. Meany was annoyed that ''39 percent of
the delegates at the convention held post-graduate college degrees.''

His view of the world was simple: Communists were the great devils,and the strug
gle against Communism took precedence over domestic affairs and e ven over labor
issues.

Although most A.F.L. and C.I.O. officials complained that big business ran the
Eisenhower Administration, Meany viewed that era with satisfaction because it
was the heyday of the cold war. He relished the cold war and wanted it to go on
forever. He admired the early Richard Nixon, ''the most ferocious anti-Communist
this country ever saw,'' though he boasted that he ran Nixon a close second in
that fanaticism. Because Nixon had been such a devoted cold warrior, Meany put
up with a great deal from him when he became President.  Meany tells us in
detail how Nixon abused him, insulted him, made a sucker out of him. But what
Meany never forgave Nixon for was deciding finally to ease up on the Russians
and Chinese - a change of heart that Meany saw as ''just ordinary appeasement''
that ''compromised human freedom.''

Still, he did appreciate Nixon's sticking it out in Vietnam. Not until 1974,
with 50,000 American lives and the war lost, did Meany concede that it had been
a mistake to support that conflict. But he shrugged it off. ''I've been wrong
plenty before,'' he said, as though Vietnam were no worse than a labor
negotiation blunder.

I think it's safe to say that Meany did not get the book he thoughthe was
getting. In an authorized biography, t he subject can be protected from everyone
but himself. ''George Meany and His Times'' shows why he was such a success with
the Wash ington establishment, for he was a master at getting along. But it also
suggests at least one reason why the percentage of union member s among the
American labor force dropped sharply during the quarte r century of Meany's
presidency. He was simply not an inspiring le ader.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AN EX-MARINE ASKS: WHAT'S GOING ON?

BYLINE: By David Douglas Duncan

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1181 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


Ever since the end of the war, we - the most powerful nation -have been running
around the earth lamenting our loss of manhood, while trying to prove we
haven't. Everywhere, we have discovered alien forces that threaten us and our
benign role as leader of a new, decent, disciplined, democratic world shaped
into our mirror-image.

It's really grotesque! The Japan Times headlines the report that Washington will
no longer validate passports for Libya because we are endangered by a ''hit
team,'' dispatched by Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi to knock off ''targets of
opportunity'' among our politicians, including the President himself. That must
be the bottom line of how far we have sunk into the abyss of fear of seeing
ourselves threatened from all sides. The United States of America vs. The Libyan
Five - sent out with bazookas, silencers, maybe even arseniclaced jellybeans, to
bring down our rippling-over-the-Potomac, poor old Stars and Stripes. It's
enough to make one scrape the mold off World War II battle gear and head for
North Africa with a John Wayne glint in still-proud eyes.

At first, of course, our super-enemy was the Soviet Union. When it became a
superpower too, we had to refocus a bit to brighten our image of those unruly
newcomers (Nikita pounding a United Nations table with his shoe): hearty chaps,
really - with insatiable appetites, like all robust men of the fields and
forests: Sell 'em all the grain they need for their kids and cows from our
bursting silos. Just steer clear of the Big Bang and make a buck. Everyone
learned the game, and the new rules.

Nobody in Washington panicked when Soviet MIG's shot down an American
reconnaisance plane probing Russian frontiers of Turkey, or when their fighters
scrambled to clobber another American recon-crew over international waters in
the Arctic but too near Murmansk. When Francis Gary Powers's U-2 was rocketed
out of the stratosphere over the heartland of Mother Russia, the Russians only
junked the Paris summit conference with Eisenhower. It was a good show - I was
there - with Khruschev indignantly bellicose in front of the press, and Ike
staying in our embassy, confessing to caught-in-the-act sinning, but safe
because th e sinned against were the evil and godless them. Next day, everyone
went home and history suffered scarcely a ripple.  Washington and Moscow
understood: Don't fiddl e with the Big Button.

Listening to the thunder of drums over the White House today, one wonders about
those legions of security forces -Secret Service men, F.B.I. men, C.I.A. men,
and local cops of that vast seen-and-unseen army who protect the brass. What are
they doing now that is more than they have been doing since Squeaky Fromm and
Arthur Bremmer and John Hinckley and other natives sneaked past them to draw a
bead on their wards? And what more can they do - except to stop going public
with their act - with just five more creeps, from Libya, slinking around?

Watching and listening from here, the whole charade appears absurd, simply by
being here - Pearl Harbor day 40 years later. There was no visible difference
from most early winter days. Foreigners mixed with locals shopping along the
Ginza. I landed here the first time as a marine, before MacArthur, was aboard
the Missouri during the surrender-signing ceremony, and have walked main streets
and back lanes ever since. No shadows, no threats. Enemies don't last forever,
but fear!

When the Russians became invulnerable, sharing our invulnerability, through
missiles, we still seemed to need someone to fear. Japan failed us miserably
when postwar Japanese looked at their destroyed cities, and then met the Messiah
himself -MacArthur. They got the message of the new religion, fast. No more war:
hai, hai (''yes, yes''); amen. No more aggressive military ambitions: hai, hai;
amen.  As a Japanese friend, a book printer, explained: ''No. We don't worry
about the future. Don't you understand? Our frontiers of tomorrow are in the
mind. And our education, our children, will conquer them.''

Tod ay, Japa n is one of the few countries in the world where one hears laughte
r everywhere.  With German y conquered, the Kremlin checkmated, Japan converted,
it became eas ier - safer - to peek around looking for someone to fear...and ma
ybe do something about. Ideally, somebody far away, froma country abo ut which
almost nothing was known.

Ho Chi Minh and Vietnam were perfect for Lyndon Johnson: 220 million against 18
million, water buffalo and all. No risk, really.  For Richard Nixon and Henry
Kissinger, Vietnam was basic fear material, enough for even revamping and
enlarging upon without bigwar risk (they know their Kremlin counterparts).
Naturally, North Vietnam (and a lot of South) was somewhat decimated by the end
of their time: after B-52 carpet bombings, napalm, Agent Orange. The message was
clear: We're not afraid of anybody. Muck around with us and you'll reap the
typhoon - unless you have H-bombs, rockets, fighter-bombers, and horizon-filling
divisions of battle tanks. In that case, we'll meet in Geneva and talk.

America-the-Free-of-fear warriors faltered, then staggered on - waiting for a
savior - while under the too-gentle, too-innocent guidance of Jimmy Carter who
lost his way down a detour leading to Human Rights - perhaps while reflecting on
blacks and browns, and Jews and Arabs. Yet in his idealistic, unrealistic,
misguided heart, he seemed not to fear much of anything except sheer ignorance,
and misused weapons and intelligence.

Now, we hear the cavalryman's bugle as he reassembles Americans to ride shotgun
once more to protect our encircled wagon trains of destiny. Cubans are coming;
and Nicaraguans; and Salvadorans (hard to find a more microscopic place, except
maybe Monaco or Andorra); and Libyans, too. Everyone to battle stations!
Bogeyman-of-the-month Qaddafi's five stooges are out to gun us down. Steel-jawed
posse man Jack Anderson stares from the front pages of Tokyo's newspapers,
holding aloft composite and incriminating sketches of The Libyan Five for TV
cameras on the ''Good Morning America'' show.

Well, as a retired Marine with unfaded patriotic memories, I presume I'm
supposed to feel that old surge of outrage, then buckle on my rusty combat gear.
Instead, I'm going out for dinner -sushi - then come back to my hotel room, turn
on the Armed Forces Far East radio station for the evening news...hoping to hear
someone in America laugh.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
David Douglas Duncan, a photographer, is author of the forthcoming book ''The
World of Allah.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of Uncle Sam holding onto the fuse of a bomb

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S., AID THE AFGHANS

BYLINE: By Rosanne Klass

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 970 words


Just two years ago, when Soviet forces rolled into Afghanistan to prevent the
overthrow of the Communist regime installed in the bloody 1978 coup, most of the
world thought that Afghanis tan was conquered. Few observers would have
predicted then that Mos cow's new puppets would fail as badly as their
predecessors, and that in 1982 the Afghan people would still be fighting for
their freedom, and more strongly than ever.

Yet today, Moscow is casting about for non-Communist turncoats to prop up the
impotent regime of Babrak Karmal, while the Afghan resistance -made up of
virtually all the Afghan people - controls most of the country. Soviet forces
are pinned down in Kabul and a few military bases, waiting for the Afghans to
exhaust themselves, forgotten by the world. The United States must make sure
that this does not happen.

It is time for Washington to make the American public aware that for more than
three years the stubbornly independent Afghans, struggling alone and almost
unaided against the Soviet Union, have been fighting our fight. It is time to
give up convoluted efforts to ignore Moscow's transparent goals, and its decades
of careful preparation for the opportune moment to seize Afghanistan, and face a
stark fact: Afghanistan is a key to eventual Soviet expansion in South Asia and
the Indian Ocean.

In 3,500 years, no power that held the mountains of Afghanistan and wanted to
move into the Indian subcontinent has been prevented from doing so. The Soviet
Union has in effect annexed Afghanistan's Wakhan Salient, the finger of land
reaching eastward to China's border, and installed radar that scans India,
Pakistan, a nd parts of China and the Indian Ocean. Preparations for subverting
Pakistan proceed apace:Since 1979, agents provocateurs have been tra ined in
Afghanistan.  Only Afghan resistance has kept the Russians from completing new
air bases within easy reach of the Persian Gulf.

Leaders of the resistance inside Afghanistan have made it clear to me that,
despite reports to the contrary, the resistance is operationally unified. They
have asserted that their people are prepared to continue fighting for years,
even decades - long enough, they hope, to persuade Moscow to accept a political
solution restoring Afghan independence and a Government chosen by the Afghan
people. But the Afghans cannot carry out such an extended struggle unaided and
alone.

It is time for America to provide strong, effective assistance - diplomatic,
political, economic, and with arms support. First of all, Washington, using
international political and economic pressures, must make it clear that
Afghanistan remains a major issue. Poland and Afghanistan should be linked in
policy as they are in fact: Afghanistan helped give the Poles their 16 months of
hope and perhaps kept the Soviet Army out of Poland, while every pressure put on
Moscow in Poland's behalf aids the Afghan struggle.

Washington should serve notice that it will respond to any further cross-border
attacks that violate Pakistan's territorial integrity.  Even if the Pakistani
Government is less than ideal, its collapse would spell international disaster.

America should provide more effective aid to the resistance fighters inside
Afghanistan, and make sure that it gets to them - antiaircraft and antitank
weapons, medical supplies, the guns and the bullets they need and lack.
Afghanistan is not Vietnam: The Afghans want to do their own fighting; they ask
only the weapons to do it with.

America should support and strengthen those elements - the vast majority of
Afghans - who seek a more democratic rather than authoritarian future. And the
Administration should reappraise its understanding of Afghan realities: For
decades, American policies have been affected by accumulated disinformation
systematically fed to us by Communists who infiltrated the local staff of our
embassy in Kabul, starting with Noor Mohammad Taraki, the leader of the 1978
coup, who was a translator in the embassy. A number of reliable Afghan leaders
have survived, and their expertise should at last be used.

Washington should stop demanding the kind of political unity that is impossible
during an occupation and guerrilla warfare and should ignore the squabbling of
political factions based in Pakistan. It should prepare to recognize the
unprecedented internal unity that, according to reliable information reaching
me, is being forged by local leadership councils throughout Afghanistan.

The Afghans have more than proved their willingness to fight for themselves. If
the monstrous details of Soviet-directed atrocities in Afghanistan ever become
fully known, they will rank with Lidice, the Katyn Forest, and Babi Yar. These
horrors might cease if the Afghan people would only stop fighting. I asked an
Afghan field commander: Why don't they? ''Do you think that Americans are the
only ones who care about freedom?'' he replied.

The Administration should act on Jeane J. Kirkpatrick's warning: ''The Soviet
Union can conquer Afghanistan only by eliminating the Afghan nation. This the
world must not permit to happen, for if Afghanistan is vanquished, no
independent nation will be safe.''
------------------------------------------------- --------------------
Rosanne Klass directs the Afghanistan information center at Freedom House, which
monitors political rights around the world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 6, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. URGED TO KEEP DRAFT ENROLLMENT

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 5


Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and the Joint Chiefs of Staff have
recommended that draft registration continue, Administration and Congressional
officials said today.

The proposal was somewhat surprising since President Reagan had pledged to
abolish the registration of young men for a possible military draft. Moreover,
Mr. Weinberger had recently extolled progress in recruiting and retention of
military personnel and had expressed a conviction that the volunteer force could
succeed.

Favored by Joint Chiefs

Henry E. Catto Jr., chief spokesman for the Pentagon, declined to confirm that
Mr. Weinberger had made the recommendation, saying that the Secretary preferred
to keep his discussions with Mr. Reagan private. But Mr. Catto acknowledged that
the Joint Chiefs of Staff favored a continuation of draft registration.

The recommendations, along with a report from a military manpower commission
established by the President, have gone to the White House, and an announcement
of Mr. Reagan's decision is expected shortly, the officials said.

Timing appears to complicate the decision. If Mr. Reagan decides to retain
registration for the draft to show resolve in response to the military crackdown
in Poland, he would appear to follow a similar decision by President Carter,
whom he criticized for renewing draft registration in response to Soviet
intervention in Afghanistan.

But Mr. Reagan might appear less than resolved if he abolished draft
registration while seeking allied sanctions against Poland and the Soviet Union.

Mr. Carter moved to resume registration for Selective Service on Jan. 23, 1980,
almost exactly seven years after President Nixon replaced the military draft
with the volunteer armed forces.

Legal and Budget Problems

Further complicating Mr. Reagan's decision are legal and budget considerations,
the officials said. The Administration recently postponed moves to prosecute
those who failed to register for the draft, pending the President's decision.

In the early months of draft registration, which began in the summer of 1980,
the Selective Service System was too preoccupied with making the renewed system
work to be concerned with going after evaders. Moreover, the issue was in
question before the Supreme Court, which eventually ruled that draft
registration for men only was constitutional.

Later, as registration progressed smoo thly, prosecution was hampered by a lack
of means to ascertain just who had failed to register. The Selective Service
System was fo rbidden by law to use Social Security numbers or tax records to
det ermine precisely who fell into the age brackets that were required to
register.

In addition, the Justice Department, which had tied up manpower and money in
long and difficult prosecutions of draft evaders in the Vietnam War, showed
little enthusiasm for prosecution under the renewed system.

Justice Dept. Told to Wait

When it became apparent that the Government would have to begin prosecutions or
see the entire system fall apart because of resistance, the Reagan
Administration stepped in and instructed the Justice Department to wait until
the President h ad decided whether toretain or abo lish draft registration.

The American Civil Liberties Union, which has opposed draft registration, has
estimated that one million young men have failed to register. Officials of the
organization said the uncertain future of registration had led many young men to
wait and see before registering.

If Mr. Reagan should decide to continue registration, some of the young men who
have not registered would probably sign up. But others, including active
resisters and those who hope just to slide by unnoticed, would not register.

That would confront the Administration with the question of costly prosecutions
of several hundred thousand young men even as the President seeks new ways to
cut the Federal budget and its prospective deficit.

In the 1980 Presidential campaign, Mr. Reagan said that he opposed both the
peacetime draft and peacetime draft registration. But he has permitted it to
continue while a high-level commission under the chairmanship of Mr. Weinberger
examined all facets of the military manpower situation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 7, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Abroad at Home;
WHO LOST POLAND?

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Jan. 6


If Jimmy Carter were President now, he would surely be under savage attack from
the right on the Polish question.  That would be so, in fact, if just about any
Democrat were in the White House. The critics would be blaming him for failing
to prevent the disaster in Poland.

Recriminations of that kind have had a bitter place in American postwar history.
The right-wing charge that Democratic Administrations had ''lost China'' -
though utterly senseless because the Chinese revolution was beyond our control -
poisoned U.S. policy in Asia for 30 years. There are zealots today who say we
''lost Vietnam'' by failing to carry that war into a fourth decade.

Centrists and liberals lack the unrelenting fanaticism needed to make that kind
of charge against President Reagan on Poland. They know that the Polish
situation was complicated and America's leverage limited. They hope that
something may still be salvaged in Poland, and they do not want to damage
American policy by politicizing it.

But there is no reason to exempt Mr. Reagan from criticism on the Polish issue
entirely, as so many politicians and commentators seem to be doing. For his
Administration's performance on Poland before the crackdown Dec. 13 was dismal.
Whatever chance the West had of affecting events, Washington lessened it by
ignorance, muddled priorities and lack of imagination.

The most striking thing about the record of the Reagan Administration's first
year in foreign and national security affairs is that Poland hardly appears on
it. We heard about the threat to freedom in El Salvador. We heard about Libyan
hit squads. We heard about the need for Awacs in Saudi Arabia.

On East-West relations, President Reagan said from the start that the
fundamental necessity was for the United States to increase its military
strength. He launched the greatest peacetime American defense buildup, including
vast new nuclear weapons systems.

Yet all the nuclear warheads and missiles were likely to have less effect on the
Soviet system and its relations with the West than the events that unrolled in
Poland in 1981. It took no great strategic genius in Washington to understand
that the survival of Solidarity, with a foothold for freedom in Poland, would do
more for the security of the West and the hope of larger freedom than 100 MX
missiles.

Given the enormous opportunity in Poland, an American government of modest good
sense would have devoted itself overwhelmingly in 1981 to the Polish crisis. And
the major problems of policy and diplomacy were evident.

The Russians, first of all, had a security interest in Poland, one generally
respected in the West. Whether we like it or not, the postwar settl ement in
Europe promised the Soviet Union above all thatit would not again be threatened
through Poland. The NATO allies could have re moved any genuine security
question by making clear to Moscow that t hey did not see the changes in Poland
as affecting the postwar under standing.

Second, Western leaders knew perfectly well that the experiment in reform could
not work unless the Poles got massive economic help from outside - from the
West. That required an act of daring and imagination, a willingness t o pledge
very lar ge sums on condition that the process of reform in Poland continue .

The leadership in those steps could only come from Washington. But there was no
leadership. There was no imagination. There was nothing that suggested an
understanding of the stakes in Poland.

The allies, like Moscow, saw an American Government given to bellicose East-West
preachments instead of the hard work of helping Poland. Some people in the
Reagan Administration actually sounded as if they wanted Soviet troops to march
into Poland, because that would make East-West relations worse.

It may be that no American or Western policy would have worked. The Soviet
leadership's fear of freedom -the fear that it will spread and destabilize the
East European empire - may simply be too great.  And the hope of gradual reform
in Poland may have depended on the degree of restraint in a suppressed people
that is beyond human capacity.

But there is no better hope of change in Eastern Europe. The Polish experiment
had the undeniable support of the mass of the population, and it had going for
it the undeniable evidence of failure in political leadership. Those facts have
not changed, and so there may still be a chance - and a need for American
leadership.

Aleksander Smolar, who represented the Polish political reform movement KOR in
the West, said the other day: ''The West must also demonstrate its determination
- unfortunately lacking so far - to provide massive economic aid to Poland. But
this aid should be subject to clear conditions: no aid, even no rescheduling of
debts, unless all the people detained are released and martial law is lifted.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLAND'S SLUMP ENDANGERING ECONOMICS OF THE SOVIET BLOC

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1599 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 7


Poland's deteriorating economy, whic h has suffered a 25 percent drop in
industrial production over the last two years, is threatenin g to cause severe
damage to the economies of the Soviet Union and its European allies.

The Polish crisis, Western experts say, is aggravating shortages in the rest of
the Eastern bloc, weakening economic links between the Communist countries and
undermining their creditworthiness in international financial markets, making it
hard for them to finance further imports of Western goods.

Polish Exports Curtailed

Banking sources in Bonn hinted today at the financial strains that Moscow may be
feeling. They said that the Soviet Union had asked West German banks for an
additional $137 million in credits for a major natural gas pipeline project and
said that the funds might be needed to help the Russians finance aid for Poland.
(Page D1.)

Poland has been unable to supply its partners in the Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance - the economic organization that embraces the Soviet Union, Poland,
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, Cuba, Mongolia and
Vietnam - with the coal, sulfur, industrial goods and food that they had been
counting on for their own development.

This trade group, known as Comecon, operates under a system that encourages its
member countries to become specialist suppliers of key products to the whole
bloc.

Impact of Sudden Cutbacks

In the centrally planned economies of Eastern Europe, sudden cutbacks in
deliveries of raw materials and industrial goods cause much greater dislocation
than in the West, where a shortfall from one source can usually be made up
somewhere else.

''In Eastern Europe, bottlenecks build up very quickly if anything goes wrong,
and they can often only be broken by buying additional supplies from the West
with scarce hard currency,'' said Philip Hanson, an expert on Eastern Europe at
England's Birmingham University.

Acknowledging the difficulties caused by Poland's faltering economy, Viktor
Gryshin, a member of the Soviet Politburo, said at Polish Communist Party
congress in Warsaw last July that shortfalls in Polish deliveries ''are
painfully affecting the interests of Poland' s socialist partners.''

But Poland's Communist trading partners, in a display of what they call
''fraternal solidarity,'' are continuing to supply Poland with far more food and
goods than it is sending them, even though such help aggravates their own
shortages.

Just yesterday the Warsaw radio reported that the Soviet Union and Poland had
signed an $11.8 billion trade agreement under which Poland would receive fuel,
raw materials and $3.8 billion in credits.

The setbacks in Poland come at a time when other Comecon members are already
experiencing increasingly serious economic difficulties of their own. Overall
economic growth for the Comecon nations of Eastern Europe, which averaged 5.7
percent in 1976, has slowed every year since then, reaching 1.2 percent in 1980,
according to the latest figures issued by the International Monetary Fund.

Although the Comecon countries' present five-year economic plans project more
vigorous growth, ranging between 3 and 4 percent a year during the period of
1981-85, the I.M.F. doubts that these targets can be met.

''If the rest of Comecon was performing well, the bloc could probably ride out
the Polish crisis,'' said Alexander Nove, a Glasgow University expert on Eastern
Europe's economies. ''What makes it serious for them is that they are all in at
least as big an economic crisis as the West.''

In the last few weeks, the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia have reduced the
official targets set for their five-year plans. Western economists believe these
cutbacks reflect Comecon's deteriorating prospects in view of the Polish crisis.


Uncertainty Stirs Problems

When Comecon prime ministers met last July in Sofia, the Bulgarian capital, they
were unable to complete an overdue coordination of members' 1981-85 development
plans because of uncertainty about the Polish economy.

The sharp cut in Polish coal exports to the Soviet Union and its European allies
has probably been the most painful result of the Polish crisis so far, Western
analysts generally agree. From 20 million tons in 1979, Polish coal exports to
the rest of Comecon dropped to 12 million tons in 1980 and were probably barely
4 million tons last year.

In 1980 the Soviet Union got only about 6 million tons of coal from Poland
instead of the planned 9.5 million tons. And last year, according to Western
officials' estimates, Poland faile d to meet its reduced targe t of 5.5 million
tons.

Even though the Soviet Union itself produces 700 million tons of coal a year, a
marginal decline of available supplies ''can create serious inconveniences when
the country is short of energy,'' said Dr. Hanson of Birmingham University.

Last year Poland reduced its promise of coal deliveries to Czechoslovakia to 1.2
million tons from 2.5 million tons. Even the new figure, some Western officials
suggest, is an optimistic target.  Czechoslovakia is believed to have spent at
least $100 million buying coal from West Germany in recent months.
Czechoslovakia has also introduced weekend work in its coal mines and has given
miners increased rations in an effort to make up for the Polish lag.

Some Projects Are Hampered

Pravda, the Soviet Communist Party newspaper, recently quoted Ladislav Luhovy,
general manager of the Czechoslovak Martin heavy engineering works, as saying
planned co-production of tractors with Poland was ''very, very seriously
threatened'' by the failure of the Ursus tractor plant near Warsaw to deliver
promised tractor parts.

Czechoslovakia's Banska Bystrica computer enterprise has announced that
production is being cut because of a shortage of Polish-made integrated
circuits.

The Soviet Union's Kama River truck plant has said it is short of brake
assemblies because of a shortfall in Polish supplies.  Western officials say
East German ammunition manufacturers have been been buying sulfur in the West
because less of it is now available from Poland.

The impact of Poland's economic crisis has not fallen equally on all Comecon
countries.  During the first nine months of 1981, Poland actually increased its
exports to Bulgaria and Rumania, although it cut back supplies to other Eastern
European countries, according to the latest Polish trade statistics.

How the Burden Is Shared

''The developing Comecon countries are being shielded from the Polish crisis,
while the richer ones are bearing the burden alone,'' said Anita Tiraspolsky, a
specialist in Eastern European economic affairs at the Documentation Fran,caise,
a French Government research center.

The Polish trade figures also show that, wh ile the Soviet Union andEast Germany
sent Poland substantially more g oods than it sent them last year, other Comecon
countries generally imported more from Poland than they sent to it. But Western
offi cials at the Brussels headquarters of the North Atlantic Treaty Org
anization believe the Soviet Union is forcing other Comecon countri es to help
pay some of the cost of aiding Poland by reducing the amo unt of oil it is
supplying them this year at prices lower than world market prices.  This lets
the Russians increase oil deliverie s to Poland.

According to these NATO sources, the Soviet Union plans to increase oil
shipments to Poland by 3 million tons, to 16 million tons, while it will cut
deliveries to Hungary by 2 million tons and perhaps also reduce exports to East
Germany and Czechoslovakia.

Frustration Over Joint Aid

Western officials say this move follows the Soviet Union's failure at the Sofia
meeting last July to get its partners to agree on a program of joint aid for
Poland that would have spread the cost among all Comecon members. Other members
(with the possible exception of East Germany) are believed to have pleaded
poverty or to have blamed Poland for its own difficulties. However, apparently
they promised to step up their shipments of food to Poland.

The Soviet Union also asserts that it gave Poland some $2.15 billion in
financial aid, forgiving debt repayments and providing new foreign currency
loans. Such support would imply additional hardships for the Soviet people and
the rest of Comecon. Moscow would have less foreign currency to buy foreign
grain with, to compensate for another poor harvest, or to lend to its other
allies.

Poland's inability to pay its Western debts has added to the pressure on Comecon
by reminding Western banks and governments that several other Eastern European
countries also are burdened with heavy foreign debts that they may have
difficulty repaying in today's depressed economic climate.

''There is little opportunity for a further development of East-West trade, now
that Comecon countries are being forced to reduce debt instead of adding to
it,'' warns Heinrich Makofski of D.I.W., the West German economic research
institute based in Berlin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of Eastern bloc countries (Page A8) Graph of
Poland's trade balance (Page A8)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN, IN A SHIFT, PLANS TO CONTINUE SIGN-UP FOR DRAFT

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 930 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7


President Reagan announced today that he had decided to continue registration of
young men for a possible military draft.

In a marked reversal of the position he took in the election campaign, Mr.
Reagan said: ''We live in a dangerous world. In the event of a future threat to

Text of statement, page B5.
national safety, registration could save the United States as much as six weeks
in mobilizing emergency manpower.''

But the President also said: ''Make no mistake: The continuation of peacetime
registration does not foreshadow a return to the draft.'' He said he remained
firm in the conviction that the draft should be resumed only in the most severe
national emergency.

'No Emergency Now Exists'

''No such emergency now exists, and registration is in no way a proxy for
conscription,'' the President said in a statement read to reporters by his
counselor, Edwin Meese 3d.

Mr. Meese, in response to questions, repeatedly told reporters that the crisis
in Poland and a desire to avoid sending misleading signals to the Soviet Union
had not figured in the President's decision. The major consideration, he
asserted, was the finding of a Presidential manpower commission that
registration could speed mobilization by six weeks.

In the Presidential campaign, Mr. Reagan criticized President Carter for
ordering the resumption of registration in 1980 after the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan, asserting that it was a meaningless gesture. Mr. Meese seemed to
take pains today to avoid drawing parallels in the Reagan Administration's
policy toward Poland.

After Mr. Carter ordered the resumption, Mr. Reagan said that ''registrati o n
will do little to enhance our military preparedness.''He said in a letter to
antidraft advocates in Congress: ''Perhaps the most fund amental objection to
draft registration is moral. Only in the most s evere national emergency does
the Government have a claim to the mandatory service of its young people. In any
other time, a draft or draft registration destroys the very values that our
society i s committed to defending.''

Question of Prosecution

The decision confronted the Administration with the immediate question of how to
enforce registration because one million young men liable for registration are
estimated to have failed to do so. A spokesman for the Selective Service System
said that 6.6 million young men had signed up since registration was revived.
The Government has not prosecuted those who did not sign up.

In his statement, the President said, ''Late registrations are being accepted
and I have instructed the Department of Justice to make provision for a grace
period for late registrants.''

The law requires a young man to register within 30 days of his 18th birthday.
Mr. Meese said the grace period for those in potential violation of the law
would be 30 to 60 days. Failure to register calls for fines up to $10,000 or
imprisonment for up to five years or both.

Officials of the Selective Service System said they expected most of those who
had not registered to do so now that the President's decision on continuing
registration had been made. But even if all but 5 percent do sign up, the
Justice Department would face the task of prosecuting 50,000 young men. Mr.
Meese said the department would have to prosecute young men who failed to
register after the grace period had expired.

The White House announcement drew criticism. David Landau, counsel for the
American Civil Liberties Union, said: ''President Reagan's decision today was
unconscionable. Over the past year and a half, registration has failed to win
the support of the overwhelming majority of young people.''

''The President has therefore precipitated a law-enforcement castastrophe,'' he
went on. ''Millions of dollars will have to be wasted in a vain attempt to
enforce this law. President Reagan, like President Carter after Afghanistan, is
using the lives of young people to play a game of military and foreign policy
symbols.''

The draft ended in 1973 after the end of United States involvement in the
Vietnam War. President Carter ordered registration resumed in February 1980 as
part of what he called a demonstration of American resolve after the Soviet
intervention in Afgh anistan in 1979.  Registration began in the summer of 1980.

After taking office, Mr. Reagan held off deciding whether to continue
registration until the Supreme Court ruled, in June, that the conscription of
men without drafting women was constitutional.

He then named a commission, headed by the Secretary of Defense, Caspar W.
Weinberger, to study all aspects of military manpower, including draft
registration and the draft. Mr. Weinberger and the Joint Chiefs of Staff were
reported this week to have recommended continuing draft registration.

Mr. Reagan also permitted the Justice Department to prepare for prosecution of
those who failed to register. In December, in what appeared a signal that he
would abolish registration, he ordered the Justice Department to hold up until
he had decided whether to continue registration. At the Republican convention,
Mr. Reagan said in his acceptance speech: ''I'll tell you where I stand: I do
not favor a peacetime draft or registration.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Edwin Meese 3d (Page B5)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 9, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

END OF ACTION ON I.B.M. FOLLOWS EROSION OF ITS DOMINANT POSITION

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Co lumn 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1434 words


The Justice Department announced yesterday that it had decided to drop an
antitrust suit that it started almost 13 years ago in an effort to dismember the
International Business Machines Corporation.

The move was widely anticipated. Recently numerous court decisions in antitrust
complaints filed by competitors have favored I.B.M.  Also, decisions in private
suits against the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and the Eastman Kodak
Company weakened the Government's legal position in the I.B.M. case. And
I.B.M.'s dominance of the computer industry has undergone general erosion since
the case was filed.

The suit charged I.B.M. with monopolizing the general purpose computer market,
consisting of companies that sold computer equipment, programming and services.
The requested relief included breaking I.B.M. up into smaller companies.

Announcements of the ending of the suit came simultaneously at a 4 P.M. news
conference in Washington called by William H. Baxter, an Assistant Attorney
General who had spent six months reviewing the case, and in the Manhattan
courtroom of David N. Edelstein, the Federal district judge who had presided
over it. The Government said the case was ''without merit and should be
dismissed.''

Computer analysts said the decision would not have a major impact on the
computer industry, where I.B.M. is facing a growing challenge from Japanese
computer makers and from American companies that make equipment that can operate
with I.B.M.'s programs. I.B.M. and its competitors alike were said to have
expected an outcome favorable to the company.

''This case didn't have a ghost of a chance,'' said Calvert D.  Crary, a
litigation specialist with the Wall Str eet firm of Bear, Stearns & Com pany.

The stipulation for dismissal stated that both sides would pay their own costs.
The Reagan Administration reportedly has estimated that the case cost the
Government as much as $13.4 million. I.B.M.  has refused to disclose its cost,
but it is believed to be several million dollars.

At the hearing in New York, Thomas Barr, I.B.M.'s chief lawyer, said, ''This
case led to the filing of many private antitrust actions.'' Noting that I.B.M.
had gained favorable rulings from 16 Federal judges in various antitrust
actions, he concluded, ''I.B.M.  has been completely vindicated.''

Minor cases against the company are still outstanding, but they have been idle
for several years. A recent ruling by a Federal judge dismissing an antitrust
complaint by the Transamerica Corporation is on appeal to the United States
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, said an I.B.M. spokesman, Edward Nanus.

The Government's case was filed by Ramsay Clark, then the Attorney General, on
Jan. 17, 1969, the last business day of the Johnson Administration.

Yesterday's announcement was hailed as ''wonderful news'' by John R. Opel,
I.B.M.'s president and chief executive officer. But the way the stipulation was
handled seemed to ruffle Judge Edelstein and some junior Government attorneys.

Although the judge had frequently encouraged the two parties to enter into
settlement negotiations, he was clearly unhappy with Mr.  Baxter's failure to
appear for yesterday's announcement. The stipulation was signed Thursday night
in Washington by Mr. Baxter and yesterday morning by Mr. Barr.

Mr. Baxter stayed in Washington for the announcement, also made yesterday, that
the Government's antitrust suit against the American Telephone and Telegraph
Company had been settled. In his place, he sent Abbott Lipsky, a deputy. Because
of a legal technicality related to his prior involvement in the A.T.&T. case, he
was unable to discuss Mr. Baxter's absence. The judge angrily chastised Mr.
Lipsky.

After hearing the presentations by Mr. Lipsky and Mr. Barr, Judge Edelstein
noted that Federal court rules permitted the parties to drop a case without any
action by the presiding judge. He said that the stipulation did not represent a
court ruling on any aspect of the case.

A junior Government attorney, who declined to let his name be used, wearily
expressed dismay after the hearing. ''We could see it coming,'' he said, adding
that Mr. Baxter had been extremely critical of the trial team's strategy and
theories during his review of the case. ''When you go through so many Assistant
Attorney Generals,'' the lawyer said, ''you are bound to get one who disagrees
with what you've done.''

The view that the dismissal was long overdu e won wide support amongthe computer
industry experts who follow I.B. M. ''It's about time,'' said Thomas J. Crotty,
vice president for res earch at the Gartner Group, a Stamford, Conn., market
research fir m. ''The winners were the lawyers. The losers were the stockholders
and taxpayers. The institutional investment community had antici pated this and
I think I.B.M.'s management had, too.''

John C. Hart, senior computer analyst at the International Data Corporation in
Framingham, Mass., agreed. He cited I.B.M.'s reorganization last October to let
it market its products more aggressively as a sign that I.B.M.'s management was
expecting a favorable outcome.

Mr. Hart said the victory did not make the day entirely happy for I.B.M.,
though. The Government's settlement with A.T.&T., he said, clears the way for
legislation to allow the telecommunications giant to plunge into head-to-head
compitition with I.B.M. in computers.

The long Justice Department suit against I.B.M. had been described as the
''antitrust division's Vietnam'' by Robert H. Bork, a Yale law professor.

Discovery and pretrial proceedings consumed more than six years, although the
first half of that period lapsed with little being done. The nonjury trial
itself took almost as long, running from May 19, 1975, through June 1 of last
year. It had been interrupted by efforts by the Government to subpeona more
evidence and by an I.B.M.  motion, denied in February of 1980 by the Court of
Appealsfor the Second Circuit, to have Judge Edelstein removed on the ground
that he had exhibited personal bias against the company.

At the time of the disqualification motion, I.B.M. estimated that the trial
might drag on into 1984, a prediction that led appeals court judge William H.
Mulligan to say that it would be an ''appropriately Orwellian denouement'' and
to urge that settlement would be in the best interests of all parties.

Negotiations attempting to narrow the issues at stake began during the summer of
1980, but were broken off in October of that year.  Sanford Litvak , then
Assistant Attorney General for antitrust, was known to open -minded on the
possibility of settling the suit without seeking to di smember the company.
However, his review was cut short by the defeat of President Carter.

Subsequently, antitrust decisions by appellate courts favoring the American
Telephone and Telegraph Company in a private antitrust suit brought by
Northeastern Telephone Company and the Eastman Kodak Company in a suit brought
by Berkey Photo appeared to weaken the Government's case.

When the trial ended, Mr. Barr asked Mr. Baxter to reopen negotiations to settle
the case or at least narrow the issues they would submit for a final decision in
briefs and closing arguments.  Mr. Baxter responded by traveling to Judge
Edelstein's courtroom on June 18 for a meeting in which he agreed to review the
case. At that point, Judge Edelstein happily agreed to extend deadlines for
posttrial procedings that would have led to submission of the case for a
decision this month.

At that meeting and in a subsequent hearing further extending the deadlines, Mr.
Baxter carefully avoided any suggestion that he felt the Government could revise
its position. But Mr. Barr was optimistic, saying, ''He is the first person I
know of in his position to take this much time to try to really understand the
case.'' The review process included periodic meetings between Mr.  Baxter and
I.B.M. attorneys to review what he had learned about various portions of the
case from Justice Department attorneys and to seek their comments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of David N. Edelstein photo of Thomas Barr

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 9, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN THRIFT SHOP CHIC IS SELLING WELL IN PARIS

BYLINE: By JUSTINE DeLACY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: PARIS


In a shop on the Boulevard St.-Michel, Parisians root through a bin of
secondhand Van Heusens going for 40 francs ($7).  Down the street, gravy-stained
ties with labels that say ''Bloomingdale's Men's Shop'' and ''Wittner's,
Reading, Pa.'' are selling for 5 francs apiece.

Paris, capital of couture, has adopted American thrift shop chic.  With the
enthusiasm of 5-year-olds dressing up in their parents' clothes, Parisians are
donning ill-fitting sport coats that droop to midthigh and trousers that end
three inches above the shoe. They are wearing white socks, loafers and
Oxford-cloth shirts.

As a result, it's getting hard to tell who's who. These days what look like
Yankees sipping expresso in Paris cafes are turning out to be French.

The popularity of American styles in Paris is hardly new. First came les blue
jeans. Then the university sweatshirt craze hit. Next a passion for Cub Scout
uniforms inexplicably overcame the French. But only in the past year or so have
Parisians begun wearing used American clothes.

By the Containerload

French old-clothes dealers, or fripiers - la fripe is the term for secondhand
clothes - are buying them by the containerload from New York dealers.

Once they've crossed the Atlantic, American castoffs are far from cheap. A
60-kilo bale of medium-quality clothes sells for 600 francs (about $105)
wholesale. The lowest quality is bought by peddlers, who sell them at flea
markets, and by the one or two real thrift shops in Paris, places like A La
Fripe (22 Rue Titon).

The rest is shaped up by owners of boutiques specializing in funk, as opposed to
utilitarian fripe. Here prices can be 10 times those in American thrift shops,
even for clothes with little fashion value - $8 for a white Alexander's
Permapress shirt with rust spots on the cuff, for example.

In one store, the cent sign on a 50-cent tag had simply been replaced with an F
for francs. Details such as the size of a collar and width of a cuff, and
whether a cowboy shirt has buttons or snaps can double or triple the price.
Holes and stains don't seem to matter. ''The more holes the better, '' says M
arianne Brun, who sells threadbare American jeans at Toxido American Frip in the
Rue Madame. ''If it's American, it sells.''

Most of the fripiers specializing in used American clothes are on the Right
Bank, not far from where the market Les Halles once stood.  Today this newly
trendy quarter is a meeting place for French youths in wide lapels and tight
shoes, sporting the Elvis haircut the French call ''la banane.''

Best-selling items at La Femme Ecarlate, a former fish store in the Rue de la
Cossonnerie, include such period pieces as velvet stoles, rabbit-fur capes and
rhinestone-encrusted cardigans that go for 250 francs.

''Rhinestones, velvet, anything extravagantly feminine sells,'' says the owner,
Madame Brochard.  Her customers include stray Americans, who are incredulous at
first, she says, but often stay to buy, and Germa ns who can't get vintage Ameri
cana at home. ''There is style and workmanship in American clot hes of the 50's
that you only get in France in haute couture,'' Ma dame Brochard explains. ''You
Americans had some fabulous wome n then, Marilyn Monroe, Lana Turner. You can
see the same flair in the clothes.''

At Terfas (Rue Rambuteau), the dressing-room curtain is an American flag.
American fake furs are the big seller here. ''In France it's always been nothing
if not the real thing,'' the manager, Nadia Brieg, explains. Nylon leopard print
sheaths are also in demand. ''A few years ago they would have been thought
vulgar,'' she said.  ''Today I can't keep them in.''

A six-foot tuxedoed mannequin -half Rock Hudson, half Ken doll - marks the
entrance of Bouzou, a boutique specializing in used sportswear and military
gear. The most sought-after items here are military raincoats - ''the kind John
Wayne wore,'' said the owner, Jean-Francois Morice -and ''501's,'' the model of
Levis worn by the late James Dean.

Mr. Morice visits the United States twice a year to look for unusual apparel and
regularly makes the rounds of New York secondhand shops.

Though the French wear their thrift shop Levis skin tight, a la fran,caise, they
regard them as a symbol of hanging loose. This association of American clothes
with an informal lifestyle is largely responsible for their popularity,
according to several fripiers. ''During the Vietnam War, no one wanted to look
like an American,'' said Mr. Morice. ''Then in the 70's, the dollar fell and the
French started going to the U.S. They fell in love with the easygoingness of the
States, and that's what the clothes represent.''

Mr. Morice's partner, Patrick Brieg, agrees. ''Europeans are naturally uptight.
It is somehow easier for them to be themselves in American clothes.''

But there are more pragmatic explanations for the fact that the French are
dressing up in old American clothes. Used clothing prices are low compared with
the price of new clothes in France - $35 for a good-quality man's shirt, for
example - and a bargain compared to the cost of the trendy American copies, with
imitation American labels, that French manufacturers are turning out.

Better Quality Noted

Enthusiasts say American clothes are better made than French and last longer,
used or not. ''Even when French manufacturers buy the denim from the U.S., the
jeans wear out faster than American jeans,'' said Gaston Kercenty, a wholesaler.

Mr. Karcenty is amazed at the condition of the American clothes he receives.
''Some look as if they'd never been worn!'' he says with approval, leaning on
one of hundreds of burlap-wrapped bales in his Rue Pelleport warehouse.

Because of the high dollar, some fripiers have begun buying secondhand German
clothes. Mr. Karcenty, however, continues to deal exclusively in American goods.
He has no choice, he says. ''The German clothes have too many holes, and there
are no secondhand French clothes because the French never give anything away.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a Paris thrift shop, Terfas

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHEEVER SCRIPT OPENS 'AMERICAN PLAYHOUSE'

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2155 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------

Doug Hill is a freelance writer who frequently reports on the television sc ene.


By DOUG HILL

''Idislike adaptations of any sort,'' said John Cheever, the Pulitzer
Prize-winning author. ''To turn a short story into a television show is like
turning an Oriental rug into a ballgame, and losing the principal
characteristics of both.''

Mr. Cheever was recently commenting on how he came to write an original script
for television. ''The Shady Hill Kidnapping,'' his first teleplay, will be the
premiere offering in ''American Playhouse,'' an eclectic 25-week collection of
dramas, comedies, musicals and biographies, both conceived originally for
television and adapted from literature and the stage, that will begin on Channel
13 on Tuesday at 9 P.M.

Like many of the productions in ''American Playhouse,'' ''The Shady Hill
Kidnapping'' took a long and circuitous route in reaching the small screen. The
story of that journey helps to illustrate some of the complexities involved in
mounting what may well be the most ambitious and expensive single series in the
history of public television.

''The Shady Hill Kidnapping'' is a satire on the contortions that residents of
the archetypical Cheever suburb go through when a child is presumed kidnapped.
It stars George Grizzard, Polly Holliday, Paul Dooley and Celeste Holm, who
plays a celebrity-huckster endorsing a wonder product called Elixircol in
several pseudocommercials Mr. Cheever has woven into his script.

In 1978, WNET had produced adaptations of three Cheever short stories. The
author, now 70, declined to write the scripts himself, but he did agree to try
his hand at writing an original play for television.

''Television was all I had in mind when I wrote 'Shady Hill Kidnapping,' '' Mr.
Cheever said, adding, ''I was interested in expressing myself in a new medium
and there was a story I had to tell.''

He submitted the piece in installments -chapters, almost - and so began a
marathon series of at least three major rewrites and innumerable tinkerings as
the author worked with WNET drama consultant Kenneth Cavander, producer Ann
Blumenthal and director Paul Bogart to mold the one-hour script into producible
shape.

''He was very charming and very puzzled by the whole process,'' Mrs. Blumenthal
said recently of Mr. Cheever, who is currently convalescing from an operation.
''He was the first to realize that (the first draft) ran more than
two-and-a-half hours, and that it didn't work as a television show really works.
Writers who haven't written for the screen tend to write in inner thoughts, and
you have to take that form and translate it to the visual.''

Much discoursive dialogue was removed, many scenes were cut or compressed and a
few explanatory scenes were added. In the original version, for example, the
missing child who is the focus of the action never returned to the screen once
he had disappeared. ''You would have wondered where he was forever,'' Mr. Bogart
said.

Nonetheless, after all the rewriting, and after a reading of the script was held
at Joseph Papp's Public Theater in February of 1979, the project lapsed into
public-television limbo until ''American Playhouse'' came along. ''There was a
very long gap between Cheever's script being ready to produce and our being
anywhere near seeing how we would find the money to produce it,'' says Mr.
Cavender.  ''Suddenly, within the space of three months, the money was
available.''

Indeed, ''American Playhouse'' is not the sort of presentation one expects from
a supposedly moribund institution. Public television, according to observers
both outside and inside its ranks, is struggling for its very survival,
threatened on one side by sharply reduced financial support from the Federal
government, on another by the skyrocketing costs of television production and on
a third by the growing competition for viewers from cable television.

Yet, on Tuesday nights through next June, some $16 million worth of programs
will be broadcast under the ''American Playhouse'' banner.  They include
''Weekend,'' an adaptation of an Ann Beattie short story with a script by Miss
Beattie herself; ''For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the
Rainbow Is Enuf,'' Ntozake Shange's adaptation of her successful Broadway
poetry-play; an adaptation of Kurt Vonnegut's short story ''Who Am I This
Time?,'' starring Susan Sarandon and Christopher Walken; ''Come Along With Me,''
an adaptation of Shirley Jackson's novel, starring Estelle Parsons, Barbara
Baxley and Sylvia Sidney and dir ected by Joanne Woodward; ''Carl Sandburg
-Echoes and Silences,'' starr ing John Cullum as Sandburg; ''The Great American
Fourth of July and Other Disasters,'' an original teleplay by humorist Jean
Shepher d, starring James Broderick, Barbara Bolton and teen idol Matt Dillon;
''Working,'' a newly staged version of the Broadway musical based on Stud
Terkel's book, starring, among othe rs, Barry Bostwick, Eileen Brenn an, Scatman
Crothers, Charles Durning, Patti LaBelle, Rita Mor eno and James Taylor; ''Medal
of Honor Rag,'' an adaptation by Tom Cole of his stage play about a Vietnam
veteran struggling to adjus t in the aftermath of the war, starring Hector
Elizondo; ''My Palik ari,'' an original film for television starring Telly
Savalas as a G reek American who returns to his homeland with his son, and
''Oppenheimer,'' a seven-part biography of J. Robert Oppen heimer, theAmerican
physicist who was instrumental in developing the first atomic bomb, starring Sam
Waterston in the title role.

Looking at a list such as this - and it's only a partial list - the rumors of
public television's impending demise might appear to have been exaggerated, to
say the least. But, in fact, ''American Playhouse'' came into being in large
part as a response to those rumors and fears. Millions of dollars have indeed
been slashed from public broadcasting's Federal appropriations; it's just that
the cutbacks won't actually take effect until late next year, and public
television is preparing itself.

''We are going to have to be supported by viewers' contributions, not by
taxpayers' funds,'' says John Jay Iselin, president of WNET/13 in New York,
''so, right now it's more important than ever that we demonstrate that we have
something useful and important to say, and that the public see that.'' Or, as
David M. Davis, executive director of ''American Playhouse,'' puts it, ''The
feeling was that we should put something together that says, 'We're alive:
public television is not dead.' We had to make a statement.''

In that spirit, many of the internecine rivalies that have plagued public
broadcasting in the past have been set aside in order to bring ''American
Playhouse'' to the small screen. The series is being produced by a consortium of
four stations: WNET, KCET in Los Angeles, WGBH in Boston and the South Carolina
Educational TV Network.  Individually, these four have long been responsible for
producing the bulk of public television's national programs, and they have often
competed against one another for the little money that was available to make
those programs. For ''American Playhouse,'' all four stations contributed money
to hire Mr. Davis and his staff, all four have representatives on an artistic
committee that advises him, and all four submitted proposals for programs they
wanted to produce, but the final decisions were Mr. Davis's alone.

Moreover, the biggest chunk of the ''American Playhouse'' budget - $4 million -
was contributed by 252 public-television stations around the country through
their group buying mechanism, the Station Program Cooperative. Despite the
feelings of many station managers that the large producing stations have always
taken a disproportionate share of public television revenues, and despite the
fact that many stations are being forced to cut back their own local programs,
that's the largest commitment the Station Program Cooperative has ever made to a
single series.

Other major contributors to ''American Playhouse'' include the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting and independent producers, two more segments of the
public-television community that have often been the focus of territorial
squabbles in the past.

Public television is hoping ''American Playhouse'' will become what one station
executive called ''a rallying point for audiences'' - a weekly series that will
provide a consistent focus and identity for American productions as
''Masterpiece Theater'' does for British productions.

Many of public television's earlier attempts to create a longrunning vehicle for
domestically produced dramas - ''American Short Story,'' ''American Television
Theater'' and ''Visions,'' to name a few -faltered in large part because they
didn't have the support of the entire system. Now that Mr. Davis apparently has
that support, he's constructed ''American Playhouse'' for the long haul.  For
that reason, he decided not to box the series in by limiting it to, say,
classical literature, to stage plays or to contemporary fiction, but instead to
make its scope as all-encompassing and flexible as possible. Thus, besides a
conscious attempt to represent diverse ethnic backgrounds, the only thematic
thread running through the 19 programs in ''American Playhouse's'' first season,
Mr. Davis says, is that they are ''American, or American in character,'' meaning
that not even productions from abroad were ruled out if they had an identifiable
American slant. Hence, the inclusion of the ''Oppenheimer'' mini-series, which
was produced by the British Broadcasting Corporation in cooperation with WGBH.

A second, narrower criterion Mr. Davis applied was that the programs be
attractive to a mass audience, since the goal of the series is not so much to
break new artistic ground as it is to attract new viewers. ''This is
network-quality professional, it is not a workshop,'' Mr. Davis says. ''We're
still doing the kind of material you can't get on network television, but at the
same time wecan be entertaining. We want stories that wil l make people who tune
in stay with us. I owe that to the stations t hat are putting up all the
money.''

Mr. Davis has been working on ''American Playhouse'' for two years. But bec ause
c rucial pieces of its complicated financial package didn't fall i nto place
until last March, for this season he was forced to rel y mainly on projects,
like Mr. Cheever's ''The Shady Hill Kidnappi ng,'' that had already been in
development at the four producing sta tions.

For example, WNET acquired the film ''Northern Lights,'' a winner of the Camera
d'Or award at the Cannes Film Festival, two years ago, according to Mr. Davis,
but it languished at the station until he picked it up for ''American
Playhouse.''

If nothing else, then, ''American Playhouse's'' first season has provided a home
for some adventuresome programs that either wouldn't have been made at all or
that would have appeared sporadically, probably without sufficient promotion to
attract much attention. The danger in Season I, the ''Playhouse'' principals
agree, is that the series will be perceived not as a series at all, but as a
group of specials sharing little in common but an umbrella title and a
Tuesday-night time slot.

''We all know that we've got to get some kind of identity for this series down
the road,'' Mr. Davis says. ''We have by necessity been almost totally
responsive rather than initiative in the first season, but you can't do that
forever.''

The primary goal for Season II, therefore, is to develop more programs
specifically for ''American Playhouse,'' and an executive producer, Lindsay Law,
has been appointed to help shape the series with as much cohesiveness and
balance as possible. Meanwhile, the endemic public-television paper chase
continues: ''American Playhouse'' won't be assured of its funding for Season II
until next March. But the consortium members are confident there will be a
Season II, and optimistic that, eventually, ''American Playhouse'' could become
a public-television institution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Judith Ivey, David M. Grant, Polly Holliday, G.
Grizzard

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SWITCH IN TIME;
CLARK PICKS UP THE PIECES BUT CAN HE DO THE PUZZLE?

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words


WASHINGTON LIKE generals preoccupied with the lessons of the last war, new
Administrations are often so determined to avoid their predecessors' mistakes
that they create new ones, often worse. A year ago, Mr.  Reagan and his
advisers, eager to avoid the internal foreign policy conflicts that marked the
Carter Administration, downgraded the nation al secu rity operation under
Richard V. Allen. But they wound up publicly d isplaying differences between
Secretary of State Alexander M.  Haig Jr. and Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger, friction betw een Mr. Haig and the White House, and confusion in the
bureaucracy a nd among America's allies. By replacing Mr. Allen last week and
upgr ading the authority of the new national security adviser, Will iam P. Clark
Jr., the President tacitly acknowledged that the orig inal tinkering had not
worked.

The new arrangement is widely regarded as a major improvement, though it carries
the seeds of difficulty, some inherent in the institutional tensions among the
White House, Defense and State Departments. There is also Mr. Clark's
inexperience and the President's reluctance to take firm control of foreign
policy.

Nonetheless, the Clark appointment was greeted with an immediate sense of relief
in the Administration. Mr. Clark has an established rapport with Secretary Haig,
so his presence at the White House should help end the personality clashes that
once moved Mr. Haig to complain of a ''guerrilla campaign'' and prompted
President Reagan to lecture Mr. Haig and Mr. Allen on bureaucratic manners. As a
Californian whose connection with the President dates to Mr. Reagan's first term
as Governor, Mr. Clark also enjoys the benefit of close personal relationships
with other well-placed Californians, including Mr. Weinberger, Presidential
counselor Edwin Meese 3d and Michael K. Deaver, the White House deputy chief of
staff.

But it will be no easy matter to deal with two strong personalities like Mr.
Haig and Mr. Weinberger, who have clashed over relations with Israel, the Soviet
Union and other matters. And it will be difficult to operate as an equal of
White House powers such as Mr.  Meese and James A. Baker 3d, the chief of staff.

An Unambiguous Mandate

Unlike Mr. Allen, Mr. Clark will have direct daily access to the President and
formal authority over the White House's foreign policy machinery. Mr. Allen
reported to Mr. Meese, with whom Mr. Haig and Mr. Weinberger conducted much
business. Now, on paper at least, Mr.  Clark has a new, mo re powerful mandate
that g ives him - and not Mr.  Meese - responsibility for ''development, coo
rdination and implementation of national security policy.'' Already, he is
pressingto have White House foreign policy statements cleared in advance through
his office - to curb the cacophony.

Yet even Mr. Clark was shrewd enough to concede right away that some
institutional tensions would persist. ''The conflict,'' he said, ''is inherent
in the system. It's healthy, the give-and-take of ideas that must exist in a
democracy.'' Structural modifications can deal with only part of the problem.
For from the outset, the Administration's foreign policy has been plagued by two
main difficulties. One is turf-feuding. The other is translating President
Reagan's basic desire to rebuild American power and his mistrust of Soviet
ambitions into a coherent and well-articulated policy framework.

In the Nixon Administration, the President and his security adviser, Henry A.
Kissinger, provided the central conceptual strategy that produced the opening to
China, detente with Moscow and a gradual withdrawal from Vietnam. Under Jimmy
Carter, Cyrus R. Vance and Zbigniew Brzezinski promoted contrary approaches;
ultimately, Mr.  Brzezinski's harsher view of the Kremlin prevailed, aided by
the President's shock over the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Both Mr.
Kissinger and Mr. Brzezinski had years of academic experience to develop an
outlook and a sense of foreign policy priorities and interrelationships. As a
lifelong lawyer and judge with no real exposure to foreign affairs until last
year, Mr. Clark lacks that crucial background.
An Administrator's Weaknesses

As Deputy Secretary of State, he was primarily an administrator. He dealt with a
few regional problems, mainly in the Caribbean, South Africa and Ireland. ''He's
coming from a job that is 85 percent ceremony and administration and 15 percent
substantive into a job that is 99 percent substantive,'' said one well-placed
foreign policy official. ''At State, he could pick and choose which issues he
might want to handle. At the National Security Council, everything comes in at
once and it rolls over every day.''

One immediate task for Mr. Clark is to muster assistants who can help deal with
foreign policy crises and brief the President on breaking developments around
the world. ''The overnight flow of messages from embassies and the intelligence
community is pretty heavy,'' said one official. ''How is Clark going to decide
what to brief the President on? If he's not used to conceptualizing, setting out
a framework and establishing priorities, he's got a lot to get used to.''

Initially, he will be relying on others and, in a break with past practice,
having top State Department, Pentagon or intelligence experts join him in
briefing the President, with written intelligence summaries carrying much of the
load. On policy issues, Mr. Clark has said he does not intend to ''become a
heavy on s ubstance, other than to recognize an issue when I see it.'' He is an
improviser, inclined to let initia tives flow up from State and Defense and then
to serve as ''honest b roker,'' resolving differences and presenting the
President wit h options, as he did 14 years ago in Sacramento as executive ass
istant to then-Governor Reagan.

But experienced observers in Washington do not believe that the pressures of
foreign policy or the competition between powerful Cabinet figures, such as
Secretaries Haig and Weinberger, will allow him such a relaxed role. Nor, many
believe, will he be able to force the bureaucracy to spell out the implications
of various policy approaches without mastering much more of the substance
himself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANTITRUST POLICIES AFFECT NOT JUST CORPORATE FUTURES

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The disposition of the giant antitrust cases against the Bell System and I.B.M.
marked the end of an era in antitrust law and very likely the beginning of an
era in information and telecommunications t echnology. In the end, la st week's
exercise in national policy could dramatically affect the mold of American life.

In a proposed consent decree with the Justice Department, the American Telephone
and Telegraph Company agreed Friday to give up its 22 local-service operating
phone companies. It would be allowed to keep one of its crown jewels, the Bell
Laboratories; its huge manufacturing subsidiary, the Western Electric Company,
and the entire intercity long-distance network.

Within hours of that announcement in Washington, the Justice Department moved in
Federal court in New York to dismiss its antitrust case against the
International Business Machines Corporation, the world's largest computer
company. William F.  Baxter, Assistant Attorney General in charge of the
antitrust division of the department, concluded that ''the Government is not
likely to win this case.'' Even if it won, he said, ''there is no relief I could
recommend in good conscience.''

In recent years, some Federal officials seemed to grow weary of both cases, but
until now, none were bold or rash enough to make a decisive move to end the
litigation. The I.B.M. suit was filed by the Johnson Administration in 1969,
charging that I.B.M. had tried to monopolize the computer business and had
maintained a pre-eminent position in the industry through a series of illegal
actions against competitors. The A.T.&.T. case was filed by the Nixon-Ford
Administration in 1974 as the latest in a series of Federal attacks on the
structure of the nation's telephone system. The charge was that the company had
blocked real and potential competitors from offering long-distance phone service
and from supplying equipment to local operating companies over the last two
decades.

Many economists and legal scholars contend that with productivity sagging, the
nation can no longer afford the costs of such big antitrust actions. And Federal
antitrust officials seem to be so disillusioned with ''big cases'' that it
appears unlikely they will bring another one of such magnitude any time soon.
The litigation costs themselves are a growing concern in the current climate of
fiscal austerity.

Advocates of aggressive antitrust enforcement generally voiced pleasure and
surprise at the sudden outcome of the telephone company case. A.T.&T. has noted
that changes in regulatory policy over the last decade have opened virtually
every sector of telecommunications to competition. ''Natural monopolies,'' many
analysts have pointed out, prove to be rather unnatural in the light of mod ern
technology. And though ma ny economists fear that in the short run, local phone
rates will ri se without the subsidy provided by long-distance calling, in t he
long run the settlement is supposed to intensify competition a nd keep prices
lower than they would otherwise be.

But the advocates expressed some disappointment with the move to dismiss the
I.B.M. litigation. Prof. Lawrence Anthony Sullivan of the University of
California at Berkeley said the I.B.M. decision reflected the Reagan
Administration's view of antitrust policy as ''soley riveted on economic
efficiency.'' That approach, he said, ignores the social and political
justifications for antitrust enforcement. Mr. Baxter has on many occasions
expressed distaste for what he calls ''populist posturing'' and ''rhetorical
chants'' that ''big is bad and small is beautiful.'' Friday, he conceded that
''there is a sense in which the antitrust division is backing off'' from
policies of earlier administrations.
Old Tests, New Markets

In the case of I.B.M, howver, it should be remembered that President Carter's
first Attorney General, Griffin B. Bell, said in 1979 that he would have tried
to settle it if he could. (Mr. Bell, like the current Attorney General, William
French Smith, excused himself from the case because his law firm had represented
the computer company.) ''Something's wrong with the court when a suit lasts this
long,'' said Mr. Bell, a former Federal judge.

Moreover, the computer industry has changed dramatically while courtroom
proceedings dragged on in the case that one expert, Robert H. Bork, described as
''the antitrust division's Vietnam.'' In recent years, the Japanese have
invested hundreds of millions of dollars to develop the world's fastest
computers and to penetrate the United States and world market.

One test of Federal policy is whether its antitrust actions help companies such
as I.B.M. and A.T.&T. compete effectively with the Japanese and other foreign
companies. There is another, more critical measure. The industries in which
A.T.&T. and I.B.M. operate are increasingly one giant, interrelated industry.
They are the very media by which people communicate, transmit information and
propagate knowledge. The shape of the information and telecommunications
industry may well define the organization of American society in the 21st
century.

Thus, Charles L. Brown, chairman of A.T.&T., had reason to describe Friday's
proposed settlement as a ''historic decision.'' Modern electronics technology,
he said, is erasing the distinction betweeen computers and communications;
A.T.&T. and I.B.M. could becom e direct competitors in many markets. Fe deral
officials and BellSystem executives are both determined, he sai d, that the
benefits of the ''information age'' should come first to America; the consent
decree, he added, provides a means to that en d.

There was a note of modesty in Mr. Brown's words Friday as he accepted the
Government's settlement offer. He realized, he said, that ''our obligation is to
conform to national policy, not make it.'' But inevitably the decisions of
telephone and computer companies do make national policy. That is why telephone
services are provided by the Government in so many foreign countries, and why
the Justice Department has repeatedly undertaken antitrust actions against the
Bell System.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Assistant Attorney General William F. Baxter
photo of basic items of I.B.M. and A.T.&T.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New York Times Magazine January 10, 1982

SECTION: Section 6; Page 4, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 296 words


William Safire 10 On Language

Vehement Objection
Russell Baker 19 Sunday Observer

Never Say Sorry
Henry Scott Stokes 24 Japan's Love Affair With the Robot
John Heminway 28 A Warrior for Wildlife

Ugandan game warden Paul Ssali defended his embattled park against not only
poachers but also the savagery of Idi Amin.
Drew Middleton 34 Vietnam and the Military Mind
Hedrick Smith 38 How Reagan Rode Out 1981
Terry Robards 66 Wine

Memories Are Made of This
68 Fashion

Making a Splash
Craig Claiborne 74 Food with Pierre Franey A Fling With Scotland's Soups
92 Puzzles

Answers, Page 56
94 Letters Cover:Photograph by Jack Mitchell
Copyright 1980, The New York Times

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos from stories

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM AND THE MILITARY MIND

BYLINE: By Drew Middleton; Drew Middleton is the military correspondent of The
New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4527 words


Sooner or later, the scar is bared. Late at night in an Army club or an aircraft
carrier's wardroom, someone will say, ''My God, if they'd only thought it
through in Washington,'' or, ''Brother, if we knew then what we know now about
that kind of war,'' or, ''You damned reporters and the damned TV, you're as much
to blame as anyone.''

At a bivouac in a pine forest, during a recent military exercise in West
Germany, a colonel gazed moodily at the stars. ''I suppose it's all over now,''
he said. ''But it isn't over. For some of us, it will never be over.''

It is getting on for nine years since the last American troops left the cities
and bases and jungles of Vietnam, disengaging from a war that the majority of
their countrymen regarded as lost. To the world at large, the fall of Saigon in
April 1975, two years after the American withdrawal, marked the final American
defeat. But to a whole generation of American officers who, understandably,
remember only the successful air strikes and the victorious battles, the idea of
defeat is still hard to accept.

They are men in their late 30's and early 40's now, ranging in rank from
lieutenant colonel to major general. You will find them commanding battalions or
serving on the advisory committees of the Joint Chiefs of Staff or studying at
the Army War College or some other high-level military academy. They have
reached positions just below the highest rungs of military authority, which some
of them will doubtless attain. Yet, for most of them, the memory of those days
when they were young lieutenants and captains in Vietnam is still painfully
fresh. The old contentious issues - the way the war was fought, the way it was
reported, the way it was directed by civilians back home - still feed the bitter
conviction that, had things been run differently, the war could have been won.

The scar is raw. It governs the attitudes both of those officers who fought in
Vietnam and those who share in the legacy of the conflict. It will, in all
likelihood, affect the performance of the armed forces the next time they are
called into action - an intangible as important to the American military
performance as the number of tanks, fighters or carriers deployed. For battles,
as the British military historian Sir Basil Liddell Hart has written, are won or
lost in the minds of the opposing commanders. And today, remembering the
confident beginnings and confused ending of our Southeast Asian involvement, the
minds of the officers of the American military establishment are troubled.

They admit they made mistakes in tactics, especially in the early years of the
war, and especially in the Army, the service that bore the brunt of the
fighting, suffered the most casualties and underwent the greatest psychological
stress.

Troops that had been trained for repelling Soviet aggression against Western
Europe were thrown into an entirely different environment, against an entirely
different enemy. An infantry battalion trained to fight Soviet troops in the
North German plain or the hills of Hesse had to adjust to jungle combat against
well-led guerrillas in the midst of a civilian population, with no clear
identification of friend or foe. No wonder that, until the battalion began to
improvise, its tactics did not work.

The Army's rotation system for company and battalion officers weakened the
command structure. The officer went to Vietnam to ''get his ticket punched.'' He
served a year or less, saw some combat and went back to the United States or
West Germany. To a lesser degree, combat units were subject to the same
turbulence in personnel. Men who depended on each other for success and survival
never had time to develop those bonds that are indispensable for high morale and
effective performance under fire.

The Army's weapons and equipment were often ill-adapted for a campaign that came
down primarily to infantry action and artillery assault. The Sheridan tank, for
instance, proved to be of little use. A colonel in an armored unit in West
Germany compared it recently to ''setting a wolfhound after a rabbit - the
rabbit gets in its hole andthe dog is left high and dry.''

As the Army learned from its mistakes, some of its innovations, like the
increased use of helicopters for troop transport and infantry support, were
successful; others were not. But whatever readiness there is today to concede
the justice of some specific criticisms of the Army's doctrine and tactics in
Vietnam, there is deep, abiding resentment in the officer corps against the
manner in which, by and large, the war was reported by the American printed and
electronic press.

A Marine Corps colonel watching his men scramble up a Sardinian hill during an
exercise last fall said: ''There they go. That's the 95 percent you people never
write about. The good soldiers, the triers, the achievers.'' His complaint
flowed from the Vietnam experience - the impression among the military that the
press there tended to concentrate on the ''5 percent'' who were inadequate
because of a lack of education, a drug or liquor problem or an inability to
adjust to the Army's hierarchical system.

In the litany of ''what ifs'' and ''might have beens'' I have listened to in the
11 years I have been reporting on the American services and on military affairs,
one recurring theme is the opportunity that was lost, as most officers see it,
at the end of the Communist Tet offensive in January-February l968. The defeat
of that all-out drive, the milita ry say, broke t he offensive capacity of the
North Vietnamese regulars and Vietcong guerrillas for months to come. That, it
is argued, was the moment w hen the United States should have applied maximum
military pressure on Hanoi.

Instead, it is charged, the American press turned an enemy defeat into a
political victory for North Vietnam by concentrating on one brief and
unsuccessful Communist action, the attack on the United States Embassy in
Saigon. The emphasis on this episode obscured the North Vietnamese reverse and,
it is argued, reinforced pressure at home for a negotiated settlement.

More generally, there is the abiding conviction among officers who served in
Vietnam that the press tended to exaggerate every setback in the field, every
instance of troops getting out of hand, every alleged atrocity.

No officer defends the massacre that was perpetrated by an American platoon in
the hamlet of My Lai or the conduct of the commanding officer, Lieut. William L.
Calley Jr. ''Hell, he was there with a rifle in his hand,'' said an infantry
colonel during Calley's trial.  ''He may have been dumb, but he must have known
what he was doing.  All I can say is that he should never have been made an
officer.''

But in regard to the overall problem of civilian casualties, another infantry
officer, now approaching high command, expressed this view:

''You get a grunt coming out of action and into a village. He's tired. He's been
scared out of his wits a couple of times. Remember, even the best get scared,
although the best don't show it. A sniper knocks off one, maybe two of his
buddies. Guys he's shared food and shelter with. He opens fire and a couple of
people get killed. Maybe they're innocent bystanders. Maybe not. Is that any
worse than what the Air Force did to a German village whenever there was a
roadblock in the village?

''None of you people ever understood - or, if you did, you didn't write it - the
mental state of a guy who's been fighting for a week or 10 days. War is
abnormal. People don't act in war as they would in normal circumstances. It's
tough, but it's true. No one at home seemed to understand this. And you people
didn't try to tell them.''

One reason the press failed to present a more rounded picture of the war, as
most military officers see it, is that the press did not spend enough time with
the forces in the field. One officer who commanded a battalion at the time
remembers telling a correspondent that he was the first newsman to visit his
unit in the seven weeks it had been in almost continual contact with the enemy.
There is a strong feeling that reporters preferred the dubious delights of
Saigon, with its convoluted, easily obtainable and ultimately immaterial
political stories, to the rigors of front-line reporting on the decisive aspect
of the conflict.

This lingering ''them against us'' sentiment is a real enough problem for a
society that depends on mutual respect among its principal institutions. Even
more serious potentially is the military attitude toward the civilian direction
of the Vietnam War.

Emphatically, the services accept the constitutional provision for civilian
control of the military. The Vietnam-era officers now entering into senior ranks
are as devoted as any in the past to the republican statutes that make the
President of the United States their Commander in Chief. But there remains the
feeling that, had they been allowed to follow their military judgment, they
could have won the war in Vietnam.

The memories are remarkably similar. The colonel behind his desk at the
Pentagon, the brigadier general at an Army post overseas, could have been, 15
years ago, the young officer harrying a Vietcong unit across the Cambodian
border or leading his men through the jungle in search of the wraithlike
Vietcong.

He did not think, back in those 1960's, that he was losing. But he had his
private doubts about whether this was the way to win.  Counting the cost in
casualties, the young officer was angered by simplistic statements in Washington
about light at the end of the tunnel or getting the boys home by Christmas or
nailing the coonskin to the wall. To him, that was the Madison Avenue side of
the war; the real side was a sudden ambush, a 10-hour march, a wounded soldier
screaming in pain.

Too much effort, he was sure, was being expended on sideshows, such as programs
designed to ''win the hearts and minds'' of the South Vietnamese. Give the Army
and Air Force their head, he would say, and victory would win more hearts and
minds than any land reform or village-resettlement program.

This conviction has endured through the years. What was needed, most officers
believe to this day, was a national policy that took a more realistic view of
the American involvement - the view that the United States was in Southeast Asia
not simply to protect the people and Government of South Vietnam but to win a
decisive victory against the expansionist Communist regime in Hanoi. This
victory, it is felt, could have been won in late 1966. The prevalent opinion -
as it was among Army and Marine Corps officers I talked to at the time - is
that, given sufficient logistical s upport and freedom of action, the American
ground forces could have invaded North Vietnam, seized the port of Haiphong and
taken Hanoi.

The argument that even that would not have ended the war - that our troops would
have been condemned to years of occupation duty and combat against guerrilla
forces holed up in the jungles - finds no more support among officers today than
it did then. Nor has the passage of time altered their disagreement with the
assumption, widely accepted in those days at the United Nations and in
Washington, that an American invasion of North Vietnam would have forced China
to intervene by sending in large numbers of ''volunteers.'' If anything, most
officers are even more persuaded that, convulsed as it was by the Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution, China was in no position to take on the United
States.

It still rankles when they recall the incomprehension of military realities, as
they see it, on the part of the civilian leadership, including their successive
Commanders in Chief, Presidents Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon.

''What the hell did we have?'' an infantry colonel said. ''A PTboat commander
with a talent for self-advertisement and a couple of Navy logrollers who never
saw action. How do you expect them to make intelligent military decisions, even
if their advisers are smart and forceful, when they have no background that
helps them understand the situation? No way, Mac.''

If there is a good deal of emotionalism in these attitudes, we must keep in mind
the situation that nurtured it.  The men who fought in Vietnam came home to be
met not with a hero's welcome but with indifference bordering on disdain. People
tended to look the other way, not wishing to be reminded of what was widely
perceived as the first defeat in American history. Some Americans, having
opposed the war on moral grounds, regarded the returnees with barely suppressed
hostility.

It was hard enough for the privates, most of them draftees ordered into Vietnam
with no say in the matter. It was doubly hard for the officers, the professional
soldiers, to be regarded as losers - if not as savages in uniform, mowing down
villagers with the firepower of a modern war machine. A young officer from New
York told me in Vietnam in 1972 that he did not wear his uniform when he went
home on leave. Why? ''They spit on me.''

The Air Force and Navy were stigmatized to a lesser degree than the Army, even
though their aircraft probably did as much damage on a proportionate basis, but
all branches of the armed forces came in for a share of the blame. This widely
felt animus against their beloved services filled many officers with blind,
unreasoning resentment.  The word ''beloved'' is used advisedly. The service is
the professional officer's home. It is at once a faithful wife and a nagging
mistress. It is an amorphous deity, to be obeyed and propitiated, no matter how
seemingly unreasonable its demands. Above all, it is those three words that Gen.
Douglas MacArthur intoned in his last speech at West Point: ''Duty, Honor,
Country.''

Of course, not all officers live by that code, but a high percentage do. And
those who did were offended, on their return from Vietnam, by something else
that had happened to the nation at the same time that half of it turned against
the war. They found it irritating, often hateful, to serve a society undergoing
a change of values, with some of its most vocal spokesmen dismissing duty as an
outworn idea, honor as a faded symbol of medievalism and country as an obsolete
concept. The new mood denied what they lived by. It has been dissipating lately,
but the effect on the military is still felt.  With due allowance for these
emotional strains, how is one to assess the military's charges against the
civilian leadership and against the press?

There is much to be said for the officers' view of the Tet offensive as a ''last
gasp'' attack. What is overlooked in this analysis is that North Vietnam's very
ability to mount a general offensive on such a scale undermined all of
Washington's claims that the enemy had been worn down in the long war of
attrition and faced imminent defeat. The resultant blow to what remained of
hopes of a military solution was a political victory for Hanoi. But it was a
victory born of the American public's spontaneous reaction to the fact of the
offensive - not, essentially, of whatever mistake of emphasis may have been
committed by the reporting from Saigon. In a war, a military victory can be a
political defeat. And in a democracy, there is no way in which a political
reverse can be hidden from the public.

Similarly, there may be justice to much of the military's charge of lack of
balance and sophistication in the way the press dealt with American and South
Vietnamese setbacks, the problem of civilian casualties and other military
aspects of the struggle. But preference for the easy life in Saigon was not a
root cause.

Clearly, there were important stories to be written about the endless political
intrigues among the South Vietnamese leaders, about the pervasive corruption and
about the relationship between these leaders and the American high command.
Beyond that, reporting on the purely military developments was difficult. There
were no firmly definable fronts. Situations changed rapidly as American units
carried out their missions and retired. If an yone could provide a coherent
picture of the state of the war, it was the American high command in Saigon. If
a news organization was represented by a single correspondent, it naturally
wanted him to be where he would get the most information and have adequate
transmission facilities.  Nor do the military seem to take full account of the
fact that we fought this war without military censorship.  The American officers
of World War II, when censorship was in effect, had little to complain about in
the conduct of the accredited war correspondents. That was largely because
commanders could take reporters into their confidence in regard to what was
really going on, knowing the information would not land in the papers the next
day and become available to the enemy. This relationship, in a war in which
Americans were solidly united, bore fruit in knowledgeable and authoritative
reporting on the strategic and tactical aspects of the campaigns in Europe and
the Pacific. No such relationship was possible in an engagement that the Johnson
Administration chose to fight without invoking the rules of an all-out military
effort, either in the economy or on the home front or in its information
policies.

Moreover, Vietnam was the first war to be given full television coverage. The
shock felt by the American public over the war's brutality did not result, as
many officers thought, from any preoccupation with atrocities on the part of the
press; it was a natural reaction to having the front-line fighting brought by
television into American living rooms. That, too, was a consequence of fighting
a war without a censorship policy concerned both with military secrets and
home-front morale.

Most of the officers' complaints against the press may thus be seen as rooted in
situations that were not the doing of either side but were the product of
political decisions - although better reporting in individual cases and better
mutual understanding of each side's problems would doubtless have made a
difference. An even more fundamental factor pertains to the charge that the
military were prevented from winning by an obtuse civilian leadership in
Washington.

That factor is the concept of limited war, in which the Government intervenes
abroad for the purpose of gaining certain specified objectives, but deems it
against the national interest to go beyond certain limits. The conflict this
creates between political considerations and military logic was aired once
before, during the Korean War, when General MacArthur was recalled by President
Truman for objecting publicly to the limitations placed on his freedom of
action. In Vietnam, the determination not to invade North Vietnam, for fear of
triggering a military confrontation with China or the Soviet Union or both,
placedthe political leaders at loggerheads with the military, who saw no other
way of achieving the stated objective of defeating the Communist ins urgency in
South Vietnam. The commanders on the scene may have been right in thinking that
the Chinese would not intervene - although Ma cArthur was wrong in thinking the
same in Korea - but, right or wron g, the White House had made a political
determination and the Joint Chiefs of Staff had to live with it.

Fighting a war without being allowed to go at the source of the enemy's strength
goes against the American military grain; in the conditions that prevailed in
Vietnam, it made it virtually impossible for the Army to fulfill its mission,
something that President Johnson and his civilian advisers did not foresee when
they sent the Army in. Yet if the United States is called upon to fight another
war - short of nuclear Armageddon - in its global political struggle with the
Soviet Union, it is likely to be another limited war, fought with conventional
weapons, in which military means will once again have to be subordinated to
political ends.

Rejection by the military of the need for such constraint could insure a divided
war effort against forces much more powerful than those we faced in Vietnam. In
a limited war fought for definable political objectives, the handicap placed on
the generals can only be accepted as inherent in the nature of the involvement.
That is the core of the problem, something to which the American officer corps
does not seem to have given sufficient thought.  Other armies have gone through
similar, and even worse, experiences and recovered. The British rallied after
their military disaster at the outset of World War II and returned to the
Continent in triumph in 1944, their confidence in their tactics and their
civilian leadership fully restored. The French Army, humbled by the Germans in
1940, defeated in Indochina in 1954 and forced out of Algeria by President de
Gaulle, nursed grievances against ''the politicians'' not too different from
those of the American officers who succeeded them in Vietnam. Today, however,
the French military appear to have recuperated from their malaise. How well are
the American armed forces doing in absorbing the lessons of Vietnam?

Like most big organizations, the Army learns slowly. But training and doctrine
have altered significantly in the last 10 years. (The Air Force and the Navy,
while also reviewing their roles in Vietnam, have had to spend more time
studying the missions of the new air- and ground-guided missiles in air and
naval warfare.)

Greater emphasis is placed on training the soldier for action in a variety of
environments, from the mist-clad forests of Germany to the deserts of Southwest
Asia. As a new corps of noncommissioned officers emerges in the volunteer
forces, the sergeants have resumed their traditional importance in the chain of
command. The individual soldier is encouraged more than ever to think for
himself and, if necessary, fight by himself. The rapid rotation policies that so
weakened the command system in Vietnam have been overhauled. Under the new
Cohort program, a company is brought into the service as a company, trained as a
company and assigned to a major unit as a company.

Vietnam has had a chastening effect on Army thinking. A more hardheaded attitude
is brought to the analysis of possible future missions. ''We've thrown over the
old 'can do' idea,'' said a colonel at Fort Hood. ''Now we want to know exactly
what they want us to do and how they think we can accomplish it.'' His ''they''
encompassed both the civilian and the military leadership.

At West Point, Annapolis and the Air Force Academy, the services are studying
their Vietnam errors. Occasionally, when officers are planning the next day's
moves in a military exercise, a colonel or a brigadier general will intervene
with the words: ''No, that won't work. We tried it in Nam and got clobbered.''
What did work is being analyzed as well. Thus, despite its pioneering use of
helicopters in Vietnam, the Army is no longer willing to go overboard on a
single tactic.

As the Army shakes off the military consequences of Vietnam, it turns toward new
problems. Some of these arose with the end of the draft and the introduction of
an all-volunteer force, with its subsequent lowering of military standards. Now
these standards are rising again, along with the recruits' educational level and
morale.  Other problems - more welcome ones - have been created by a relative
improvement in the Army's supply of conventional weapons after a long period of
shortages on every level: The Army must master sophisticated new equipment to be
ready once again for non-nuclear war.

The military are doing less well in sorting out their feud with the press. The
press, for its part, is doing no better in arriving at a better understanding of
the military.

The dispute is less strident, to be sure, than it was a decade ago, when Adm.
Stansfield Turner, then head of the Naval War College, went so far as to call
conferences on how to bridge the gap. All three services try to bring
public-relations officers face to face with representatives of the newspapers ,
magazines, radio and television. The give-and-take at these meetings is
educational for both sides. Yet prospects of a basic improvement in the
relationship remain uncertain. A public-relations officer can introduce a
reporter to the commanding officer of a corps, division, brigade or battalion;
he is unlikely to change the officer's attitude, especially if the man feels he
was ''burned'' by the press in Vietnam.

One measure of this antimedia syndrome is that few officers expect the press to
deal sympathetically, or even intelligently, with the problems they are bound to
encounter assimilating their new weapons.  They fear that the press, once again,
will concentrate on the troublesome ''5 percent'' of the situation and ignore
the successful ''95 percent.'' This distrust of reporters surfaces only briefly,
but it is likely to return as a full-blown problem for both sides should the
country become involved in another limited war, with indistinct rules for press
coverage.

The overriding question, however, is whether such an engagement will ignite
among the military the same sense of being unfairly handicapped that embittered
them in Vietnam.

Reduced to its essentials, what does the professional soldier want? He wants, it
could be said, a high command that operates on a purely military basis and gives
him what he needs on the battlefield. Thus, remembering Vietnam, he is likely to
have strong, if rarely expressed, feelings about any political constraints that
interfere with this objective. At the same time, contrary to what some critics
have suggested, there is no significant sentiment among the military for placing
the next war, if there is one, under purely military control. There never has
been in this country the kind of ideological officer corps that acted as a
separate political entity in, say, the Kaiser's and Hitler's Germany. Despite
the punishment they feel they took in Vietnam, today's American officers show no
disposition to embrace that alien idea.

Basically, what they want is greater consideration of their views on the conduct
of a war than they feel they received from the civilian leadership during the
Southeast Asian involvement. They expect the nation's top military officers to
be men of the highest military - rather than political - ability, and they want
the military viewpoint to be presented to the President more firmly than,many
feel, it was done by the Joint Chiefs of Staff at critical phases of the Vietnam
engagement.

Yet even if the military get their demand for greater professionalism at the top
the next time they are sent into battle, will that be enough to reconcile them
to the inescapable necessity of subordinating military to political
considerations? Or will the anxieties and resentments left over from Vietnam
flare up into even more serious impatience with civilian control? Perhaps the
conflict that posed this dilemma for the nation is still too close for any
confident answers, and more time is needed for the built-in contradictions of
limited war to be absorbed into our military traditions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senior American officers on NATO in Italy, in
1979 photo of army officer asking farmer about ID card, Vietnam 1969 photo of
military news conference in Saigon, 1971 photo of West Point parade photo of
foreign civilians fleeing Saigon by helicopter, 1975

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW REAGAN RODE OUT 1981

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5065 words


Hedrick Smith is The Times's chief Washington correspondent.
By Hedrick Smith

Not long ago, President Reagan invited some longtime Hollywood friends to the
White House for a private showing of ''Reds,'' the film about John Reed, the
radical young American journalist who became an enthu siast of the Bolshevik Rev
olution. The closing scene showed Reed dying of typhus in a Soviet h ospital.
After the lights went on, the President, without any o bvious qualms about his
ideological differences with Reed or the i rony of his showing a film about a
pro-Communist, said, ''I was hopin g for a happy ending.''

That remark was vintage Reagan, typical of the easy, natural, unthinking
optimism that animates the President's approach to people and to politics and
that so captivated the country during his gallant early months in office. With
his politics of optimism, Mr. Reagan propelled Congress and the nation through
an extraordinary first year, inviting the unwarranted, and now troublesome,
expectation that big budget cuts and huge tax cuts would power America to
economic recovery and cure inflation without serious pain or economic
dislocation.

Now, as the President heads into his second year, a lot of the magic is gone and
the politics of optimism has fallen on hard times.  Recession has hit with a
force totally unexpected in the euphoric high tide of

Reaganism last summer. Fellow Republicans, like Gov. Richard A.  Snelling of
Vermont, chairman of the National Governors' Association, charge that the Reagan
game plan is leading the na-tion to ''an economic Bay of Pigs.'' Columnists and
cartoonists take ever more critical aim. And the soaring public confidence of
six months ago has given way to a mixture of tenuous hope that Reagonomics can
still succeed and fretful concern that even if the economy pulls out of
recession the Reagan program may reignite inflation next fall.

In a very real sense, the Reagan Administration has fallen victim to its own
optimism. As top Government officials now concede, the projections they made a
year ago for economic growth, interest rates and tax revenues were overly
optimistic. Instead of giving Wall Street the quick psychological shot in the
arm it expected and needed, the President disappointed the financial community,
which became increasingly skeptical of his program, and his scenario began to
unravel. As intere st rates climbed, defici ts ballooned and the economy turned
down sharply.

The tightening economic bind has forced the President to choose among competing
objectives and between divided factions in his Administration. In the 1980
campaign, his opponents contended that it would be impossible to cut taxes
sharply, increase military spending and balance the budget all at once, and now
Mr. Reagan is discovering they were right. After a year in office, he is being
crowded by unpalatable alternatives - whether to give first priority to holding
down spending, taxes, deficits or military growth, and thus define himself as a
purist or pragmatist on supply-side economics. And, in another realm, whether to
stick with his original team or juggle his lineup, especially to reduce the
jangling of personalities in foreign affairs.

All this has thrown the Presidency of Ronald Reagan into a critical and perhaps
decisive phase. For the obvious failure of the Administration's economic program
would not only cost Republicans dearly in next fall's Congressional elections
but could ultimately discredit conservativism generally. With his own economists
(probably too gloomily) projecting deficits totaling $423 billion over the next
three years, the candidate who pledged in the closing weeks of his campaign that
his economic program would give the country ''a balanced budget by 1983 and
possibly by 1982'' stands to become the nation's biggest-ever deficit spender.
''In the first year, there was an air of excitement and commitment that was
reminiscent of popular feelings about Franklin Roosevelt,'' notes A. James
Reichley, a former Ford White House aide and specialist on conservative
Presidencies. ''But if things now go badly, there is going to be real
disillusionment and a massive turn against Reagan.''

In part, Mr. Reagan's present headaches reflect the life-cycle of the modern
American Presidency -flashy freshman beginnings, followed by a sophomore slump,
with some third-year recovery or dazzling achievement, like Richard Nixon's
opening to China or Jimmy Carter's Camp David accords. Even the doomed
Presidency of Herbert Hoover enjoyed eight fairly good months before the stock
market crash in October 1929. And the popular Presidency of Dwight Eisenhower
had to endure the recession of 1953-54 and the Republican loss of Congressional
majorities during President Eisenhower's second year.

It is as if there were a rhythm to the political process that not only insures
exaggerated tolerance in the honeymoon period but also dictates a political
downswing as each new President bogs down toward the end of his first year in
the frustrating unpredictability of the economy, the self-inflicted wounds from
internal rivalries and failings, the troubling actions of foreign powers and the
electionyear nervousness and independence of Congress.

Uncannily, President Reagan's doldrums last fall roughly coincided with Jimmy
Carter's period of difficulties, when his budget director, Bert Lance, came
under fire. Almost on schedule, as it were, David A. Stockman, Mr. Reagan's
budget director, nearly lost his job because of overly candid admissions to The
Atlantic magazine. Meanwhi le, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.,
complained of a ''guerrillacampaign'' ag ainst him from within the White House
and Richard V.  Allen, the Pr esident's national security adviser, got into
trouble over money an d watches he had received from Japanese contacts. To those
attuned to the rhythms of this President, none of these tribulations preclude
Mr. Reagan's bouncing back. Even Democratic economists ar e currently predicting
an economic upturn next summer.

It is easy, moreover, in the pessimism of the moment to lose sight of Mr.
Reagan's rather spectacular achievements as a political leader during his first
year. When he came into office, the nation was aching for political as well as
economic revitalization, and leading politicians of both parties were so fearful
that the American political system was hopelessly deadlocked and the American
Presidency so weakened that they were urging a six-year term for the President,
along with other structural reforms. But the former California Governor soon put
the White House clearly back in charge of the political process. In place of
stalemate, President Reagan made the system work again by forging an effective
coalition with the Senate Republican majority and the alliance of Republicans
and breakaway moderate ''Boll Weevil'' Democrats in the House.

As promised, he engineered a radical change of direction by implementing the
free-enterprise economics and fiscal conservativism of Calvin Coolidge and
Herbert Hoover to roll back the Great Society liberalism of Lyndon Johnson. In
one quick year, he moved more vigorously, and successfully, to curb the growth
and retrench the role of the Federal Government than had such of his Republican
predecessors as Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford.

As a long-term legacy, to cite but a few examples, Mr. Reagan has shut down the
antipoverty programs of the Community Services Administration, sharply curtailed
the Environmental Protection Agency, moved toward phasing out the public-service
job program, obtained authority to sell off the failing Conrail system and
forced states to limit health care subsidies and close facilities for dispensing
nutritional aid to the elderly.

And even without further legislative victor ies, his success in persuading
Congress to cut nearly $40 billion from the 1982 budget and to enact the largest
tax cut in history w as stunning enough to earn comparison to the legislative
wizardry o f Lyndon B. Johnson in his heyday in 1965.

His Congressional foes have consistently underestimated Mr. Reagan, often to
their regret. Those who thought they could beat back either his proposed
increases in military spending or his plan to sell Awacs reconnaissance planes
to Saudi Arabia were confounded. And though he had to compromise in his autumnal
round of budget cuts, Mr. Reagan lost no major legislative fight in his freshman
year. Indeed, his present difficulty now stems from the fact that he sought and
won too much - especially on tax cuts.

In foreign affairs, he has been lucky to escape a major crisis - like Vietnam,
Iran or the Bay of Pigs - that could have crippled or consumed him in his first
year. His hallmarks have been to strike a determined anti-Soviet posture and to
increase military spending. At the Western summit in Ottawa and the North-South
summit in Cancun, Mexico, he defended his free enterprise-free trade approach
without serious setbacks. But he has been notably less successful abroad than at
home.

In 12 months, Mr. Reagan has yet to project a well-coordinated foreign strategy
to match his economic program. He has paid a price for relegating foreign
affairs to second priority and letting disarray develop among feuding
subordinates because of his own failure to provide continuous, unifying
leadership or turning over chief responsibility to a strong Secretary of State.

Gradually, he and his inner circle have learned that the world is a more complex
and intractable place than they had assumed as outsiders. For in the 1980
campaign, Mr. Reagan tapped popular frustration and raised expectations by
suggesting that America's global position could be restored by a military
buildup and a stronger assertion of national will. Yet, as the Polish crisis,
tensions with Europe and wrangling with Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin
have demonstrated, many events are beyond Washington's power to control, or even
effectively influence.

Equally, the Administration has yet to score visible gains in its drive to
oppose Soviet and Cuban adventurism, initially in El Salvador. Indeed, except
for bristling rhetoric about Central America and Libya and an arms proposal for
Europe, the Reagan approach has not diverged dramatically from that of the
Carter Administration.  Even the Reagan military buildup expands on a Carter
trend. And despite the President's outspoken opposition to Mr. Carter's
unratified strategic arms limitation agreement with Moscow, his Government has
quietly abided by its terms.

Mr. Reagan's one major foreign-policy initiative - his Nov. 14 proposal for
eliminating Soviet and American medium-range missile arsenals in Europe - came
nearly 10 months into his term. Bela tedly, it demonstrat ed the
Administration's recognition that the rising anti-American , neutralist mood in
Western Europe was a crucial diplomatic pr oblem that required understanding and
response. When thePresident fin ally moved, his initiative won support in
Congress and in Europe. Wh ether he can actually achieve an arms agreement with
Moscow is an open question.

Politically, his offer has bought time with the American public and seems to
have eased West European fears that Mr. Reagan is a ''cowboy President'' with a
wobbly commitment to peace and a worrisome tendency to talk about limited
nuclear war. In a few weeks, Mr.  Reagan is likely to use the start of strategic
arms talks with Moscow to reinforce this more moderate image with another
proposal for nuclear force reductions.

But while such moves improve the political atmosphere over the short run,
serious problems with Europe are bound to persist. For instance, when the
President charged that the ''Soviet Union bears a heavy and direct
responsibility for the repression in Poland'' and cut back sharply on
Soviet-American trade and scientific exchanges last month, as well as banning
Soviet airline flights to this country, West Germany did not assail the Soviet
Union, but rather spoke of the American sanctions as ''creating difficulties.''
The Continent does not share Mr. Reagan's strong anti-Soviet views. His tough
terms on arms probably mean long, arduous negotiations lie ahead. This will not
only leave the arms race unchecked but leave Washington hard-pressed to prevent
further rifts in the Atlantic Alliance over Western missile deployment.

For the time being, Poland's military repression against the Solidarity movement
has diverted the West from its intramural problems and aided the American
political offensive in Europe. As foreign crises often do, it has also given the
President a temporary lift by causing Americans to rally around their leader.
Ironically, wider bloodshed in Poland or direct Soviet military intervention
would do more to draw the alliance together than anything the Reagan
Administration could devise.

But the initial success of the Polish crackdown left the West divided on how to
respond. NATO had based its coordin ated strategy onSoviet intervention. When
Polish forces struc k alone, Mr. Reagan tried the carrot and stick approach,
cutting off aid but offering to restore it if - ''but only if'' - coercive me
asures were eased.  Privately, top Administration officials conce de the limits
of this leverage but they hope that the harsh economi c realities in Poland will
eventually force Warsaw and Moscow to te mper the repression in return for
Western economic assistance.

In the Middle East, the Administration has had to readjust its thinking.
Ambitiously, it had trumpeted the goal of an anti-Soviet ''strategic consensus''
built around Egypt, Israel and Saudi Arabia.  The difficulty was that while
Washington sees Moscow as the enemy, the Arabs and Israel see each other as the
enemy. The concept lost a linchpin when Egyptian President Anwar el-Sadat was
assassinated. It ran afoul of regional sensitivities, as when Saudi Arabia urged
Oman to keep American military exercises out of the Persian Gulf. And it
collided with immutable Arab-Israeli tensions when Israel caustically cast aside
a Saudi peace plan.

The Reagan team's one diplomatic triumph in the Middle East has been the
ceasefire along the Lebanese-Israeli border. But that remains fragile and its
existence has not prevented the Camp David peace process from losing steam.

More fundamentally, the Reagan Administration has been unable to devise a steady
working relationship with Prime Minister Begin. It has swung from ardent support
to pointed criticism and forceful reaction to his unilateral decisions to annex
the Golan Heights and attack Iraq's reactor and Palestinian areas around Beirut.
But neither approach has persuaded Mr. Begin that such actions play havoc with
the relationship between Washington and Tel Aviv and American ability to move
moderate Arabs toward ultimate accommodation with Israel.

For the next three months, Washington will be striving to keep Lebanon from
erupting or disintegrating, to make progress in the Palestinian autonomy talks
and to insure that Israel completes its scheduled military withdrawal from the
Sinai Peninsula in April.  Despite Mr. Begin's letter last month reassuring
Egypt that Israel would honor its commitment to withdraw from Sinai, the Israeli
leader's recent moves have raised fears that the April deadline may not be met,
or that some Israeli blow at Lebanon is in the works. But even if such fears are
proved false and the Reagan-Begin tiff is papered over, the Golan Heights
annexation may have effectively blocked a wider Arab-Israeli agreement for many
years.

Beyond any specific problems, President Reagan has been ill served by his
failure to organize his foreign-policy apparatus clearly.  Normally,
Administrations operate in one of two ways: Either the President takes the lead
in foreign policy and uses his national security adviser to shepherd the
Government's policy, or he turns over the leading role to a strong Secretary of
State. Mr. Reagan has done neither and has paid the price of private backbiting
and public disar ray.

He has also suffered by not having a national security adviser strong enough to
focus the Presidential agenda and to help resolve the disagreements on tactics
between his assertive Secretaries of State and Defense, Alexander Haig and
Caspar W. Weinberger. Richard Allen was too downgraded to do the job, and Edwin
Meese 3d, the President's counsellor, was too busy with domestic affairs.
Replacing Mr. Allen, now on administrative leave, with a stronger new national
security adviser would require Mr. Meese to surrender some of the power he has
had as Mr. Allen's supervisor and go-between for the President with the top
Cabinet officials. Mr. Reagan's decision to use Vice President Bush as his
coordinator during the Polish crisis indicated how hard he found it to resolve
the matter.

For all the problems, Mr. Reagan has established himself as a natural leader at
ease with his powers and the burdens of office. He has confounded many critics
by shaping the office to his own pace and style, rather than letting it drive
him mercilessly. He has come across as a more ideological Eisenhower, but with
that same warm, boyish grin, vague geniality, jaunty charm and obvious personal
rapport with the public. His appeal on television recalls the charisma of
Franklin D. Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy.

And like President Eisenhower, Mr. Reagan defuses political antagonism by
letting subordinates, such as Secretary Haig or budget director Stockman, act as
lightning rods. Except for his melodramatic shutdown of the Government last fall
and an occasional joust with House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Mr. Reagan has
sought to stand above partisan politics, though that is likely to change this
year.

Significantly, he has followed President Eisenhower's pattern of charting a
general policy course and delegating broad authority to half a dozen key
subordinates. Aides say Mr. Reagan is aggravated by commentaries suggesting that
he is a disengaged President, but he continues to invite such criticism by his
laid-back, chairman-of-theboard approach.

That impression was reinforced recently, for example, by his skipping daily
meetings of Cabinet-level advisers on the Polish crisis or by seeming vague or
out of touch on ot her issues, especially in the national security field. On
Oct. 2, for example, after announcing his strategic-weapons progra m, the
President took only a handful of questions from reporters. W hen asked why he
thought the proposed B-1 bomber could penetra te Soviet air defenses, he
beckoned to Defense Secretary Weinberger, saying, ''I think my fewminutes are up
and I am going to turn that qu estion over to Cap.'' With only six news
conferences this year, few er than any recent predecessor, Mr. Reagan has added
to the noti on that a probing forum makes him uneasy.

Moreoever, he has not shown the voracious curiosity of Franklin Roosevelt or
John Kennedy about the world nor the prowling, selfprotective inquisitiveness of
Lyndon Johnson or Richard Nixon. He was quite content last Aug. 19, he said,
that Ed Meese had not awakened him in the wee hours of the morning to tell him
that American Navy jets had downed two Libyan planes. Later, when the furor
broke over David Stockman's admissions of doubt about the Administration's
economic program, Mr. Reagan was slow to seek out the actual magazine article,
leaning on staff summaries instead. When he eventually read the piece in the
Atlantic, it angered him and he reprimanded Stockman.

Presidential scholars, like Thomas E. Cronin, professor of political science at
Colorado College, suggest that Mr. Reagan, as a political leader with a
well-defined, single-minded philosophy of ''getting the Government off people's
backs,'' may not feel the need to learn as much about government and the world
as other, more eclectic-minded Presidents. But this trait leaves him more
dependent on often troublesome subordinates like Mr. Stockman and Secretary
Haig, therefore, perhaps more hesitant to dismiss them. It also may produce less
philosophical evolution in this Presidency than in some others.

But when Mr. Reagan talks about his stewardship, he projects an inner
self-confidence and betrays no self-doubts. In the midst of the Polish crisis,
he joked to reporters that he had ''come to the conclusion that there is a
worldwide plot to make my job more difficult on almost any day that I go to the
office.'' But he shows no signs of being overburdened, and he brushes aside
criticism of his socializing with wealthy California friends or of Nancy
Reagan's expensive replacement of the White House china. Typically, during one
Thanksgiving interview at his California ranch, he was the very picture of a
comfortable gentry President in his leather jacket and riding boots.

With that image, he runs the risk of looking unconcerned about the social and
economic divisions that his policies are sharpening, or lacking in genuine
compassion for the disadvantaged. Already, his Presidency has been assailed as
an Administration for the well-to-do, who have gotten tax breaks while less
fortunate people lose the cushion of food stamps, energy subsidies, Medicaid
benefits and the like. (The Congressional Budget Office has reckoned that just
over half of the 16.5 million fami lies living near or below the poverty line
will los e some income because of the Reagan budget cuts.)

It is that perception which made Mr. Stockman's admissions to The Atlantic so
damaging, precisely because they suggested high-level cynicism about social
consequences of the Reagan program. The President's political strategists expect
such admissions to haunt Republican candidates in the fall. A harbinger recently
came from former Representative John B. Anderson, the independent Presidential
candidate in 1980, who noted that people ''are willing to sacrifice and accept
hard knocks provided there is a perceived sense of equity in the suffering. But
that is not now the case.''

At the height of the Congressional battle over the Reagan tax package last
August, the Senate majority leader, Howard H. Baker Jr., acknowledged that the
Reagan economic program ''is really a riverboat gamble'' for the nation and the
Reagan Presidency.

How that gamble pays off will depend not only on the economy's performance, but
public patience, the credibility of the Reagan program with Wall Street and the
business community, and the President's ability to hold together his political
coalition in Congress. But this year, everything will be politically more
difficult: Congress will be harder to persaude, the press more critical, the
Administration more at odds within its own ranks and the public more fickle.

To win over Wall Street, President Reagan will have to show that he can reduce
inflationary pressures by devising a credible way to bring the 1983 and 1984
budget deficits down from the $150 billion range to under $100 billion in 1983
and about $60 billion in 1984.  Lowerthan-normal wage settlements in major
industries this year may help to cool inflation, but the main arena will be
Congress.

Senate Republican leaders, who blanch at the scale of new budget cuts drafted by
the Administration, have pressed the President to swallow some sizeable tax
increases to reduce the deficits, though House Republicans oppose this in an
election year. Some top Presidential advisers have also urged Mr. Reagan to
close tax loopholes, increase excise taxes and add a windfall profits tax on
deregulated natural gas to help close the deficit. But all last month, Mr. Regan
balked at anything that s mac ked of tacitly admittingthat his 1981 tax-cut
package went too far. A t his Dec. 17 news conference, he declared flatly: ''I
have no p lan for increasing taxesin any way.''

But his tactics toward Congress are changing. With his first budget veto last
November, he signaled a shift away from the politics of conciliation to partisan
confrontation. Even if it means losing some key votes, tough, confrontational
tactics this winter would let Mr.  Reagan go to voters next fall contending that
House Democrats blocked his program and that he needs a Republican-controlled
House to legislate his proposals. His vehicle is a big new package of budget
cuts directed mainly at already hard-hit domestic social programs and, so,
unlikely to win full approval. Partial success, however, would help trim the
deficits and also set up the President's partisan pitch to the electorate. With
his political coalition fraying, Mr.  Reagan is beginning to adapt to reality.
Some of his conservative Southern Democratic and Republican backers, like
Senator William L.  Armstrong of Colorado, have been stunned by the forecasts of
huge deficits and angered by their almost cavalier acceptance by top
Administration economists. On the other flank, moderate Republican ''gypsy
moths'' from the Northeast and Midwest opposed the President's fall round of
budget cuts and are likely to be even more rebellious this year against further
rollbacks that will hit their economically depressed districts in an election
year.

There is other erosion as well. In his first year, Mr. Reagan won important
political backing from Republican governors and local officeholders who
anticipated dividends from his New Federalism.  Increasingly disillusioned, they
have begun openly to oppose him.

Last November, four Republican governors told the President that their states
could not absorb any more Federal budget cuts and urged him to trim military
spending instead. And Mayor Koch of New York, who had earlier supported the
Reagan approach, denounced it in December as ''a sham and a shame.'' ''In
withdrawing Federal involvement from the needs of the people and the cities,
President Reagan protests that he is returning to the states responsibility that
is properly a local concern,'' the Mayor said. ''In truth, he is employing the
mask of federalism for a systematic campaign of abandonment.''

Reagan strategists like Richard Wirthlin, the President's pollster, contend that
the public is more patient with Mr. Reagan than is Mayor Koch. Late last fall,
Mr. Wirthlin's polls found that seven out of 10 Americans believed it would take
a year or more for the Reagan program to have an impact on the economy. Nearly
60 percent also thought Congress had passed no more than half - or even less -
of the President's package. The Gallup Poll and others not only showed the
President's personal popularity strong but also indicated that he probably
benefits from widespread skepticism that any President can control infla tion.

But several opinion surveys also point to incipient pitfalls ahead for Mr.
Reagan. One of the ways that he has won public tolerance is to promise a break
from ''business as usual,'' but that tolerance dwindles as people come to feel
that he is following the familiar tactic of using recession and unemployment to
fight inflation.  Increasingly, too, polls like the Gallup Poll and network
surveys show the belief spreading that the Reagan program benefits the wealthy.
And such shifts in the public mood have an impact on Congress.

It is normal for Presidential approval ratings to fade after a year, except for
periodic spurts of support during foreign crises.  What Reagan strategists hope
is that their man can hold onto a strong personal following, such as President
Eisenhower enjoyed, and use that leverage to maintain political momentum for his
program.

But, some opinion surveys show that as a more radical and ideologically
fundamentalist conservative than Presidents Eisenhower, Ford or Nixon, Mr.
Reagan has polarized public opinion and engendered strong public opposition more
sharply and more quickly than any recent President. His refusal to backtrack on
tax cuts underscores his determination to force a permanent change in the
Federal Government's role in domestic policy, even at significant political
risk. He has already shown that he attaches higher priority to cutting the
budget than to balancing it. And sharper partisan tactics increase the
Republican gamble.

As Richard Wirthlin, one of the President's closest political associates,
ruefully remarked recently, ''It's clear there's not going to be any easy happy
ending for Ronald Reagan in 1982. His toughest job this spring will be to keep
people believing that while they may have hard times now, better times lie
ahead.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Reagan with Richard Allen cartoon of Reagan
riding a bag of money

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 94, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 151 words


Lucinda Franks's article was enlightening, but I was disturbed by her concluding
comments. I am angered not because I am ''young,'' butbecause I treasure
humanistic ideals - something mature individuals can strive to achieve. If
ambitions ''to want to save the world'' must inevitably be abandoned for
''personal goals,'' then I fear what we all must be headed for. As a student, I
like to think that the ''personal goals'' I am currently pursuing can be used
later on, not in a large sense ''to save the world,'' but indeed to make it a
better place. If the rage of these radicals never abated at the end of the
Vietnam War, then I applaud them. Miss Franks appears to regard the abatement of
her own rage as a sign of maturity. I think not.  Idealistic yearnings to want
to improve the world are something one should never grow out of.
ANDREA LANG FOSTER, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 94, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 123 words


Although it would be wrong to eliminate psychological factors from any
examination of human events, it is equally incorrect to make psychology solely
determinative of those same events. It is necessary to include history,
economics, the power of special interests in a complex of interacting factors in
order to gain an understanding of the war on Vietnam and people's resistance to
that war. Were there no children of relatively privileged and doting parents
among those who ran the war? Although some of the members of the Weatherpeople
came from wealthy backgrounds, did they all? How many?  Did any more of them
have such backgrounds than, say, the Young Americans for Freedom or the Young
Republicans?
BERTRAM GARSKOF, New Haven

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RENOVATED LIVES

BYLINE: By JOSEPHINE HENDIN; Josephine Hendin teaches English at New York
University. Her most recent book is ''Vulnerable People: A View of American
Fication Since 1945.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words


A MOTHER AND TWO DAUGHTERS By Gail Godwin.  564 pp. New York: The Viking Press.
$15.95.

IT was Emerson who called for ''men and women who shall renovate life and our
social state,'' believing that ''our arts, our occupations, our marriages, our
religion we have not chosen, but society has chosen for us.'' That tension
between individual vision and the constricting power of circumstance finds a
fresh and distinctive expression in Gail Godwin's ''A Mother and Two
Daughters,'' a novel about three women who try to ''renovate'' their lives.

Here, as in her previous novels, Gail Godwin has drawn on the tradition of
American individualism and adapted it to her concern with female lives. In ''The
Odd Woman'' (1974) her heroine was an unmarried woman of 32 whose
self-measurements against a married woman colleague, against a passionately
feminist friend and against her own married lover only left her more assertively
odd woman out, without the anchors of marriage or ideology. In ''Violet Clay''
(1978) her artist heroine ''fits in'' as a commercial book-jacket designer until
she decides to go off and paint what she wants. These characters have found no
final answers to the problems of solitude, but neither have they accepted any
packaged solutions, rejecting both dogmatic feminism and love affairs that are
only consolations. They prefer to live with the problematic facts of their
natures.

''A Mother and Two Daughters'' extends this faith in the individual toward a
vision of community, within the family, the town and, ultimately, the nation. In
this novel, Gail Godwin's individualists are the female members of a family in
crisis over the death of husband and father. The widowed mother and her two
daughters have lost their first illusions; their bulwark is gone. Their
necessity is to pull together. The mother is a nurse (though she hasn't worked
professionally for many years). Lydia, her 35-year-old daughter, is the family
angel, who married well and had two sons. Cate, her 39-year-old twice-divorced
sister, is the rebel, a political activist who feels at home nowhere. As the
novel progresses, Lydia decides to divorce her husband and reject the
self-abnegation of ''excessive'' love. Cate, who is given to intellectual vanity
and an overweening sense of her own capabilities, must come to grips with what
she has accomplished in her life of edgy rebellion. Although their mother's own
life has been stable, she becomes unsettled when the disordered lives of her
daughters begin to throw a shadow over the promise of her own future.

As each woman exerts her claims on the others, as each confronts the envy and
anger the others can inspire, Gail Godwin orchestrates their entanglements with
great skill. Cate's struggle, after a terrible argument with her sister, is
particularly moving: ''The ghosts of her arrogant young dreams clustered around
her like frightened children seeking protection from the lengthening shadows.
The light in the house was at that dreaded melancholy-orange stage that had
always set off her claustrophobia. All her life, even before she had anything to
run from, she had been fleeing this thickening, dusty half-light, as if it
possessed some spiritual chemical that could destroy her. Now she knew what the
chemical was composed of: it was made up of all the ingredients of her own
history - those she could control and those she could not. She had been fleeing
from the premonition of just such a moment as this, when that history would have
had enough time to assume a shape.''

As Lydia moves toward independence, as Cate strives toward a greater acceptance
of others, and as their mother reconstructs her life, Miss Godwin achieves a
richness of affirmations. In this generous novel, illness and age are enablers.
And if time has taken the illusions and promises of youth from these women, it
has also pressed them toward recognizing the serious courtesy due one another's
pain. In one of the best-realized episodes of the novel, Cate, whose face is
temporarily paralyzed by Bell's palsy, reaches accord with a former high school
friend whose leg was shattered in the Vietnam War. Anti-war activist and veteran
- both battered by their choices - comfort each other with exquisite simplicity.

America is in flux as much as Americans are. The beauty of the small Southern
mountain town in which the novel is set, the smug, traditional morality of the
town's elite, even the mystery of Cate's favorite Thoreauvian old uncle, who
chooses to live among his apple trees -all contribute to the bright American
colors of the novel.  Encroaching on these are darker shades: Skylab is about to
fall, the Iranians hold American hostages, the town's appearance is marred by
garish shopping malls, racial violence erupts. Although Miss Godwin does not
entirely succeed in negotiating the distance between family and nation, between
the personal and the political, she clearly hopes these distances can be
narrowed. In an epilogue, she moves forward in time to show the family rejoicing
at the wedding of a brilliant and beautiful young black woman to a talented
young white man. Offering us a visionary glimpse of Americans in an extended
kinship, she describes a harmony among classes, races and generations.

Ironically, the major flaw of ''A Mother and Two Daughters'' arises out of Gail
Godwin's ability to modulate emotion. She is a thoughtful craftsman, countering
her characters' excesses of emotion with excesses of mind, tempering their envy
with concern, their disapproval with compassion - to the point where she
neutralizes the force of her narrative. Perfectly balanced, the novel is
imperfectly pitched. Its overmodulation produces a monotone of sweet
reasonableness that seems inappropriate to the more painful aspects of her
characters' experience: abortion, death, adultery.

''A Mother and Two Daughters'' is nevertheless a remarkable novel.  In this
spacious, harmonious book - an expansive and imaginative celebration of American
life - Gail Godwin retrieves her heroines from impasses. Through characters who
are recognizable contemporaries, she takes us back to an Emersonian faith in the
human capacity for good, for betterment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

What's Doing in;
HONOLULU

SECTION: Section 10; Page 10, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1977 words


ROBERT TRUMBULL, a retired Times correspondent, lives in Honolulu.

By ROBERT TRUMBULL

''There's no place like Hawaii,'' according to a song that was popular locally
before the islands became the 50th state in 1959, and the description still
stands, even in the deceptively modern surroundings of Honolulu, the capital on
the island of Oahu.

Something special in the look and way of the people, the more relaxed pace of
life and the natural beauty of the place belie the superficial resemblance of
Honolulu to any other city. Even though clusters of buildings rise to heights of
40 stories, there are still ing fewer - where the green Koolau Mountains are the
only skyline.

A short drive inland in any direction takes one through a relatively unspoiled
countryside of valleys festooned with rainbows, fields of sugar cane and
pineapples, and uncrowded beaches, some with waves that lure the world's best
surfers to Hawaii.

The People

Differences begin with Honolulu's 365,000 residents - about 750,000 if you
include the rest of the island of Oahu, which belongs to Honolulu County and is
governed by the same mayor and council as if the city and county were one. In
Hawaii, everybody belongs to an ethnic minority. Only about one person in four
is Caucasian. The rest are divided among indigenous Polynesians, Asians or
others, giving the islands a racial mix unlike any other among the 50 states.

Although the life style seems purely American on the surface, the cultures of
Asia and the Pacific Islands of an earlier time influence attitudes, personal
relationships, family customs, dress, diet and even speech. Everyone except a
few older immigrants and some newcomers speaks English, but there is a special
island accent among the locally born, and conversations are interlarded with
many words adopted from the native Hawaiian tongue, such as ''mahalo'' for
''thank you'' and some from Japanese, Chinese and Portuguese.

Polynesian taste for vivid color combinations has been adopted almost
universally on Honolulu's streets and even in downtown offices. The multi-hued,
loose-fitting ''aloha shirt'' is commonly worn by men, not only for relaxing but
at work.

Where to Stay

Hote ls in Waikiki, the city's resort center , range from the very expensive to
the very cheap, as rates go thes e days, making Honolulu a bargain destination
for the budget traveler . In top-class establishments, such as the classic Royal
Haw aiian, right on Waikiki Beach, single rooms begin at $62 and doubles at $65.
Just one block inland, places like Marine Surf Waikiki (364 Seaside Avenue,
Honolulu, Hawaii. 96815; 808-923-0277) offer attractive double rooms with
cooking facilities and color television, plus full hotel service, for $28 single
or double.

A locally popular hotel away from Waikiki but near the sprawling Ala Moana
shopping center and Ala Moana Park, with a beach that Honolulu families use, is
the Pagoda (1525 Rycroft Street, Honolulu, Hawaii. 96814; 808-941-6611). The
Pagoda is full of Oriental and tropical decor, and has a good dining room.
Singles or doubles begin at $32.

Away from Waikiki in the opposite direction but with its own beach near the
Waialae Country Club, where the Hawaiian Open Golf Classic is played in
February, is the Kahala Hilton, a favorite of film stars. Singles start at $93,
doubles at $95. The address: 5000 Kahala Avenue, Honolulu, Hawaii 96816
(808-734-2211).

A free guide issued by the Hawaii Visitors Bureau, 441 Lexington Avenue, New
York, N.Y. l0017 (212-986-9203), contains information on hotels and condominiums
throughout the state.
Getting Around

To savor the variety of Honolulu, one must leave Waikiki where most of the
tourist hotels are, and explore the sprawling city by car, bus or afoot. You can
go anywhere on Oahu, or clear around it, on the municipal bus system for one
50-cent fare, payable as you enter, in exact change. A selection of excellent
bus guides, with exact directions, is available on newsstands for about $1.50
each. An immediate answer to inquiries about bus travel can be had by calling
(808) 531-1611.

Anyone 65 years old or older can get a free bus pass by applying, with proof of
age, at the Municipal Office Building, but it takes three to four weeks for the
application to be processed and the pass mailed. The pass is good only for a
year. Permanent residents can get lifetime passes.

National car-rental agencies as well as many local ones offer a variety of
rates. It is wise to telephone for a taxi, as cruising cabs are scarce.

Points of Interest

To experience the full flavor of Honolulu, a visitor should explore some of the
neighborhoods by car, bus or afoot. Starting on Kalakaua Avenue and proceeding
along the shore past Diamond Head, the extinct volcanic crater that is the
city's trademark, a short drive takes one straight into the leafy suburb of
Kahala, an elite residential area that looks about the same as it did 40 years
ago. A comfortable house on the beach there can cost more than $1 million. The
same seaside road leads past the exclusive Waialae golf course, on through other
residential areas full of tropical charm, past scenic Hanauma Bay and a string
of inviting beaches, and on around to a succession of old plantation villages
and more modern communities that serve mostly as bedroom towns for people
working in the city proper.

The No. 4 bus goes away from Diamond Head on Kuhio Avenue one block inland from
Kalakaua Avenue and the beach, to Manoa Valley, an affluent older neighborhood.

Downtown Honolulu, about three miles from Waikiki and reachable by several bus
lines, is divided into three parts. Nearest Waikiki is the civic center, a
complex harboring the main state and municipal government buildings. These
include the modern state capital, which is worth a look inside for the art work.
Across from the capital on Beretania Street is Washington Place, a mansion that
was built in 1846 by a prosperous trader, was occupied later by Hawaii's last
monarch, the deposed Queen Liliuokalani, and is now the official residence of
Hawaii's governors. Nearby, fronting on King Street, is Iolani Palace, the only
royal palace in the United States. Tours begin every 15 minutes between 9 A.M.
and 2:15 P.M. and cost $3 a person, Monday through Saturday; reservations must
be made in advance by calling 808-536-2474.

A few steps toward Waikiki from the palace is the Spanish-style city hall,
called Honolulu Hale (''Hale,'' pronounced haw-lay, is Hawaiian for ''house'').
Across the street is the historic Kawaiahao Church, where Hawiian royalty
worshiped in the Congregational faith and a Sunday morning service is still
conducted partly in the Hawaiian language. Down the street, in front of the
classic old courthouse, is a famous statue of King Kamehameha I, who united the
islands under his own rule early in the last century.Next door to the church is
a cluster of early mission homes that have been preserved in their original
state.

This part of the city retains some of the ambience of Honolulu's past, as does
the old section, known as Chinatown, a few blocks farther west.

Most tourists like to visit the Arizona Memorial, a national shrine built over
the sunken battleship in which mor e than 1,000 Navy men died during the Dec. 7,
1941 Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. It is best to take the standard Navy tour,
which is the only one that gets you aboard the Memorial itself and includes a
film of the attack and its background plus a cruise around the Pearl Harbor Navy
Yard. Take the No. 8 bus on Kuhio Avenue, ask the driver where to transfer, and
allow 40 minutes for the trip each way. The f ree tours run from 9 A.M. to 3
P.M. daily except Monday. For furth er information call 808-471-3901.

World War II buffs also flock to the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific,
in the extinct volcanic crater known as Punch Bowl, where veterans of the wars
in the Pacific, Korea and Vietnam are buried. Murals depict the World War II
fighting against Japan. Take the No. 8 bus and ask where to transfer. There is a
scenic 15-minute walk to the cemetery from the bus.

The Bishop Museum, 1355 Kalihi Street, has one of the world's best collections
of Polynesian arts and crafts. It is open daily from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. including
Sunday. A red double-decker bus from London goes directly to the museum from
King's Alley, the shopping complex on Kaiulani Street next to the Hyatt Regency
Waikiki Hotel. Admission to the museum is $4 for adults, $2 for children.
Admission to the planetarium next door (showtime 11 A.M. and 3:15 P.M.) is $1.50
for adults, 75 cents for children.

The Honolulu Academy of Arts on Beretania Street, open daily from 10 A.M. to
4:30 P.M., Sunday 2 to 5 P.M., has outstanding Oriental collections. The No. 2
bus goes right there, 15 minutes from Waikiki. There is a pleasant restaurant
attached.

A two-hour bus ride (or one hour and 15 minutes by car) takes one into the heart
of old Polynesia, including the Hawaii of a vanished era, at the Polynesian
Cultural Center at Laie, on Oahu's north shore near some world-famous surfing
beaches. Admission is $13, $6.50 for children, with extra charges for lunch,
dinner and a lavish dance performance in the evening. This is a Mormon Church
institution, so no alcohol is served. Tickets include a tour of the nearby
Mormon Temple, one of the Hawaii's religious showplaces. For information,
reservations and brochures, call 808-923-1861.

Dining Out

Honolulu restaurants, like the hotels, are geared for every purse and taste from
the level of the McDonald's chain, which has outlets all over the island, to
deluxe establishments like Bagwells 2424 in the Hyatt Regency Waikiki Hotel at
2424 Kalakaua Avenue, (808-922-9292).

The Third Floor in the Hawaiian Regent Hotel, 2552 Kalakaua Avenue
(808-955-7866) and the very French Chez Michel, 444 Hobron Lane (808-966-7866).
At all of these, a meal with wine can easily cost $50 a person.

The relaxed dress rules even in the best Honolulu restaurants usually permit
aloha shirts or similar attire but not jeans, Tshirts, tank tops or thongs.
Telephone ahead to be sure.

Two excellent seafood restaurants with stunning views of the waterfront are the
very expensive (entrees up to $35) John Dominis, 43 Ahui Street (808-523-0955),
and the inexpensive (dinner for two up to $25) Fisherman's Wharf, 1009 Ala Moana
(808-538-3808).

The Willows, a picturesque garden restaurant long favored by local people at 901
Hausten Street (808-946-4808), is a good place to try native Hawaiian cuisine. A
lunch featuring laulau (meat and fish baked in leaves, is $8.95. Dinner with a
greater variety of dishes is $13.50. The restaurant has a tropical setting and a
strolling Hawaiian trio. The Willows also has a Kamaaina Suite, where a full
Polynesian dinner is served at $42.50 a person, with wine and tip extra.

Shopping

Waikiki is full of shops crammed with Polynesian carvings and woven goods,
resort clothes in bright Polynesian prints and Oriental goods ranging from cheap
souvenir gewgaws to fine art work. Antiques and a wealth of other attractive
items from the People's Republic of China are stocked by the Friendship Store on
the third floor of the Andrade Shop, a large apparel store in the Royal Hawaiian
Center shopping complex on Kalakaua Avenue near the Royal Hawaiian Hotel.

A stroll through the International Market Place across the street is fun, and so
is a visit to the Ala Moana Center, one of the world's largest shopping
complexes. It is a 15-minute ride from from Waikiki by the No. 8 bus.

For Information

Guidebooks and local newspapers containing copious suggestions for sightseeing
and entertainment are available at newsstands and in hotels. The Hawaii Visitors
Bureau Information Office in Waikiki is at 2270 Kalakaua Avenue (808-923-1811).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of a surfer and the Arizona Memorial at Pearl
Harbor photos of statue of King Kamehameha and Iolani, the royal palace photo of
pageant at Polynesian Cultural Center map of Honoulu coastline detail map of
Waikiki area

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

For Defense, Slow Gains

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 12; Special Section Page 34; Page 34, Column 1; National
Economic Survey Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


WASHINGTON WHEN Ronald Reagan took office and Caspar W. Weinberger became
Secretary of Defense a year ago, they proclaimed the urgent need to ''rearm
America.'' The nation's military contractors quickly snapped to attention,
saluted smartly and did little to suppress their smiles.

Now most of those contractors, at least for 1982, are preparing to battle to
keep what they have rather than to fight for new contracts. Not one is close to
starvation, but they will be surviving on Crations most of this year.

The turnaround in the outlook for the industry began shortly after the Reagan
Administration announced its ambitious plans for increases in military spending
last March. The immediate question: How would the nation cut taxes and domestic
spending, balance the budget and increase military spending all at the same
time?

By August, it became clear that it couldn't. Mr. Reagan sided with Mr.
Weinberger against David A. Stockman, the director of the budget who is in
charge of making the President's fiscal plan work. They blocked most of the cuts
from the defense budget that Mr. Stockman wanted to get the Federal budget on
the road to balance.

Even so, there were cuts that hurt. The Air Force, for instance, had
procurements set at $14.7 billion in March. By the time Congress got finished
with it in the fall, it was down to $13.7 billion. The Navy started with 33
ships in a $10.3 billion procurement budget in March and end ed with 26 ships in
an $8.8 billion budget.

Equally important, much of the increase that stayed in the budget was to pay for
manpower and for operation and maintenance intended to bring the military forces
to a better state of readiness, rather than to provide them with the new weapons
that fueled the industry.

The stock market prices of leading military contractors suggested that investors
are not overly sanguine about the immediate prospects of the industry. Shares of
General Dynamics, Boeing and Grumman, for instance, have been selling just above
their 52-week lows recently.

In the long run, however, there may be hope, according to Paul H.  Nisbet, a
specialist in defense issues with Bache Halsey Stuart Shields Inc. He wrote
recently: ''The considerable skepticism that has prevailed in the finance and
investment communities relative to the Reagan defense plans, in times of a
fragile economy and burgeoning deficits, has placed the defense issues under
severe pressure.'' But noting that the Reagan military budget for 1982, after
its trims, was adopted by Congress largely intact, Mr. Nisbet asserted: ''We
believe this negative momentum is now being reversed.''

As in other sectors of the American economy, inflation has made inroads. During
Congressional testimony in the fall, James R. Capra, an economist at the Federal
Reserve Bank in New York, asserted that ''because no recent studies of weapons
system cost growth are available, cost analysts are frankly puzzled.''

He cited the increase in unit costs of the AH 64 helicopter of 15 percent to
$29.7 million, in M-1 tanks of 76 percent to $2.4 million, of the Navy's F-18
fighter of 43 percent to $32 million, of an Aegis cruiser of 14 percent to $1
billion, of an F-16 Air Force fighter of 12 percent to $12.9 million and a
cruise missile of 38 percent to $5.8 million.

Another reason 1982 will most likely be no bonanza for military contractors is
that much of the big spending for the President's $180 billion program to
revitalize the strategic deterrant will not come until later in the decade when
the MX intercontinental missile and the B-1 bombers are to be deployed.

In addition, not much of the planned increase will call for plant investment
since the defense industry already has plenty of capacity. So far, only a few
new weapons, such as the ''stealth'' bomber are envisioned, and they are mostly
in the research and development stage.

Finally, the planned increases in military spending, which are to consume about
a third instead of a quarter of the Federal budget, will still be a relatively
small portion of the gross national product.

Military spending, if the Reagan Administration's plans stay intact, will rise
slightly to 5.7 percent of the gross national product in 1982 and continue
slowly upward to 7 percent in 1986, according to the Congressional Budget
Office. During the Korean war, that share was 13.2 percent and in the Vietnam
war 6.9 percent.

On the upbeat side, employment in the aerospace industry has been projected to
rise in 1982, according to the industry newsletter, Defense Daily. But the gross
rate has dropped since a similar projection was issued in the middle of 1981.
Employment there is expected to grow by 11,000, to 1.265 million instead of
1.275 million. Similarly, Data Resources Inc. has projected modest increases in
industrial production as a result of military spending, which it expects to rise
4.6 to 6 percent in 1982.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: chart

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A GLIMPSE OF THE YEAR 2000

BYLINE: By N.R. KLEINFIELD

SECTION: Section 12; Special Section Page 78; Page 78, Column 1; National
Economic Survey Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


WHITHER our world? Walk out the door in the year 2000 and what will be? Datsun
spaceships flashing by? Robot chiropractors?  Everyone packing a ray gun? No
more inflation? No more tooth decay?  Everyone parked before the shimmering
tube, playing Hyperactive Pac-Man?

One way to get an idea is to go ask your local futurist. In recent times, the
professional futurist has become a popular character.  Several dozen oracles
make up the calling, drawing contracts from companies and governments keen to
know what to expect.

Roy Amara is a futurist who seems very much a man of these times: closely
barbered gray hair, soft-spoken, taciturn. He is head of the Institute for the
Future, a meticulous student of what's ahead. ''In many outward appearances,
life won't be significantly different 20 years from now,'' he said over a lunch
devoted to talk of the future. ''We'll be living in similar houses, except
they'll be unquestionably smaller and more clustered. Families will be smaller -
one child or none. Inflation will keep people working longer'' and will tail off
to 6 or 7 percent in the 1990's. ''We'll still be driving cars - smaller, more
efficient ones,'' he said. ''By the year 2000 it's possible that 10 percent of
those cars will be electrically driven.''

But, he went on, ''the big revolutions one looks for are in the workplace. Work
will be more self-managed by workers. The workplace will be more cooperative
than adversarial. Workers will want intellectual and psychological fulfillment,
not just financial reward.

''I'm quite optimistic for the 1990's,'' he concluded, ''assuming we play our
cards right in the 1980's.'' Herman Kahn's message is technology. Bearded and
brazen, Mr. Kahn, the demiurge of the Hudson Institute, unleashes a torrent of
talk about prosperity through technology. ''The U.S.  went into a malaise in the
early 1960's,'' he said. ''Everything went to hell. The economy, crime, the
stock market, productivit y, you name it. I think we're coming out of that. Now
there's a new e ra of high technology coming about. I think the new technology
will turn people on like theastronauts used to.''

What will technology do? Well, Mr. Kahn said he expects inflation to be zero
within five or six years and per-capita income to double by 2000. There will be
no energy problems. There will be loads of family experimentation. Communal
living. Group marriages. Robots will tackle menial chores. Maids, though, will
probably persist. ''You can program a vacuum cleaner to retrace its steps,'' Mr.
Kahn said, ''but if the baby gets in the way, too bad for the baby.''

What else? What businesses are likely to be scorching hot, which ones ice cold?
''General Motors is the classic dinosaur,'' said Peter Schwartz, a futurist at
SRI International ''I wouldn't be surprised if it's a lot smaller.'' He sees the
hot industries as being high technology, service and information, not large
capital-intensive industries, not basic raw materials, not autos. ''Warner
Communications is the classic company of tomorrow,'' he continued. ''It will
grow fast.  Merrill Lynch is a classic company of tomorrow. Sears is a good
example of a company perceiving the future and moving in that direction.''

Switching to lifestyles in the year 2000, Mr. Schwartz sees people leading more
disparate lifestyles, he sees the hunger for spiritual belief continuing
unabated (''The idea that God is dead is not true.''), he sees the electronic
home (You'll be ''talking to your stove, talking to your door lock, talking to
everything''), he sees no slackening in the spread of fast-food operations
(''I'm waiting for the Woolco-Reggie Jackson fast-food chain. It's going to
come.'').

''You will definitely see this returning to a more human scale society,'' said
Hazel Henderson, a freelance futurist, from her post in Gainesville, Fla. ''It
will be more efficient and do things locally. It won't make sense to buy Wonder
Bread baked in Illinois.

''In the future, we will share capital goods like lawnmowers and freezers and
houses,'' she added. ''For instance, I share the house I live in, whereas 10
years ago I wouldn't have dreamed of that. And my quality of life has improved.
I travel on trips and my housemate waters my plants for me and takes care of my
cat.''

There are still other, odder views. Talk to Barbara Hubbard, an independent
futurist, and she says, ''We are going to cultivate the stars.''

''There are the materials of a thousand earths on the moon and asteroids,'' she
said. In 20 years, she forsees people inhabiting the moon and the asteroids,
mining their materials. ''In 20 years,'' she said, ''there is the possibility of
a cosmic civilization.'' She knows this will not be easy: ''The question is: Can
the infantile species take its mind off of destruction and concentrate on
construction?'' If it doesn't, she warned, ''we will be a retarded planet.'' If
it does, she beamed, ''We will move to a new humanity.''

Of course, futurists don't foresee everything. They never figured on the big
push of women into the workforce; they never saw inflation getting so miserable;
they never mentioned the Vietnam war. But, after all, getting a firm handle on
the future is like figuring out how many angels can dance on the head of a pin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW DRAFT BOARDS: DIVERSITY IS GREATER THAN IN 1960's

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1312 words


Standby draft boards established over the last few months have many more female,
black and Hispanic members than the boards of the Vietnam era, according to the
Selective Service System. And interviews with a score of the new members in the
New York metropolitan area show that their views on war and military service
vary widely.

''I was a student activist,'' said a Connecticut man. ''I'm pro-E.R.A,'' said a
New Jersey woman. ''I was definitely against that war - that's one of the
reasons I wanted to get involved in this,'' another Connecticut man said.

The new boards, authorized by Congress in 1980, are designed to mirror the
racial and ethnic composition of the areas under their jurisdiction, as measured
by the 1980 Census, according to Joan Lamb, a spokesman for the Selective
Service System.

Governors Have Veto Power

The system hopes that if Congress and the President decide to resume military
conscription, decisions made by the morerepresentative boards will sit better
with those affected, she said.

The board members were chosen nationwide by the Selective Service System,
although the governors of each state were given veto power.  The boards were
completed late last month, and final statistics on their composition are still
being assembled. But Selective Service officials in the New York area said that
representation of minority groups and women was much higher than in the 1960's.

Of the 26,254 applications received for 10,155 places, nearly 5,400 came from
women, 2,500 from blacks, 1,100 from people of Hispanic origin and 36 5 from
persons of Asian or native American heritage.

In the decade since the draft expired, attitudes toward the rights and abilities
of women have changed markedly, a shift reflected in the opinions of members of
the new boards.

''I'm pro-E.R.A.,'' said one member, 40-year-old Susan Gebelein of Blackwood,
N.J., in Camden County, ''and if Congress passed the necessary legislation to
draft women, I would not give a woman a deferment simply because she was a
woman.''

Members of the new boards are apparently also younger than those of the boards
that lapsed in the 70's. Nationwide, a quarter of the applicants for board
positions were less than 35 years old. Among the younger members are some who
are Vietnam veterans, and some who protested the war.

''I was a student activist,'' said Robert D . Godfrey, 33, of Danbury, Conn.
Asked if he had participated i n antiwar demonstrations, he said, ''In student
governm ent, I helped organize them.''

''I still believe the Vietnam War was a wrong one, but there are legitimate
wars,'' said Mr. Godfrey, who added that he believed in the draft. ''It is
legitimate that the military must be subservient to the civil government. One of
the ways of accomplishing that is the citizen army.''

The new boards, with five members each, were ordered formed by Congress, which
appropriated money for them in June 1980, said Mrs.  Lamb, the Selective Service
System spokesman.

Lottery Based on Date of Birth

The system has termed them ''local boards,'' rather than draft boards, because
if a draft were resumed, conscripts would be called up from Washington in a
lottery based on date of birth. The boards would hear requests for deferments
and exemptions.

Since there is no draft law now in force, the boards have no work to do, but the
members, who are unpaid except for expenses, have begun meeting for training
sessions.

The Government's authority to draft men expired on Dec. 31, 1972.  Young men are
now supposed to register at age 18, a requirement that President Reagan
announced on Thursday he would continue, in a reversal of his campaign position.
Mr. Reagan did not, however, call for a resumption of military conscription.

The United States Supreme Court has affirmed the constitutionality of a
male-only draft, but drafting young people of both sexes has been suggested in
Congress. It is an idea that some members of the new boards find acceptable, at
least if women are drafted only for noncombat service.

Officials could not provide figures for the 39 local boards in New York City.
But in the rest of the state, there are 76 women and 46 black or Hispanic
members among the 460 people on the 92 boards.

In New Jersey, each of the 61 boards has at least one woman, according to Edward
J. Henderson, director of Selective Service for that state. Of the 305 board
members, approximately 65 are female; about 75 are black, and ''7 or 8'' are of
Hispanic origin, he said.  Total minority representation on the New Jersey
boards is about 27 percent.

In Connecticut, which has 25 boards, 22 of the 125 board members are black,
native American or of Hispanic origin. Minority representation is 18 percent.
Nineteen members are female.

Many of the members were recruited by the Selective Service System.  ''I felt a
certain responsibility. I didn't want to just say 'no,' '' said the Rev. Charles
Eichman of Staten Island.

Letters to Minority Organizations

Minority members were actively sought, according to draft officials in the three
states, who sent letters to organizations, including the National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People and the Urban League, asking for
recommendations.

Alexander Williams Sr., a letter carrier who lives in Danbury, said the
postmaster there had got in touch with him. ''They wanted to have someone from
all sections of the community, and have at least one minority on the
commission,'' said Mr. Williams, 54, who is black and served in the Army Air
Corps from 1944 to 1947, leaving as a corporal.

Jose Rodriguez, an airport police officer in Bridgeport, Conn., who volunteered
for service in Korea in the 1950's, said that he saw the value of minority
representation. ''There was a lot of abuse and everything else going on,
especially if you were of a minority class,'' he said, speaking of his Korean
service.

''I knew they were looking for people,'' he said of the boards.  ''Everybody
should get a break. I think I'm of a fair frame of mind.''

The idea of fairness was not limited to members of minority groups.Mitchell Zach
arakis, an insurance broker of Spring Valley, N.Y., was a member of a draft
board in Rockland County during the Vietnam era, and will serv e again now. His
neighborhood has many young men of Greek extract ion, he said, and he wanted to
be sure they ''got a fair hearing. ''

Richard E. Blomstrann, 29, of Manchester, Conn., said he had not been ''a really
active protester'' against the Vietnam War, but added: ''I was definitely
against that war. That's one of the reasons I wanted to get involved in this, at
least to have a different side on the draft boards.''

The presence of what used to be called ''doves'' on the boards is good, Mrs.
Lamb of the Selective Service said. ''That means we've got a good cross section,
and that's what we want. You don't want a rubber stamp.''

Some new members said they opposed any draf t of women; others said they would
favor some obligation for women, b ut not combat service.  ''I have mixed
emotions on the subject,'' s aid Allie F. B.  Stanford, of Mount Holly, N.J.,
who served in the Air Force from 1956to 1966. ''On the one hand I have seen that
w omen can serve with responsibility and perform almost any task as well as a
man.''

But ''I just don't feel right about a general draft that would include women,''
she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 3 photos of draft board members (Page B4)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THAI PIRATES CONTINUING BRUTAL ATTACKS ON VIETNAMESE BOAT PEOPLE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 750 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 10


Nguyen Tien Hoa says he escaped from Vietnam in mid-November aboard a 50-foot
boat that carried about 75 refugees, more than half of them women and children.

By the end of the month, Mr. Hoa, 31 years old, wounded, distraught and alone in
a disabled vessel with his 10-year-old brother, drifted ashore in Malaysia,
where the boy died of shock and untended injuries.

A few days later, Mr. Hoa told an American diplomat in Kuala Lumpur what had
happened. It was a chronicle of repeated attacks, robbery, torture, rape and
murder at the hands of Thai pirates. In a subsequent cablegr am relaying the
account to the State Department, the embassy in Malaysia said, ''For unrelieve
d, repetitive brutality,the story is one of the worst we have heard.' '

Mr. Hoa's story provided State Department Asian specialists and refugee
officials with what one diplomat described as a first-person confirmation of
worrying statistical evidence.

14 Incidents of Mass Murder

Figures compiled by the United Nations High Commission on Refugees show that
there were 14 documented incidents of mass murder of Vietnamese boat people in
Thai waters in 1981.

United Nations figures also show that in the first 10 months of the year, 289
refugee boats were attacked - with, on average, more than three attacks per
boat. There were 484 known deaths or murders and 583 identified rape victims.

In addition, 199 women and girls were recovered from Thai houses of prostitution
to which they had been abducted. In most cases, as in Mr. Hoa's, victims
identified their attackers as Thai pirates or fishermen. Officials emphasize
that they believe that these figures represent only a part of the problem.

In Mr. Hoa's account, the boat on which he was traveling was attacked by a total
of 13 other craft. In the first attack, pirates boarded the boat, removed all
the valuables and raped the women before taking them, along with the children,
away.
Thai Patrols Curtailed

Since last September, Thai naval vessels have virtually stopped patrolling
Thailand's approximately 600 miles of coastline, American diplomats say. In
September a 1980 agreement between Thailand and the United States, under which
Washington provided the money necessary for the Thai patrols, expired.

Negotiations to renew the agreement foundered last summer, officials say,
because Thailand wanted a larger grant. After the International Committee of the
Red Cross brought to international attention the plight of the unprotected
Vietnamese, the United Nations refugee commission undertook to frame an
internationally financed program to replace the Thai-American accord.

Although Bangkok has agreed in principle to that program, refugee officials said
this week that the Thais were continuing to ask for more than the $3.6 million
package the United Nations had proposed.  Thais are also apparently balking at a
United Nations request to have a committee of foreign diplomats in Bangkok
monitor the program.

U.S. Pledges $600,000

The United States has pledged $600,000 to the international effort. Other
contributions include $285,000 from Australia, $266,650 from Norway, $220,000
from Switzerland and $100,000 each from France and West Germany.

Meanwhile, the waters off Thailand are unpatrolled, although the United Nations
has already purchased three 40-to 45-foot patrol boats, some small motorboats
and a few small patrol aircraft for use by the Thais.

The United Nations commission has also arranged for some posting along the coast
of its own employees - a function well outside the normal role of refugee
officials.

Representatives of the Swedish Save the Children fund are providing rape
counseling.  Voice of America broadcasts, diplomats said, have warned the
Vietnamese of dangers in the Gulf of Thailand. But boat people continue to risk
both attack and repulsion from Thai shores by authorities carrying out that
country's laws against illegal immigration.  According to United Nations
figures, 12,526 boat people arrived in Th ailand from January through November
of last year.

Thais have been putting many in refugee camps. But they also have been reported
to be towing Vietnamese boats back out to sea.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Vietnamese refugees

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM U.S. MESSAGE RECOUNTING A REFUGEE'S ORDEAL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 918 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 10


Following are excerpts from a cablegram sent by the United States Embassy in
Kuala Lumpur to the State Department relating the account of Nguyen Tien Hoa.

Hoa, 31, described himself as one of a Roman Catholic refugee family which had
fled south in 1954. He said that his boat had left Rach Gia on the night of Nov.
16-17 with approximately 75 passengers. About 30 of the passengers were adult
males and young men; the remainder women and children.

Disaster struck the party three days later, probably during the early morning
hours of Nov. 20. They had encountered stormy weather; and when a large vessel,
some 25-30 meters long, appeared, Hoa's uncle had thought it was probably a
rescue boat. On this assumption, he had announced that they were near land. Then
three other wooden vessels the same size joined the first, and the four
proceeded to surround the refugee boat. Hoa described the men aboard as Thai,
dressed as fishermen, but behaving in such a way as to convince him they were
full-time, professional pirates, armed with shotguns and pistols.

The pirates took all of the young men aboard one of their vessels and conducted
a body search, robbing them of all their valuables.  Then the crews of all four
pirate ships, totaling around 50 men with 15 firearms, came aboard the refugee
boat to rape the women.  Following the above events, which consumed about two
hours, the pirates took all of the women and children aboard one of their own
boats. They then removed from the refugee boat all the engine's fuel and oil and
threw all food and water aboard into the sea.

After having transferred all their male victims back to the refugee boat, they
then tried to sink the refugee boat by ramming it. The refugees thought it would
go under the first time; however, because the pirate vessel was so much larger,
it merely rode up over the top of the refugee boat without damaging it below
decks.

Agreed That They Must Fight

Nevertheless, the refugees had agreed that they must fight the next time the
boats came into contact, or they would eventually be sunk.  They grabbed
whatever tools or utensils were left aboard which might serve as weapons. When
the pirates realized that the refugees intended to fight to the death, they drew
away, circled, and shot at the refugees from a distance, evidently afraid of
hand-to-hand combat with enraged Vietnamese who had nothing to lose and who had
just witnessed their loved ones raped and abducted.

Hoa was particularly distraught about the fate of his wife, 32; his son, 6; his
daughter, 5; his sister-in-law, 24, and his sister-inlaw's daughter, 4. The
children had been last seen without clothing - the pirates had taken even that.

After the above melee had been going on for s ome 15 minutes, Hoa said, he jump
ed into the sea. Most of the others did the same, he believes.

Sometime later, totally exhausted, he crawled back aboard the refugee boat. He
claimed that he saw no immediate evidence that anyone else was alive, either on
the boat or in the water. Half an hour later, somewhat recovered, he heard a
faint cry. It came from his younger brother, who had been hit in the thigh by a
bullet. The bullet had broken the femur.

During the next five days, Hoa and his brother were without food.  He was able,
however, to catch rainwater to alleviate thirst.  Nevertheless, the ordeal had
only begun.

During this time, he said angrily, the two castaways were attacked on nine
separate occasions by nine different parties of what he described as ordinary
Thai fishermen in small boats of various descriptions and colors.
Boat Looted Repeatedly

The refugee boat was searched and looted repeatedly and Hoa beaten and stabbed.
The worst single act of barbarism described by Hoa involved the discovery by
some of the fishermen that Hoa's brother had a broken leg. According to Hoa,
they wrenched the limb back and forth, torturing the 10-year-old boy for
apparently no other reason than sadistic pleasure.

On the sixth day after the initial attack by those Thai pirates, the refugee
boat again was surrounded by four larger vessels.  Fearing yet another pirate
attack, Hoa said at first he hid below deck. However, he soon deduced from the
fact that the markings on the other boats were in Roman rather than Thai
letters, that they were Malaysian.

The largest of the Malaysian vessels dispatched a dinghy with four men aboard.
Hoa claimed that when he emerged to ask for food and water, the dinghy beat a
hasty retreat, as did its mother ship. The other three Malaysian vessels,
however, remained in the vicinity, and before departing, their crews eventually
provided Hoa with milk, noodles and cookies. However, they refused to take his
injured brother to a hospital. He said that they indicated their fear that if
they did so, they would be arrested by Malaysian police.

Hoa stated that after eating, he managed to manufacture a crude sail out of
nylon sacks. A day later - Nov. 27, in the early morning hours - the boat put
ashore at Kota Baru. When the police came up in a small boat, they took the
injured boy aboard; however, at that very moment, 20 minutes after he landed in
Malaysia, the boy died.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
SHOWING THE DIFFERENCE

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 922 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 10


A lot of people in Europe, but also in the U.S., have been asking how much
difference there really i s between the Soviet supported military regime in
Poland an d the American-backed junta in El Salvador.

The tendency has grown in recent years to talk about the two superpowers as
though their similarities go much further than parallel nuclear might, and their
differences add up to little more than ideological language.

While Leonid Brezhnev was in Bonn, a few weeks before the Polish coup, a
left-wing German deputy told me that ''the Poles want their superpower to stop
telling them how to live and we want ours to stop telling us how to die.''

The idea of a Soviet-American mirror image had a great deal to do with the
swelling European peace movement. If Westerners demonstrated against U.S. but
not Soviet weapons, it was because many accepted the idea that one should oppose
one's own titan, not the one dominating the other side.

It is a pernicious habit to make these parallels and it weakens the cause of
democracy. But it has grown because U.S. policy has on occasion provided the
grounds, mainly in Vietnam but also in Latin America, which is often compared to
Eastern Europe as the Western superpower's backyard.

Rather than using Soviet acts elsewhere as justification for U.S.  intervention
in the Western Hemisphere in the name of resisting Communism, it is essential
that America make the differences in superpower behavior fully clear.

There are many differences. An important one is the U.S. Congress and its
capacity to represent the voters in supervising policy. Last summer, as the
public temper rose against military involvement in El Salvador, House and Senate
committees voted overwhelmingly to attach some stringent conditions on military
aid for that murder-ridden country.

The conditions were attached to the foreign aid bill that President Reagan
signed into law on Dec. 29. They included a requirement that the aid be cut off
unless the President could certify within 30 days that the situation in El
Salvador had changed.

The final wording of the bill was quite specific. It obliges the White House to
''discuss fully and completely the justification'' for determining whether El
Salvador has complied with each of the legal conditions.

Mr. Reagan must show that El Salvador: ''l. Is mak ing a concerted and
significant effort to comply with international ly recognized human rights; ''2.
Is ach ieving substantial control over all elements of its own armed forces, so
as to bring to an end the indiscriminate torture andmurder of Sal vadoran
citizens by these forces;

''3. Is making continued progress in implementing essential economic and
political reforms, including the land reform program; ''4. Is committed to the
holding of free elections at an early date and to that end has demonstrated its
good faith efforts to begin discussions with all major political factions in El
Salvador which have declared their willingness to find and implement an
equitable political solution to the conflict, with such solution to involve a
commitment to:

''a. A renouncement of further military or paramilitary activity; and ''b. The
electoral process with internationally recognized observers; ''5. Has made good
faith efforts both to investigate the murders of six U.S. citizens in El
Salvador in December 1980 and January 1981 and to bring to justice those
responsible for those murders.''

Representative Stephen Solarz of New York, who helped work out the language, has
now received information that the Administration plans baldly to certify all
this has been done.

In fact, the violence has escalated. ''There has been no systematic or sustained
effort,'' Mr. Solarz says, to leash the right-wing murder gangs. There have been
no political negotiations and the junta has maintained its demand that the
insurgents lay down their arms before talking, in effect a kind of ultimatum
sure to keep the war going.

Without a Presidential finding that all conditions have been met, the $25
million in weapons and $1 million for military training provided in the law must
be withheld.

The real purpose of Congress in setting these requirements was not to bind the
Government's handling of foreign policy but to provide it with tools to press
the Salvadoran junta into curbing its extremists. They haven't been put to much
use as yet.

A certification pretending there have been real improvements would not only be a
gross bending of truth, it would signal to official assassins in Salvador and
all the blood-soaked countries of Latin America that the U.S. doesn't care who
is killed with its arms.

It would also signal to people around the world that the will of the Congress
may not mean so much more than the Supreme Soviet's r ubber stamp. If the
Administration goes thro ugh with its plan, Congress can't do anything but
refuse more mo ney in next year's foreign aid bill. But in the meantime, Americ
a will have lost anotherpart of its credibility and there will be mor e
questions about how much difference there is between the superpow ers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
MONDAY, JANUARY 11, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 950 words


International
A cutoff of vital parts of a pipeline that will carry Soviet natural gas to
Western Europe is being sought in West Europe and Japan by the Reagan
Administration, diplomatic sources said. The request, which follows a United
States decision to ban such shipments by the General Electric Company, is seen
as the first major test of Western Europe's willingness to support the economic
sanctions President Reagan imposed on the Soviet Union after the declaration of
martial law in Poland. (Page A1, Column 4.)
A warm welcome in Moscow was received by Foreign Minister Jozef Czyrek of
Poland. It is the first visit by a high Polish official to the Soviet Union
since martial law was declared in Poland nearly a month ago. So viet television
showed Mr. Czyrek being embraced by the Soviet Foreig n Minister, Andrei A.
Gromyko, perhaps to indicate that Soviet-Polish relations were continuing as
usual. (A1:5.)
The U.S. will press its allies for agreement on a framework for sanctions
against Moscow if the situation in Poland is not ''remedied in the immediate
future,'' Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. said on the eve of a NATO
meeting in Brussels. (A13:-1-6.)
The torture of suspected guerrillas in El Salvador was witnessed by two United
States military advisers, according to 21-year-old man who claimed to be a
former Salvadoran soldier. The Americans, he said, attended but did not
participate in two ''training sessions'' at which the torture of two suspected
guerrillas took place, but they made no effort to stop it. (A2:3-6.)
Mexicans are protesting the canceling by the Reagan Administration of the
temporary immigrant visas of tens of thousands of Mexicans living in the United
States. The uproar is threatening the first storm in relations with Mexico since
President Reagan took office. Mexico has recalled its Ambassador to Washington
for consultations on the issue. (A3:-4-6.)
National
All 17 A.T. & T.'s directors approved the divestiture plan that led to the
settlement of the Government's antitrust suit last week. They quickly approved,
in advance of its presentation to the Justice Department, a plan that was
outlined to them Dec. 16 by A.T.& T.'s chairman, Charles L. Brown, who explained
the company's objective in settling the suit: the divesting of the 22 Bell
System companies that provide most of the nation's local telephone service in
return for a free hand at competing in data processing, computer communications,
equipment sales and other previously prohibited, but lucrative fields. (A1:2-3.)

Who the unemployed are is answered in masses of data collected monthly and
analyzed at the Bureau of Labor Statistics in Washington. The bureau has found
that unemployment continues to strike most harshly at workers in the
construction and automotive industries and in industries dependent on them.
(A1:1.)
The makeup of standby draft boards is more diversified than in the Vietnam era,
according to the Selective Service System. More women, blacks and people of
Hispanic origin are sitting on the boards, which were established over the last
few months. Their makeup is intended to reflect the racial and ethnic
composition of the areas under their jurisdiction, a spokesman for the system
said. Selective Service officials in the New York area said that representation
of minority groups and women on the boards was considerably higher than in the
1960's. (A1:6.)
Much of the country froze during the worst cold spell this winter.  Snowstorms
and icy winds swept from Oregon to North Carolina, killingeight people. Chicago
and several other areas in the Middle West reported the lowest temperatures on
record. T housands of people in Chicago and suburban Washington were without
electricity. (A1:3-5.)
Evidence examined by microscopes will now play an important part as the murder
trial of Wayne B. Williams in Atlanta enters its third week. A large part of the
prosecutor's efforts to convict Mr.  Williams of murdering two young men will
depend on chemical tests and the molecular makeup of fibers and hairs.
(A16:1-2.)
Metropolitan
A surcharge on city income taxes and commuter income taxes of 5 to 10 percent
will probably be sought by the Koch administration to help close an expected
budget gap of about $900 million, budget officials said. The surcharge, which
would require approval by the State Legislature, is one of several tax measures
being considered, according to the officials. Another proposal would separate
some state and city business tax deductions from Federal schedules so that tax
cuts enacted in Washington would not affect local revenues.  (A1:6.)
New York City is preparing to pay for the shipment and storage of the 1.65
million pounds of cheese that is its share of a surplus that the Government is
making available to the poor. The state is planning to store 2.4 million pounds
of the processed American cheese in refrigerated warehouses at nine sites
outside New York City when it is received in February. The state's Office of
General Services said the state does not have a refrigeratedwarehouse in the
city.  (B1:6.)
Below-freezing temperatures in the New York area are expected to continue
through Tuesday, and to drop even lower in some areas. Zero to minus 10-degree
temperatures were forecast for some places in North Jersey today. (B1:1-5.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOME NOT-SO-VITAL STATISTICS

BYLINE: By Marjorie Hunter

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 337 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 10


For weight-watchers and other observers of the American political scene, here
are some little-known facts about the Speaker o f the House, Thomas P. O'Neill
Jr., a man who says he has lost more weight over a lifetime than anybody in
America, only toput it right back on:

Height and weight - 6 feet 2 1/2 inches, 265 pounds.  Waist - 50 inches.

Shoe size - 11.

Hat size - 7 3/4.

Eyesight - Wears bifocals.

Hobbies - Golf and gin rummy.

Allergies - Newsprint.

Favorite food - New York sirloin steak, medium rare.  Favorite snack - Ice
cream.

Favorite drink - Beer.

Favorite sport - Baseball.

Favorite time of day - Gets better as the day goes on; late afternoon and
evening.

Best memory - First time he saw the Capitol.  Favorite President - Harry S.
Truman.  Personal heroes - Truman in politics; Babe Ruth and Ted Williams in
sports.  Favorite movie - ''Gone With the Wind.'' Favorite actresses - Myrna Loy
and Rhonda Fleming.  Favorite television show - ''Monday Night Football.''
Political superstitions - Rain is a Republican day; sunshine is a Democratic
day.  Current reading - ''Boston's Gold Coast, the North Shore, 1890-1929'' by
Joseph E. Garland.  Favorite vacation spot - Cape Cod.  Favorite saying - ''All
politics is local.'' Most memorable moment in career - When elected to the House
in 1952 to succeed John F. Kennedy.  Most difficult period - The Vietnam War.
Favorite city - Boston.

Favorite book - ''The Outermost House,'' by Henry Beston.  Marjorie Hunter

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Harry S. Truman Photo of Rhonda Fleming Photo
of The Capitol

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MOHAMMED GHAZALI BIN SHAFIE, MALAYSIAN OFFICIAL, DIES IN CRASH

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section D; Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 530 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Jan. 10


A small plane piloted by the Malaysian Foreign Minister, Mohammed Ghazali bin
Shafie, crashed into a mountainous jungle today, killing all three people
aboard, the police said.

Mr. Ghazali died in the crash with his flying instructor, Chako Verghese, and
his bodyguard, the police said.  The plane, a six-seater Cessna, went down near
Bukittinggi, about 20 miles northeast of Kuala Lumpur. Mr. Ghazali was heading
for his home constituency of Kuala Lipis in Pahang State, about l00 miles from
the capital, when the plane crashed about 12 minutes after takeoff, officials
said.

Officials spotted the wreckage from a helicopter nine hours after the search
began. Rescuers who reached the wreckage said everyone in the plane had been
killed.
----

Sought Aid for Refugees

Mr. Ghazali, who was 60 years old, became Foreign Minister of Malaysia last July
in the Cabinet of Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, after serving for eight years
as Home Minister.

As Home Minister, Mr. Ghazali had to deal with the flood of refugees from
Vietnam. Malaysia was the principal destination of the thousands of refugees who
set out across the South China Sea in fishing boats, and Mr. Ghazali made many
appeals to other nations to take responsibility for them.

Mr. Ghazali maintained that the refugee problem was the direct result of the
long-term American presence in Southeast Asia. Several times he call ed on the
United States to take more of an interest in the refugees.

In 1978, when there were already more than 42,000 refugees in Malaysian transit
camps and more were arriving at the rate of about 1,000 a day, Mr. Ghazali made
an urgent appeal to President Carter to take the lead in a major international
effort to provide asylum for them.

''Countries who contributed toward the creation of this problem just cannot turn
their heads and wish it away,'' Mr. Ghazali said in a speech in Kuala Lumpur.

He went on: ''They are not fulfilling their obligations in the context of human
rights simply by offering money to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and dictating at a distance what Malaysia should or should not do.
Conscience money is not the answer.''

Before Mr. Ghazali became Home Minister he headed the Information and Special
Functions ministries. In 1969, af ter racial riots resulted in the suspension of
Parliament, he was appointed a member of the National Operations Council that
gover ned Malaysia for two years.

For 14 years Mr. Ghazali was Secretary General for Foreign Affairs and was
involved in all of Malaysia's major foreign policy initiatives following
independence from Britain in 1957.

Mr. Ghazali played a large role in coordinating Malaysia's armed confrontation
with Indonesia in 1966 and later in restoring close ties with Jakarta. He also
had an active part in the formation of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, a grouping of non-Communist countries in the region.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Briefing

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 905 words


T HE wrenching plight of children of the Orient fathered by American servicemen
is scheduled to reach Congress in the next few weeks, and Representative Stewart
B. McKinney, who has been championing their cause, is faintly optimistic that
the House will finally approve his bill.

Mr. McKinney, Republican of Connecticut, is sponsoring a measure that would
change the ''not-preferential'' status of the children and allow them to apply
to enter the United States under the Immigration and Nationality Act's ''first
preference'' status for unmarried children of American citizens.  The change
would also require the applicants to have American sponsors, but that would not
be very difficult since a range of groups, such as The Pearl S. Buck Foundation
and Save the Children, are actively involved.

''These children will not be coming here to find fathers,'' said Mr. McKinney,
whose earlier bill concerning the children died in the House. ''Many of these
kids are abandoned.''

The Congressman said that both the Carter and Reagan Administrations had been
chilly to his proposal to assist the children, of whom there may be as many as
80,000 in Vietnam, Korea, Thailand, Laos and the Philippines. Officials of the
Reagan Administration have expressed worry about fraud and abuse, Mr.  McKinney
said, and have proposed that any immigration effort should wait until each child
received a blood test, a notion he called ''ludicrous.''

Mr. McKinney said that the measure would not open the doors to mass immigration,
but ''would simply place the Amerasian in his or her proper reference
classification, based on their legitimate claim as a child of a U.S. citizen.''

With 155 co-sponsors in the House, and with a Senate bill supported by such
Republican conservatives as Jeremiah Denton of Alabama and Paul Laxalt of
Nevada, Mr. McKinney is hopeful that his measure will triumph.

''I don't think you can see the pictures and hear the stories of these kids and
not become involved,'' he said.

I N this day of tight Federal budgets and a war on waste in the Pentagon, the
Defense Department's chief spokesman, Henry E. Catto Jr., was asked the other
morning to justify an annual subsidy to the National Rifle Association to
promote target practice. Caught unaware, Mr. Catto asked how much was involved.
Told it was $440,000, he said, almost with a straight face: ''You can't call tha
t a cheap shot, can you?''

A S if the State Department didn't have enough worries, along comes The Crisis
in the American Embassy in Bangkok.  For the last few years, the former American
Ambassador, Morton I.  Abramowitz, maintained a somewhat informal diplomatic
atmosphere.  Most of the senior staff called the Ambassador ''Mort.'' His door
was inevitably open to anyone who wanted to chat. Unlike most ambassadors, Mr.
Abramowitz would dial the telephone himself and invite American journalists over
for a movie or a quick lunch. Around the embassy, many of the men wore
short-sleeved shirts, open at the neck, because of the pulsing heat.

Mr. Abramowitz departed last year; he is now scheduled to take over the American
Embassy in Indonesia. His replacement, John Gunther Dean, promptly made it plain
that the informal days were over.

Mr. Dean, a former Ambassador to Cambodia, Denmark and Lebanon, prefers to be
called ''Sir,'' or ''Mr. Ambassador.'' An embassy officer who showed up
Saturday, his day off, to clean up his desk, was admonished by Mr. Dean because
of his casual appearance.

Mr. Dean even has a young political aide pouring tea now, whenever the
Ambassador has a guest in his office. Mr. Dean prefers his tea hot.

J O-ANN GASPER, a self-described ''pro-family leader'' who edited a publication
called, ''The Right Woman,'' and who opposes Federal assistance to battered
wives and abused children, has just been appointed Deputy Assistant Secretary
for Social Services Policy at the Department of Health and Human Services.

''People for the American Way,'' a Washington-based organization seeking to
counter the influence of Moral Majority, takes note in its current bulletin of a
column that Mrs. Gasper wrote in the March, 1980, issue of the Conservative
Digest, whose publisher is Richard A. Viguerie, the direct-mail expert for many
New Right organizations.

In the column titled, ''Beating Up on the Family,'' Mrs. Gasper wrote that the
concept of domestic violence was so vague that it can mean ''any form of
'belittling' or 'teasing' or 'failure to provide warmth' (whatever that may be -
I guess if you don't set the electric blanket high enough in the winter).''
Francis X. Clines Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 13, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

COLLEGES TO REASSESS BACHELOR DEGREE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Jan. 12


Proclaiming that undergraduate education in the nation had become fragmented and
overspecialized and had lost its sense of civic purpose, the Association of
American Colleges today announced a three-year program to reassess the
bachelor's degree.

Mark H. Curtis, the president of the association, said at the group's annual
convention here that the study would attempt to ''revive a consensus among
faculty, deans, presidents and trustees on the meaning and purpose of
baccalaureate degrees.''

Mr. Curtis said that a panel composed of 17 professors, deans and university
presidents would also try to define what levels of knowledge were needed for
undergraduate study and would publish criteria for assessing the quality of
college education.

The findings of the study committee will not be binding on any of the 575 public
and private colleges and universities that belong to the association. But
William R. O'Connell Jr., a vice president of the organization, said he hoped
that its recommendations would be used by some of the professional and regional
groups that accredit institutions of higher learning.

Avoiding Prejudgments

Mr. O'Connell said the review committee would not start with any assumptions
about what the bachelor's degree should be.  But in a panel discussion here, one
of the members of the committee, Charles Muscatine, a professor of English at
the University of California at Berkeley, suggested that current requirements
for a bachelor's degree teach students little more than how to take notes,
memorize facts for examinations and deal with the registrar's office.

''Ninety percent of all courses teach the same skills over and over, note-taking
and memorization,'' said Mr. Muscatine. ''That is a very narrow range of skills
to be teaching at such expense.''

The current baccalaureate degree, he added, ''is a marvelous convenience for a
mediocre society, putting passive acceptance ahead of questioning and
propagating the dangerous myth that technical skills are more important than
ethical reasoning.''

New Look at Basic Assumptions

Mr. Muscatine suggested that the committee ought to re-examine some of the most
basic assumptions of liberal arts programs, including the concept of the student
undergraduate major and the breakdown of fie lds into the humanities, the social
scienc es and the natural sciences.

Instead, he said, ''we need to shift our emphasis from a narrow concern with
subject matter to emphasis on process.'' The key goal of education should be the
teaching of ''informed decision making which recognizes there is a moral and
ethical component to life.''

One possible new approach, Mr. Muscatine said, would be to divide the curriculum
into investigative skills, gathering data, interviewing and laboratory
experiments and integrative skills. The latter would include wr iting and
speaking.

Colleges should place much more emphasis on teaching logic and giving students a
historical and theoretical perspective from which to view any problem.

As for current undergraduate education, Mr. Muscatine said, ''I don't feel very
good.''

Social and Political Effects

''Has the quality of our lives, of our leadership, of the way with which we deal
with each other been affected by the fact that half the population'' is now
going to college, he asked.

One proof of the problem, Mr. Muscatine suggested, was that in the late 1960's
when Berkeley's campus was in turmoil over the Vietnam War, its alumni had not
come to its rescue.

''Where were the alumni when we needed them?'' he asked. ''They were at the
polls electing Ronald Reagan as Governor.'' Mr. Reagan, he recalled, had run for
the governorship on a pledge to impose tighter government and fiscal controls
over the university.

Mr. Curtis, the association's president, said in a speech to the meeting today
that despite the enormous expansion of colleges in the last three decades,
''liberal education has suffered loss of its appeal and justification, and
undergraduate programs have become fragmented, overspecialized and disjointed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 13, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Watt Raises Obstacle On Vietnam Memorial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 252 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


Interior Secretary James G. Watt has raised a barrier to building a monument to
America's Vietnam veterans after some Republicans complained that the memorial's
design ''makes a statement of shame and dishonor.''

Mr. Watt told the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, which is to build the
monument, that the design must be resubmitted to him because of modifications
made since he gave preliminary approval in June.

Leaders of the fund were surprised, thinking the plan had cleared all Government
hurdles. A copy of Mr. Watt's letter, written last week, was made available by
critics of the design.

Meantime, H. Ross Perot of Dallas said he was hiring a poll-taker to seek views
on the design from Americans wounded or taken prisoner in Vietnam and some othe
r veterans of the war .

Mr. Perot, chairman of Electronic Data Systems, said he thought the memorial
would look like ''a trench.'' In a letter to President Reagan, 27 Republican
Congressmen denounced the design.  ''We feel t his design makes a political
statement of shame and dishonor,'' t he letter said, ''rather than an expression
of our national prid e.'' The letter was circulated by Representative Henry J.
Hyde, Repu blican of Illinois. ''A new jury ought to be appointed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 13, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AID PROGRAMS SHRINKING AS JOBLESS RATE CLIMBS;
Out of Work Fourth article of a series on the nation's unemployment problem.

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1917 words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS, Jan. 8


When Walter L. Barnes was discharged from the Navy last summer after a
three-year hitch as a machinist's mate, he returned to his hometown expecting to
find a job. But like many of the old industrial cities in the Middle West, St.
Louis had fallen on hard times, and the 26-year-old veteran soon learned that
jobs for which his Navy training had equipped him were ''not to be found in this
city.''

Like many jobless veterans before him, Mr. Barnes sought unemployment payments
to tide him over. He was surprised to learn, however, that the Federal program
of unemployment payments for those who chose not to re-enlist in military
service was abolished a few days before he applied.

Link to Reagan Budget Cuts

The young veteran is one of vast numbers of Americans who are finding that just
as unemployment is becoming acute, the system of cushions that had been created
to ease the pain of being without work is shrinking, in large part because of
the budget cuts pushed through Congress by President Reagan to spur the economy.

In addition to the changes affecting veterans' benefits, others have taken place
recently as the recession has deepened and more people have entered the ranks of
the unemployed:

- Federal budget cuts have virtually eliminated payments that go beyond regular
unemployment compensation for workers whose jobs were displaced because of
imports such as automobiles, shoes and steel.

- The duration and amount of workers' compe nsation payments are being reduced
in a number of states as a resu lt of a tightening of Federal regulations and a
shortage of state f unds.

- The state employment offices, which get Federal financing, are being forced to
lay off many of their own employees who screen applications for payments and
help the unemployed find work. Thus, the jobless are waiting in longer lines and
receiving less assistance in finding new jobs.

- Benefits such as food stamps and health assistance that have helped people
through periods of unemployment in recent years have been cut back substantially
as a result of both Federal and state budget reductions.

50-Year Trend Reversed

As a result of the Great Depression, Congress enacted unemployment insurance and
social welfare laws to tide over those who were out of work. New programs with
more generous benefits were adopted in the 1960's and 1970's. In the view of
many labor experts, those cushions made unemployment a less serious national
problem than it had been before and made relatively high levels of unemployment
less of a political liability to Presidents and members of Congress. Now the
steady upward trend of 50 years is being reversed.

Manpower economists say the phenomenon of diminishing cushions for the
unemployed is so new that little is known nationally about its impact. Neither
the Labor Department nor Congress has figures on the number of people affected
or the extent of the impact. The situation varies from state to state.

In the summer of 1980, as unemployment was rising, President Carter was
campaigning for re-election on a promise that he would seek greater benefits if
those that existed were not adequate.  Conservatives, on the other hand, argued
that many of the cushions were excessive to the point of hurting the economy.
They cited, for example, the case of automobile workers who drew almost as much
in union and government compensation as they did in salary and spent their idle
winters in Florida.

With enactment of President Reagan's budget cuts, the conservative view has
prevailed, and the nation is beginning to see some of the effects.

Here in Missouri, although the unemployment rate has been a little lower than
the national average, layoffs have been going on for two years or more in
automobile, shoe and steel factories, and the state government is in a financial
bind and is cutting back on services.

As arctic winds swept across the state this week and layoffs in both the public
and private sectors mounted, stories of hardships proliferated.

Complex Set of Standards

Glen Gash, director of a state employment office that serves an area of five ZIP
codes in the southern section of St. Louis, spoke ominously of the number of
people who have exhausted their compensation and are ineligible under the
complex standards for Federal extended benefits, which become available when a
certain number of people are out of work.

Exact numbers are lacking, partly because those out of work for a long time tend
to move, but Mr. Gash said that if extended unemployment benefits were to become
available, ''We would be so swamped with applicants we would be unable to handle
them.''

George Kerry does constituent service work for Representative Richard A.
Gephardt, a Democrat of St. Louis, and he has been taking calls from citizens
angered at learning of diminished benefits.

''People say, 'Why didn't somebody tell us about this or that being cut?' and
all I can say is a lot of Congressmen didn't know what was taking place,'' Mr.
Kerry said, referring to the President's budget reconciliation bill, which was
hurriedly enacted last summer in an effort to trim Federal spending.

Veterans Aid Center Loses Funds

Patrick J. Schommer is director of the Veterans Service Center in downtown St.
Louis. A Vietnam veteran who has spent the years since his discharge helping
other veterans adjust to civilian life, he barely contained rage when telling
how the center lost its sole support, $400,000 a year from the Labor Department,
in the Federal budget-cutting.

Nevertheless, he persuaded the city, even as it was cutting other services, to
provide $40,000 to keep the center going on a reduced basis. People like Walter
Barnes come to him for help.

Mr. Barnes dropped out of school in the seventh grade, he said, and he held a
series of jobs in the service sector of the economy before he joined the Navy
and helped maintain an ammunition ship's steam mac hinery.

When he returned to St. Louis and could not find work, his predicament was not
unlike that of thousands of young men, black a nd white, in St. Louis. But his
options for maki ng a living were fewer than they would have been had he
returned a y ear earlier.

Not only were there more jobs open then in the private sector, there were public
service jobs financed by the Federal Government, more training programs and, as
temporary relief, unemployment compensation that would have paid a portion of
what he had earned in the Navy for up to 26 weeks.

In eliminating compensation for those who leave the service, the Reagan
Administration said private workers frequently were disqualified for payments
when they leave a job voluntarily and that this should apply to servicemen ''who
voluntarily refuse to reenlist.''

But Mr. Barnes was on a ship at sea, he said, and never got the word.

'I'll Just Keep Looking'

For now, he said, he has enrolled in a school to earn a high school diploma,
still living on his Navy savings, still trying to find a job.

''I'll just keep looking,'' he said.  Figures from the state government give
some indication of what is happening under the Trade Adjustment Assistance Act
of 1974, which had become far more costly to the Federal Government than the
veterans' assistance program, where a saving of $225 million in the current
fiscal year was projected. Although no up-to-date national figures were
available, the Office of Management and Budget estimated last year that $1.2
billion could be saved this year by having a worker displaced because of imports
receive the same level of compensation as others who are unemployed.

David L. Van Dyke, claims supervisor of the Missouri Division of Employment
Security, said his office had previously been paying displaced workers from $4
million to $6 million a month, with payments running $289 each per week. Now the
office is paying out $40,000 a month at $105 each per week. Nationally, close to
a million displaced workers had been drawing payments under the trade act, in
addition to their regular unemployment compensation. That number has dropped to
68,000.

Although the reduction of benefits has been felt nationwide, the greatest impact
has been in the industrial states of the Middle West, not only because of heavy
unemployment there but because that is where payments under the trade assistance
legislation had been concentrated and where state governments have been least
able to maintain high levels of unemployment payments.

Officials said New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, as well as a number of
other states with fairly stable economies and jobless rates below the national
average, have had a minimal number of hardship cases because of reduced
compensation.

Most Americans who are out of work and looking for a job are still entitled to
26 weeks of Government unemployment benefits, but the assistance provides only a
marginal living at best. Payments, which are based on workers' previous earnings
and employment records, have been averaging less than $100 a week. In Missouri,
which is fairly typical, maximum payments are $125 a week for 26 weeks.

Cutbacks in Employment Offices

High inflation and the reduction of employment offices and personnel have joined
the freezing of benefits in many states to add to the burden of joblessness.

Although the states pay most of the unemployment claims through taxes on
industry, the Federal Government pays for staffing and running the unemployment
offices. Thus, the reduction in personnel is occurring in most every state. In
Georgia, for instance, 200 employees have been dismissed and 25 of 150
employment offices closed. In Oklahoma, 36 percent of the staff has been laid
off.

The Federal Government and many of the states have been tightening regulations
to make it more difficult to get extended unemployment benefits.

In some states, such as Illinois, the entire system has been in trouble, and
both employers and the unemployed will have to pay to pull it out. The state has
enacted legislation that both raises the tax on employers and reduces the
benefits for laid-off workers. It expects to save $256 million this year by
reducing maximum payments after six weeks and eliminating payments to those who
leave their jobs voluntarily.

Administration Defends Cuts

The Reagan Administration says that despite present hardships, their changes,
including the deep cuts, will make the unemployment system more efficient and
fair in the future.

But people such as Rudy Oswald, chief economist for the American Federation of
Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations, disagree.

The erosion of the various government cushi ons that had been added over the
years for the unemployed, he said, i s another form of redistributing wealth
from low-income to high -income citizens.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of General Motors plant in St. Louis

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 13, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 'SHARKS' AND 'ALL THINGS' ON PBS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 971 words


PBS has two documentaries on tap this evening. The National Geographic series
returns, at 8 o'clock on WNET-TV, with an essay on ''The Sharks.'' And at 9:30,
''All Things Considered,'' long an award-winning beacon of National Public
Radio, will attempt to transfer something of its special style to the television
screen.

The point of ''The Sharks'' is that the poor creatures have been taking a bad
publicity rap in the popular press and imagination. Dr.  Eugenie Clark, a
biologist and the scientific adviser for the program, insists that car accidents
are far more numerous and horrifying than shark attacks. Only about 50 such
attacks are reported yearly, and only 10 of those are likely to prove fatal.
This is all very comforting but, in fact, many of the closeups in this film show
some of the sharks doing their best to devour everything in sight, including
steel cages and stainless-steel gloves.

If the overall thesis of ''The Sharks'' gets a bit wobbly at times, the program
does offer a helpful survey of sharkdom, from Florida to Japan, from tiny 6-inch
specimens to the 40-foot-long whale shark. The 40-footer, incidentally, is
something of a pussycat, allowing exploring scientists to hitch a ride on its
back. There are 350 known species of shark. In fact, relatively few ever attack
humans.

Most of the myths about remorseless killers and helpless victims have been
generated by the great white shark, the one that inspired the story of ''Jaws''
and the one that glides off with the ferocity honors in this documentary.
Elsewhere, though, Dr. Clark finds remarkable gentleness. One extraordinary
sequence shows normally active requiem sharks lying motionless near the floor of
Mexican underwater caves as small fish suck parasites from their bodies.

One questionable segment features an Australian couple testing a stainless-steel
mesh diving suit designed to protect the body against snapping sharks. The piece
comes too close to being a commercial for an unproven product. In the end, the
test fails as the diver gets nipped in the hand - that's where the swallowed
glove comes in. Going to Japan, sharks become big business. The huge daily
catches are marketed as meat, fish-cake snacks and, after processing the skin,
expensive leather. The large livers of deep-sea sharks yield an oil that is used
in medicines, cosmetics and health foods.

Written, produced and directed by Nicolas Noxon, ''The Sharks'' ends with
something very special - a rare glimpse of a shark being born. In Japanese
waters, a swell shark emerges from an egg case that has been bound to branches
of soft coral for almost a year. It is a remarkable sight.

''All Things Considered'' made its National Public Radio debut May 3, 1971. The
big story that day was a Washington march protesting American involvement in
Vietnam. Since then, the program has been garnering widespread praise for its
daily mixture of news and features, hard and soft, running for 90 minutes on
weekdays and an hour on Saturdays and Sundays. Many observers have long
contended that this was precisely the kind of regular ' 'news presence'' that
was noticeably lacking on public television.

Now, with the system facing increasing competition from cable interests for
quality ''cultural'' products, public television seems suddenly keen about
expanding its news operations. There is serious talk of expanding ''The
McNeil-Lehrer Report'' to an hour each weekday. And, sure enough, administrators
are wondering if a television version of ''All Things Considered'' might be
feasible.

For the record, tonight's special is not officially a ''pilot'' for a series. It
is an experiment, an attempt not to duplicate the radio content but to capture
its spirit and style. There are no up-to-theminute news reports. With A.H.
Perlmutter as executive producer and Christopher Koch as producer, this is a
television magazine with a superimposed, and at times barely visible, theme. The
full title is ''All Things Considered - on Main Street.'' Susan Stamberg and
Sanford Ungar are the co-hosts.

The borders of this Main Street are broad, encompassing just about anything the
producers and correspondents can generate. In fact, the individual segments are
fine, most notably ''Those Fine Young Men,'' a profile of the new breed of young
politician, and ''Welcome to Main Street,'' a look at some of the new immigrants
and the fact that ''we play favorites'' - some refugees are welcome and some are
not. Those from Poland, yes; those from Haiti, no. Politics plays an
instrumental role but, as the film footage makes embarrassingly clear, so does
race.

Some of the lighter pieces touch on the growing importance of malls as social
environments, the selling of designer jeans and Cajun music in Louisiana. There
is supposed to be an element of irreverence in the humor, but for the most part
this serving of ''All Things Considered '' is about as naughty as a liberal
bishop.

It would indeed be interesting to get a television version of ''All Things
Considered,'' but tonight's toe-in-the-water test raises crucial questions.
Where is the money going to come from? A nightly or even weekly run at this
production level would be very expensive.  And where are the personnel going to
be recruited? Would the radio version be dumped? Have the last 10 years of
success been only a prelude to ''making it'' in the big pond of television?
Evidently, National Public Radio and PBS must proceed with caution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 14, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SHACKLED SANDINISTS;
News An alysis

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua


Everything from auto license plates to government stationery proclaims this
country to be ''free Nicaragua,'' but the reality is that its fortunes are
dependent upon other countries, particularly the United States.

Its economy can be rescued only through the cooperation of the Western financial
community, and political peace can be won only through an understanding with
Washington.

It is an unhappy fact of life for a revolutionary leadership that fought under
an ''anti-Yanqui'' banner and largely believes in Marxist analysis. But it is an
accepted fact, and the poor state of relations with the Reagan Administration is
a source of genuine despair and, at times, fear in Managua.

''We know we cannot produce the profound social gains we want if we are in
confrontation with the United States,'' said Sergio Ramirez Mercado, a member of
the three-man governing junta.

The Reagan Administration believes the Sandinists mean to extend their ideas o f
governing and the influence of the Soviet Union and Cuba througho ut Central
America, and it has reacted in a way that justifies Mr.  Ramirez's use of the
word ''confrontation.''

American officials talk openly of sponsoring or supporting military moves
against this country of 2.5 million people. On the diplomatic front, they are
trying to persuade other Western governments to reduce their backing for the
revolutionary regime. In response, the Sandinists are intensifying the buildup
of militias and reserve units and scrambling to hold the allegiance of their
supporters in Europe and the Americas.

Among the charges directed at the Sandinists by Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig Jr. is that they are constructing ''a platform of terror and war,'' that
they have ''steadily increased the drift toward totalitarianism'' and that they
''are proceeding to push against our fundamental values.''

The Administration accuses the Sandinists of aiding the guerrillas in El
Salvador and has cut United States aid in retaliation. Latin American and
European diplomats here and opponents of the Sandinist regime such as Alfonso
Robelo Callejas, leader of the Nicaraguan Democratic Movement, argue that it
would be difficult for the Sandinists to curtail all aid to people that helped
them in their own insurgency.

Secretary Haig's reported interest in being perceived as the shaper of American
foreign policy is nowhere more satisfied than in daily readings of the official
Sandinist press. He has become the principal bogeyman.

''He seems to believe that the United States cannot lose one point, and we are
one of those points,'' said Mr. Ramirez. ''It's bringing back the politics of
Taft and Teddy Roosevelt from the beginning of the 20th century.''

Mr. Haig's charges also appear to be grounded in ideology. Despite his complaint
that the Sandinists are violating ''fundamental values,'' it is indisputable
that Nicaraguans today suffer less state repression of fundamental freedoms
under their leftist Government than do the people of countries in the region
like Guatamala and El Salvador whose right-wing governments do not draw the same
kind of critical comments from Washington.

''Nicaragua is not one of the governments in the hemisphere that has instituted
summary execution or torture,'' said Tom J. Farer, a Rutgers University law
professor who is president of the Organization of American States'
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. The group conducted a survey of
Nicaragua in October 1980, something it hopes to do shortly in El Salvador and
has been rebuffed from doing in Guatemala by the Government of Maj. Gen. Romeo
Lucas Garcia.

In a Different Category

While stressing that he was barred from directly contrasting member nations,
Professor Farer said that Nicaragua was ''in another category altogether'' from
more authoritarian Latin American regimes.

The Sandinists' strong-arm tactics have included rigging the 51-member Council
of State to assure themselves a majority, postponing promised elections until at
least 1985 and restricting political parties to organizational activities short
of ''proselytizing.'' There has been minor harassment of opposition political
figures, but nothing approaching the assassination campaigns that have decimated
the political middle and left in Guatemala and El Salvador.

The Sandinists want to impose single party rule, and the election delay is seen
as a strategy to provide more time for the full functioning of the mass
organizations that they hope will give them highly responsive grass-roots
backing.
The Sandinists marched into Managua in July 1979 as a conquering ar my and the
proprietary sense it gave them persists. Significantly, th e army and the
national police are called the ''Sandinist'' rather th an the ''Nicaraguan''
army and police.

Washington fears that the model they ultimately choose will be Cuba, where no
opposition parties operate. Sandinist sympathizers in Mexico point to their own
system as an alternative. The Institutional Revolutionary Party there has
dominated the political process for 52 years although some parties have
continued to exist and no fears of ''totalitarianism'' have been raised.

Thus far the Sandinists have not hampered the activities of the church or
multinational companies, two victims of the Cuban revolution. A third break with
the Cuban experience, and one that Fidel Castro himself urged on them, is an
attempt to achieve coexistence with the private sector. Businessmen still
control 60 percent of the economy, and their departure from Nicaragua would most
likely mean the loss of support the Sandinists need from Europe, Latin America
and the Socialist International.

The businessmen say they want guarantees that they will not be subject to ar
bitrary confiscation and that they can participate more actively in t he
nation's political life. The Government is offering understanding but no
promises.

''We know they feel the loss of their political power, but we would like them to
feel secure nevertheless,'' said Mr. Ramirez. A vice president of the principal
business group, the Superior Council of Private Enterprise, said, ''Our only
security at the moment is that we know that they know they cannot survive
without us.''

Flying the blue and white Nicaraguan flag as opposed to the red and black
Sandinist one has taken on the combative nature in Nicaragua today that the
ostentatious showing of the American flag did in the United States during the
years of contention over the war in Vietnam. Blue, white, red and black flutter
jointly above official buildings in Managua, as interested parties wait
anxiously for the country to show its true colors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sergio Ramirez Mercado speaking to students in
Managua

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 14, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WITNESS IN ABBOTT TRIAL TELLS OF NIGHT OF MURDER

BYLINE: By PAUL L. MONTGOMERY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 844 words


The prosecution at the murder trial of Jack Henry Abbott concluded its case
yesterday with seemingly unshakable testimony from an eyewitness who said that
he had seen the prison author stab a retreating East Village waiter from behind
last summer and then shout ''very sadistically'' at the victim.

The witness, Wayne Larsen, a 35-year-old Vietnam veteran and unsuccessful band
conductor, said in State Supreme Court in Manhattan that he had been standing
near the corner of Fifth Street and Second Avenue about 5 A.M. last July 18 when
he saw two figures talking angrily outside a restaurant across Fifth Street.

He said he saw the figure he identified as Mr. Abbott raise a knife as the other
figure walked away, that he saw Mr. Abbott lunge and stab the figure from behind
with an impact ''which rings in my ears today,'' and that Mr. Abbott then cursed
the victim and screamed, ''Do you still want to continue this?''

Mr. Abbott, whose prison memoir, ''In the Belly of the Beast,'' was receiving
critical acclaim at the time of the stabbing, studied Mr. Larsen through
gold-rimmed glasses during the testimony.
'Reliving the Event'

Before the cross-examination began, Mr. Abbott asked to be removed from the
courtroom and the request was granted. He had a wadded Kleenex in his hand, and
his lawyer said he had been weeping.

''The testimony was extremely upsetting to him, reliving the event,'' said the
lawyer, Ivan S. Fisher. He said Mr. Abbott would take the stand in his own
defense today when he presents the defense case.

Mr. Abbott, who has spent 24 of his 37 years in prison on a variety of charges
including stabbing another inmate, was in a work-release program at the time of
the killing of the 22-year-old waiter, Richard Adan. The release had been
supported by a number of literary figures including Norman Mailer. Mr. Abbott's
correspondence from prison with Mr. Mailer is the basis of ''In the Belly of the
Beast.''

Mr. Abbott, a slim man with his hair combed in a pompadour, is charged with
murdering Mr. Adan, a waiter at the Binibon restaurant, after a dispute over use
of an employees-only bathroom. Mr. Abbott was eating at the restaurant at the
time with two female friends. He had been out of prison six weeks and was living
at a halfway house nearby.

A Shouting Argument

Mr. Larsen, who now works as an oil-tool salesman in Houston, was doing odd jobs
last summer and living with his sister and her boyfriend on Staten Islan d.

The night of July 17, he said, the three of them had dinner in a seafood
restaurant on the Upper East Side. He testified that he had a shouting argument
with the boyfriend and set off walking downtown in the early morning hours to
work off his anger. About 5 A.M., he said, he found himself on the corner of
Second Avenue and Fifth Street, across from the Binibon.

He testified that his attention was drawn to a ''very animated conversation''
between two figures on the opposite corner. He said that after a moment the
waiter ''went into reverse, so to speak,'' made what he interpreted as a
''conciliatory gestu re'' and began to walk toward the restaurant entrance.

Mr. Larsen said that he saw Mr. Abbott raise his left hand and that he also saw
''a metal projection catching the light - it looked like a knife.'' There had
been previous testimony that Mr. Abbott was carrying a knife in his belt that
night.

'Hair Swung Back'

The witness said Mr. Abbott ''made a beeline'' for the retreating figure,
reached around and stabbed him from the front ''with terrific velocity.'' The
lunge was so powerful, he said, that ''the hair swung back on his head.'' He
said Mr. Abbott then ''taunted'' the wounded figure.

He said Mr. Adan, holding his chest, said something like: ''God no. Are you
crazy? I already told you, I don't.'' Mr. Larsen testified that he crossed the
street, keeping an eye on Mr. Abbott on the corner, and, seeing that the victim
was badly hurt, ran for an ambulance. Mr. Abbott, according to earlier
testimony, ran from the scene after telling his companions that ''I just killed
a man.'' He was recaptured two months later in Louisiana.

Mr. Larsen was questioned hostilely for more than an hour by Mr.  Fisher. An
assistant district attorney, James H. Fogel, rose several times to object, and
Acting Justice Irving Lang generally sustained the objections. Mr. Larsen gave
equable answers to the questions, repeating his precise description of the
stabbing.

Mr. Fisher had said at the beginning of the trial that he would call Mr. Mailer
to testify about Mr. Abbott's state of mind in the week before the stabbing. The
lawyer said yesterday that other testimony had brought that out and that Mr.
Mailer would not be called.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 14, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 999 words


By John Leonard
THE AGE OF DESIRE. Case Histories of a Radical Psychoanalyst. By Joel Kovel.
282 pages. Pantheon. $16.50.

WE feel rotten. When we feel so rotten that we can't function, we ask for help.
Psychoanalysis purports to be a form of help. It isn't, according to Joel Kovel
- a psychoanalyst on the faculty of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, a
professor of psychiatry at the Bronx Municipal Hospital and a visiting professor
of anthropology at the New School - nor is any other adjunct of the ''mental
health'' industry in the Western world.

Why not? Because, says Dr. Kovel, ''bourgeois psychology'' is in business to
abet capitalism. Capitalism is predicated on overproduction and forced
consumption. The ''market'' of capitalism expands to eat the world and contracts
to squeeze the self. Coming and going, it metastasizes. Our desire (for a
meaning without a name) is converted into something abstract (like
exchange-value). If we can't produce or consume, we are worthless. The object of
most therapies is not to make us feel worthy, but to get us back to work.
Back to Plato

I simplify, but so does Dr. Kovel. He wouldn't go so far as to blame all madness
on capitalism, although he does seem to blame it on a class system and a dualism
as old as Plato's Greeks. He doesn't contend that all psychoanalysts are
careerist charletans, although Freud is one of the several fathers he must try
to kill in the Oedipal drama of this book. He is, however, firm on one essential
point: psychology as we know it was invented in the 19th century to rationalize
the political economy of imperialism.

What did Freud leave out of the psychic equation? Freud, or his epigones, left
out history and society. The Freudians presume a permanent infantilism, as
though we never abandoned the crib for the assembly line, as though the cash
nexus and the libidinal cathexis are wholly unrelated. What if, asks Dr. Kovel,
the ''Other'' is a social system organized to steal our labor and ''administer''
our desire? Wouldn't the madness of the individual then be an authentic response
to an insane situation? And let's not scapegoat the nuclear family; the nuclear
family, like modern psychology, was invented to internalize bourgeois values.

Marx - another father to be slain -also left out a lot. Marx, we are told, was a
closet positivist. He took no account of intimacy and those ''negations'' by
which a personality constitutes itself.  Beyond language and abstraction, before
''differentiation,'' alone in a dream, prior to any ''I'' knowing it must die,
there is a needy preconsciousness and it casts a shadow on the blueprint and the
print-out. Marx heard no whispers, merely drums.

Dr. Kovel would marry Marx and Freud, history and child. He's not the first such
matchmaker, although he may be the most tendentious.  He mentions Wilhelm Reich,
Herbert Marcuse and Jean-Paul Sartre. He ought to have nodded in the direction
of Geza Roheim. Norman O.  Brown, besides, has been here before, and Norman
Mailer has seldom been anywhere else since ''Barbary Shore.'' In fact, any
modern intellectual who isn't haunted by these two ghosts of Christmas Past, and
who doesn't seek in some way to reconcile their dissimilar promises of
emancipation, is a waste of your time and mine.

But Dr. Kovel applies his romance. He introduces us to five ''composites'' - a
bank executive whose demons attack him through his anus, a lawyer who overeats,
a dancer who won't work, a Vietnam veteran who tries to kill himself, a
construction worker who beats his wife - and explains them as victims of
capitalism. What we used to call ''human nature,'' which Dr. Kovel prefers to
describe as ''the transhistorical,'' collides in each case with social reality,
which is the dehumanizing labor-exchange of the capitalist marketplace. Desire
meets lack of fulfillment. Pathology is greed in reverse.

This, of course, is too neat, as though some packager of failed talent were
putting together a situation-tragedy for public television. Dr. Kovel has
interesting things to say about ego psychology, the drug cult inside medicine,
pop therapies, the ''vicissitudes'' of the family since the Industrial
Revolution, and disease as a ''commodity.'' He has not-so-interesting things to
say about Herman Melville, whom he misreads, and the welfare system, of which he
is contemptuous. He is hard on his colleagues and perhaps a little too easy, if
ironic, on himself. He provokes, inspires, pontificates and jargonizes unto
''hegemony'' and ''archaic parental imagos.'' He quotes William Blake so often
that the cows won't come home, or the tigers. And yet we keep thinking about
those case histories, those people who feel rotten.
Convenient Pegs

He has inve nted them. He says so. They are convenient pegs on whichto hang his
t heories about money and excrement, the denied child, the ''useless '' female,
the ''imperialized'' Puerto Rican, the thwarted prol etariate. There may be
professional reasons for this fictiousness; nevertheless, it injures me in my
credulity and Dr.  Kovel seems t o enjoy it too much. Let us suppose, however,
that each of these walk ing-wounded commodities in search of the
transhistoricalhas been radi cally psychoanalyzed. Into what are they
emancipated?

Dr. Kovel, angry, charming and coy, can't say. Desire is beyond language. The
irrational has no name. Negation is secret. The Other went to sea with Melville.
Socialism, Dr. Kovel concedes, looks very much like captialism with a different
advertising agency. The revolution, which he very much desires, sounds almost
nostalgic.  What's out there, beyond language and political economy? The
inexpressible. Marx had a livelier sense of capitalist dynamics and the
inexpressible made him impatient. Freud was frightened of the nameless; he might
have predicted Hitler as the incarnation of Desire. Sometimes, maybe, we feel
rotten because we think about how we feel, and fear ourselves, and there is no
Disneyland.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Dr. Joel Kovel

TYPE: Revie

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A WRONG LABEL FOR VIETNAMESE MOTHERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


To the Editor:

We are writing in regard to your recent series of news articles concerning four
American veterans and their visit to Vietnam, and particularly in regard to the
last article, on Dec. 27.

In this article, your correspondent covered the contact between the American
veterans and children of American soldiers in Ho Chi Minh City (formerly
Saigon). While we are very pleased that this story has been presented, we are
equally displeased at the biased, stereotyped labeling of those children's
mothers as prostitutes.

To anyone who spent a year in Vietnam during the war and came to know the
Vietnamese people, it would be clear that the Vietnamese mothers of American
servicemen's children are not prostitutes - rather they are decent, loving
persons who care for their children.  Moreover, had they been prostitutes, there
would have been abortions, not children.

By and large, the children's fathers served in combat-support and other
noncombat units and formed more than transitory relationships with these women.

There would be no fatherless children had the hierarchy of the American military
forces permitted, rather than systematically prevented, the legitimate marriages
that both American servicemen and their Vietnamese women desired. To compound
this situation, in order to prevent harassment by the South Vietnamese
authorities, bribes were necessary to obtain passports for Vietnamese women.

We suppose that many, perhaps nearly all, the fathers of these children are
living, and a substantial number of them would welcome renewed conta ct.

What The Times has done, however, is to perpetuate a backward racial stereotype,
which undermines the dignity of Vietnamese women and does the fathers in the
United States little good. Moreover, it harms the goal of r econciliation so
long sought.
WILLIAM J. SIMON, JOHN P. ROWAN, Woodha ven, N.Y., Dec. 31, 1981

The writers, both veterans of the Vietnam War, are, respectively, a member and
vice chairman of the Veterans Upgrade Center's board of directors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Pop Jazz;
BEAT GENERATION LIVES IN A NIGHT OF ROCK AND POETRY

BYLINE: By ROBERT PALMER

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1269 words


''I SAW the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness,'' Allen Ginsberg
wailed in his poem ''Howl,'' published in 1956. Along with Jack Kerouac's ''On
The Road''(1957) and William Burroughs's ''Naked Lunch''(1959), ''Howl''
announced the coming of age of an angry new generation, a ''beat'' generation.''
For many young people, the beat generation is history, but not for Tav Falco,
leader of the rock band Panther Burns.

''The ideas in beat writings are really germane to the character and sensibility
of today's world,'' he said the other day. ''I quote at length from 'Howl' or
from other beat poetry during some of our performances because the most vital
American music, the music that really inspired the Panther Burns -
rock-and-roll, rockabilly, electric blues - was created during the same period,
the 1950's. And the beat writers influenced our lives as profoundly as that
music.''

Tomorrow night, Mr. Falco and the Panther Burns, will take part in a special
''Beat Night'' at the Mudd Club, 77 White Street near Broadway. The program will
begin around 11 P.M. with a reading by the poet John Giorno, whose personal and
often confessional poetry is in the beat tradition. Ed Sanders and Tuli
Kupferberg, tw o beat poets who became rock performers in the 1960's, wil l read
and take part in musical performances, backed by members of a band called the
Fred McMurrys. The evening's last set will be by t he Panther Burns, whose first
album, ''Behind The Magnolia Curtain,'' was recently released by the Rough Trade
label. Admission to the Mu dd Club is $8 before 10 P.M., $10 after. Its
information number is 73 2-3800.

Tav Falco isn't the only contemporary rock artist who has been inspired by the
beats. Patti Smith was a poet and a friend of Allen Ginsberg, William Burroughs
and other beat writers before she became a rock singer. Last year, Richard Hell,
the punk rock singer and songwriter, spent several months driving across the
country in a secondhand car and recording his impressions, in emulation of
Kerouac's ''On The Road.'' Tom Waits and Rickie Lee Jones are the most prominent
of a whole school of young singer-songwriters whose celebrations of lives lived
on the edge derive from beat models. The rebellious, disillusioned protagonists
of Bruce Springsteen's songs, and his paeans to the automobile, are clearly
rooted in beat literature.

Wave of Antinuclear Protest

In recent years, a number of rock artists have become involved in the
antinuclear movement. Musicians United for Safe Energy, an organization created
and staffed by rock musicians, has taken part in protests at nuclear plants and
has helped raise money for the cause. On Tuesday night, an antinuclear benefit
at New York's Peppermint Lounge featured a performance by Tav Falco's Panther
Burns and a reading by Allen Ginsberg. A number of writers associated with the
beat movement were taking part in antinuclear protests as long ago as the 50's.
Ed Sanders wrote his most celebrated poem, ''Poem From Jail,'' after he was
arrested for taking part in a sit-in at a nuclear submarine base.

The last few years have seen a sizable increase in such activism and in the
number of rock musicians willing to take part in it. Many observers are reminded
of the 1960's alliance between many rock musicians and antiwar activists. ''It's
obvious that the so-called hippies of the 60's were looking back to and reading
the writings of the beat generation,'' noted Tav Falco. ''The things the beats
stood for - sexual freedom, freedom from neurosis and inhibition, speaking out
against living on the brink of nuclear war -were as relevant in the 60's as they
were in the 50's. If anything, they're even more relevant today.''

The continuing appeal of beat literature is evident in the flood of books on the
subject. Among the latest are ''The Holy Goof,'' a biography of Jack Kerouac's
traveling companion Neal Cassady, by William Plummer, and ''Baby Driver,'' an
on-the-road epic from the 1960's by Jack Kerouac's daughter Jan. William
Burroughs, who was an inspiration and a kind of father figure to Mr. Kerouac and
Allen Ginsberg when they all lived near Columbia University in the 1940's,
recently toured the United States giving readings from his work in rock clubs. A
recent performance by Mr. Burroughs, John Giorno, and the performance artist
Laurie Anderson drew a near-capacity crowd to the commodious Ritz.
Reasons for the Kinship

The kinship with the beats that many young rock musicians and rock fans seem to
be discovering isn't difficult to understand. Like Allen Ginsberg, they have
seen many of the best minds of their generation destroyed by various forms of
madness - drugs and the Vietnam war, for example. The cold war crises of recent
years, from Afghanistan to Poland, have probably made the present generation of
young people more acutely aware of the possibility of nuclear holocaust than any
generation since the one that faced the Cuban missile crisis in 1962. The
country's move to the right, and especially th e election of President Reagan,
recall for some the Eisenhower ye ars, which was the main period of the beats.

But what about musical tastes? For the most part, the beats shunned
rock-and-roll. The music that Jack Kerouac celebrated was bop jazz; he beat out
a rhythmic tattoo on dashboards and ashtrays to the visceral excitement of bop
records such as ''The Chase'' by Dexter Gordon and Wardell Grey. He often read
his poetry to jazz accompaniment.

''Bop jazz had more in common with rockabilly and blues than you might think,''
Tav Falco said. ''If you listen to 50's blues records, you can tell that people
in Howlin' Wolf's band and Elmore James's band, for example, were listening to
bop. And some of the rockabilly guitarists were picking up on bop horn players.

''A couple of years ago I was involved in videotaping an interview with Sam
Phillips, who recorded a lot of blues before he discovered Elvis Presley and
Jerry Lee Lewis. He remembered a guy named Bill Justis as the first person who
ever came into his recording studio talking hip lingo. Justis was a jazz
musician, and at first he didn't want to make rock-and-roll records, but he got
together with Sam Phillips and they came up with 'Raunchy,' one of the classic
rockand-roll instrumental hits. A lot of the rockabilly and blues musicians of
the 50's were living the kind of lives Kerouac was writing about. And I'll bet
that in some of the those 50's juke joints and chil i houses, you could find bop
j azz and blues and rockabilly records on the same jukebox.

''That kind of raw, incendiary American music tends to get overlooked in today's
world of high-tech record production, just like the things the beats were saying
tend to get overlooked. But the Panther Burns, and a lot of other bands, can't
relate to most of what we hear on the radio today. We're trying to be an
antidote to that kind of slickness; we're trying to relate that 50's music and
the concepts of the beat writers to our lives in the 1980's. We figure that if
you take that music and that writing and rub them together, you'll get an
explosion - an explosion that's contemporary.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Tav Falco

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies;
Finding roots in Hitler's Germany.

BYLINE: By Chris Chase

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1522 words


''DAVID,'' based on Joel Konig's novel about a Jewish boy who lives in - and
escapes from - Nazi Germany, opens next Wednesday at the Lincoln Plaza 2. Peter
Lilienthal, the 52-year-old director of ''David'' and himself a German-born Jew,
has already lived several lives. When he was 10, he fled with his widowed mother
to Uruguay.  ''My mother had a special mother intuition,'' he says. ''My
grandfather was rich. He had a house. He always thought, 'There's some way of
staying.' But my mother said, 'We have to leave.  Tomorrow. For whatever
country. My child has to be safe.' ''

In Uruguay, his mother ran a small, shabby hotel, and the boy worked in the
kitchen and played on the beach. In Uruguay, there was no anti-Semitism.
''Nowadays there's a military dictatorship,'' Mr.  Lilienthal says. ''But when I
was a kid, Uruguay was a paradise for everybody.''

Twenty years after he'd left it, Mr. Lilienthal returned to Germany, where he
now makes Berlin his base of operations. ''I realized I could find out something
about history, about people, about my big family that I could never find out
through books or the stories of friends. And I was already a film maker. I
wasn't a tourist, trying to go to a pleasant place like Paris or Rome.''

Although his movies are political (''Calm Prevails Over the Country,'' made in
Portugal after the overthrow of Salvador Allende Gossens, is an allegory of
events in Chile; ''The Uprising,'' made in Nicaragua is about the Sandinist
revolution) , Mr. Lilienthal doesn't employ violen ce or the clash of armies to
make his points.

''If the audience has a feeling about what it means to lose your dignity,
through a scene like the one in 'David' where a Nazi cuffs the old man, the
rabbi, and hits away his hat,'' he says, ''then you don't have to show machine
guns. You don't have to show people in concentration camps.

''I wanted to make 'David' in Poland, but in 1978, there was a strong feeling of
anti-Semitism there. Nobody said it openly, but I felt there was no interest in
working on a Jewish subject. So I made the picture in East and West Germany.

''For West German kids, Hitler is just a comic-strip character; they have no
idea of the past. They're concerned about their school and their parents and how
to survive. All these disco kids, 14, 15, they have a sense of apocalypse. They
know something about danger.  They can smell it. But the Nazis weren't their
fathers; they were their grandfathers. They're not ready to believe this
pleasant old man sitting home telling stories was a criminal who killed Jews.

''Sometimes, when they're forced to sit in a classroom and see films about
concentration camps, and it has nothing to do with their own reality, their own
problems, their reaction is just to make fun of it, to say 'Heil Hitler!' and
draw swastikas on the walls.''
The reason for this, according to Mr. Lilienthal: ''We missed the ri ght way of
telling stories to kids. Why should they believe us? We do n't have the right
teachers, we don't have the right ministers, we do n't have politicians who are
honest enough to make kids believe th ere is something important in listening to
a history lesson in sc hool. If you talk seriously about Vietnam or the
Holocaust, th ere's a consequence. You might have to give up something or change
yo ur life.

''That's why I thought if I'm making a film about the Holocaust, it has to be
focused on family, on simple things like a man coming back from a concentration
camp and trying to eat his soup.''

Despite his dedication to art, Mr. Lilienthal seems unpretentious and cheerful.
He says he likes making films ''because it's not a real serious business.'' But
he adds that to be a film maker is to be ''a very privileged person.''

''I can remember as a kid,'' he says, ''watching grownups and thinking, 'That's
funny, that serious face he's making.' I was amazed.

''I was watching grownup people, and I knew there was something fake about their
attitude.  ''That's still the way I'm watching life.''

Once upon a time, Robert Altman, the movie director, owned a studio called Lions
Gate. Last July, Jonathan Taplin bought Lions Gate for $2.5 million, and
proceeded to invest $1.5 million more to make the place as sophisticated as
Francis Coppola's American Zoetrope.

Mr. Taplin, in his mid-30's, is a Princeton graduate, who used to be a kind of
rock groupie. He once got a job with Robbie Robertson and the Band because, Mr.
Robertson told a friend, ''It was easier to hire him than to get rid of him.''

Having developed into a good road manager, Mr. Taplin eventually found himself
with nothing to manage. ''Bob Dylan didn't want to be on the road anymore. Eric
Clapton was retired. The Beatles were finished. The only people who could afford
a big touring thing were Alice Cooper and David Bowie, and they weren't really
my kind of music.''

So Mr. Taplin went to Hollywood and met Martin Scorsese, who showed him a script
''he'd been carrying around for years.'' ''I kind of liked it,'' Mr. Taplin
said, ''put up some money, raised some more money from friends, and we made the
movie. It was 'Mean Streets.' ''

After ''Mean Streets'' in 1973, Mr. Taplin produced ''The Last Waltz,'' and
''Carny.'' (''The Last Waltz,'' featuring Robbie Robertson and the Band, will
play a three-week return engagement at the Sutton starting next Friday). In the
course of producing movies, Mr. Taplin became frustrated with the way ''the
economics of the movie business were developing.''

That's when he decided to buy Lions Gate. ''Because there were technological
changes in the air that Francis Coppola's people and George Lucas's people had
started work on. Any time you can put a computer and a piece of videotape
together it's faster than editing with a movieola and a pair of scissors.
Automation has been in the music business for years; there's a new breakthrough
every week, but it's as though nobody in the film business knew it was going on.

''Lions Gate already had a very good sound-mixing studio. Altman had always been
interested in sound; he was always layering sound, lots of people talking at
once.''

If technology can save so much money, then why did Francis Coppola almost go
broke? Mr. Taplin has an answer. ''Francis put all he'd saved on technology into
constructing sets. Constructing Las Vegas, for instance, for 'One From the
Heart.' That's what made it cost $23 million. We w ant to make movies on
location.''

Who's ''we''?  Well, Steven Gilbert and Robert Chester are the administrative
heads of the new corporation that runs Lions Gate, while Mr. Taplin and a man
named Peter Kaminsky are the ''creative'' producers. They have two feature
films, ''Peru'' and ''Under Fire'' (which will star Treat Williams), in
preproduction, and recently they came to New York to shoot (for ABC Arts Cable)
two one-act plays by David Mamet.  Lindsay Crouse, who is Mrs. Mamet, stars with
Michael Higgins in the one-acters. Because she's pregnant, she refused to fly to
California, so the whole production was moved east. ''We brought the mountain to
Mamet,'' says Mr. Taplin.

Mr. Kaminsky, who has been listening quietly while Mr. Taplin talks, is asked to
spell out his last name, and obligingly does so.  ''It's the same name as Danny
Kaye and Mel Brooks were born with,'' he says. Then he sighs. ''I'm not related
to the other Kaminskys. I wish I was. They could help with my car payments.''

Mark Rydell, highly praised for his direction of ''On Golden Pond,'' will next
do the film version of ''Nuts,'' Tom Topor's play about a young woman involved
in a murder and trying to prove her sanity. ... ''Dialogue With a Woman
Departed'' is the independent film maker Leo Hurwitz's tribute to his late wife,
Peggy Lawson. Fourhours long, it took eight years to make, has won several
prizes in Europe and will be shown at the Public Theate r Feb.19-28. ... A
recent occupant of the Public, ''Over the Edg e,'' did so well that itis opening
a regular run today at Cinema 3 in the Hotel Plaza. The film, directed by
Jonathan Kaplan in 1978 fro m a screenplay by Charles Haas and Tim Hunter,
focuses on restl ess youth in a California suburb. Question: Shouldn't a movi e
about youth also play in a theater that attracts a youthful audienc e as well as
one in the stately Plaza?. ... Klaus Kinski, currently i n ''Buddy Buddy'' and
soon to be seen co-starring with a deadly sna ke in ''Venom,'' has joined Ken
Wahl in ''The Soldier,'' a spy thr iller that is resuming production in Austria
for a dramatic ski sequ ence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Peter Lilienthal

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOUR RESCUERS PRAISED; COURAGE OF THE FOURTH IS KNOWN, BUT NOT THE NAME

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 14


There were brave men among the living and the dead in the crash of an Air
Florida jetliner yesterday into the frozen Potomac River.

A Park Police helicopter team that pulled five survivors from the water and a
young Government employee who dived into the river to save a woman too weak to
grip a rescue line spent most of their time today giving interviews.

The other hero, still unidentified, was somewhere under the river ice. He
disappeared after, one by one, passing a lifeline from the helicopter to five
oth ers clinging with him t o the tail wreckage of the plane in the freezing
water.

President Reagan, in New York to speak to a business group, hailed the courage
of the man and said, ''We don't know who he is because he gave his life doing
that.''

They Still Wear Revolvers

The helicopter crew, Donald W. Usher and M.E. Windsor, returned from the rescue
mission Wednesday night to give their sad account to reporters. They wore blue
jumpsuits, and the police revolvers slung under their arms seemed as irrelevant
as they did useless.

They had acted heroically themselves, and back at the office, they were
embraced, sometimes emotionally, by their colleagues. They had taken up the
rescue helicopter, Eagle I, under the marginal safety conditions of a snowstorm
because there was no other way to reach the survivors. The ice immobilized
rescue boats, leaving firemen on the river bank trying desperately to toss
lifelines to the survivors a hundred yards from shore.

At one point, Officer Usher, the pilot, even dipped the helicopter's landing
skids into the water, a dangerous maneuver, to allow Officer Windsor to grab a
woman who was unable to hold on to the rescue line. The officers said their main
concern was icing on their helicopter, which they said was more dangerous for
their small craft than for the larger jetliners. It took them six minutes after
receiving the call to get to the disaster scene, where time was vitalbecause of
th e water temperature.

They Say Another Was Hero

But when the two officers told their story, they insisted that the only hero was
the man whose courage filled their eyes with tears.  They know him only as a
head in the water, a baldish man, perhaps in his mid-50's, with a heavy mustache
and gray sideburns.

Hovering over the ice floes, they looked for survivors amid the bobbing debris,
which included a twisted tennis racket and a child's shoe. Sighting six people
clinging to the tail section, they threw down a rescue line to a man who
appeared to be the most alert.  Instead of taking it, he helped place it around
a woman. . They kept dropping the line, and the man kept passing it to the
others.

When two men and three women were out of the water, the helicopter returned to
pick up the man who had put others first. The officers said they wanted to
commend him, to tell him how selflessly he had acted. Officer Usher said he had
never seen such courage, not even in Vietnam, where he flew combat rescue
missions.

But the man was nowhere to be seen. They kept looking for him, swinging the
helicopter low, hoping they could at least retrieve his body. Finally they gave
up.

''In a mass casualty situation,'' Officer Windsor, a paramedic, said at a news
conference today, ''you'll find people like him, but I've never seen one man
with that much commitment.''

Both officers said that in their minds, the man's face remains as vivid as his
deed. ''We want to know his name,'' Officer Windsor said.

Watchers on the Shore

Before the helicopter began pulling survivors to shore, M.L.  Skutnik 3d, a
28-year-old employee of the Congressional Budget Office, paced the river bank
while rescue workers stood by helplessly, unable to cast lines far enough.

As the helicopter attempted to drag an injured woman to safety, she let go and
fell into the water. Mr. Skutnik took off his coat and boots, jumped into the
water and pulled her in.

''I had been there all that time and nobody was getting in the water,'' he said.
''They just kept throwing ropes out that nobody could reach and when the woman
let go, I knew I could swim and I had to try to do something.''

Mr. Skutnik, who was treated for exposure at a local hospital and released, had
gone to the scene to try to help, but he said his action surprised even him.
''It's something I never thought I would do,'' he said, ''but in looking back, I
guess I did it because I didn't think about it. Somebody had to go in the
water.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Army trucks bringing material for pontoon
bridge

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 16, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CAREY RULES OUT RACE FOR 3D TERM; WIDE FIELD LIKELY

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2186 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Jan. 15


Governor Carey announced today that he would not seek re-election to a third
term and would devote himself instead to a yearlong battle to make New York ''at
once compassionate and competitive.''

Surrounded by his family, his Cabinet and his closest aides, New York's 51st
Governor declared himself ''more of a fighter than a politician.'' He explained
his decision by recalling his service dur-

Transcript of statement, page 28.
ing World War II, an experience that Mr. Carey has drawn upon frequently during
his 22-year political career.

''As a young officer in the infantry on the battlefields of Europe, responsible
for the lives of those who served under me,'' Mr. Carey said, ''I learned the
hard and bitter lessons of choosing my battlegrounds - deciding where to fight
and for what. In 1982, I have chosen.''

'Commitment' to 'State's Future'

''I have decided,'' the 62-year old Governor continued, ''to devote all of my
strength to finishing the work of these past seven years; to achieving a program
that sets a certain, s afe course for this state's future; to seeking a victory
more end uring and more importantthan any personal triumph at the polls.

''I cannot fulfill this commitment and at the same time immerse myself in the
day-to-day details of the campaign trail. I will, then, neither seek nor accept
the nomination for Governor.''

Mr. Carey's wife, Evangeline Gouletas-Carey, maintained an impassive smile but
appeared close to tears.  The Democratic Governor, whose standing in the polls
has fallen to a low point, appeared at ease and in good humor throughout the
address, but he approached tears at the end of his statement, when his
commissioners and staff members gave him a standing ovation.

He described his administration as ''the best group of government people in the
United States,'' a remark that did not appear in his prepared text.

Mr. Carey's unexpected decision sets up a potentially fractious and broad battle
for the Democratic nomination for Governor.  The Governor and his aides tried to
play down the importance of Mr. Carey's standing in the polls as a factor in his
decision.  ''Popularity polls have never stopped me from saying what was on my
mind, or from fighting battles I knew had to be fought,'' Mr. Carey said in his
address. ''Opponents never intimidated me or made me back away from what I
believed in.''

But statements from some Republican politicians here suggested that Mr. Carey's
popularity decline would play a major role in their party's strategy.

''I'm sorry I won't have the opportunity to run against the Carey record, which
is very different from the o ne he depicted for himself today,'' said Senator
Ralph J. Marino, Republican of Muttontown, L.I., who is Nassau County's
favorite-son candidate for Governor.  ''Anyone runn ing on the Democratic line
will be painted in the same corner with t he Carey brush.''

Mr. Carey's decision, which became known on Thursday while his aides huddled
into today's early morning hours -first in New York City and then at the
Executive Mansion - had several possible Democratic candidates assessing their
chances.

Lieut. Gov. Mario M. Cuomo is expected to announce his candidacy by March. Also
pondering the contest are the Assembly Speaker, Stanley Fink of Brooklyn; the
President of the New York City Council, Carol Bellamy, and the State Attorney
General, Robert Abrams.

Others are John S. Dyson of Dutchess County, the chairman of the State Power
Authority; Alfred B. DelBello, the Westchester County Executive; Howard J.
Samuels, a businessman who once lost the Democratic nomination to Mr. Carey, and
the Senate minority leader, Manfred Ohrenstein of Manhattan.

Mr. Carey said in a brief news conference after the announcement that he would
not endorse any candidate for his party's nomination.  In his formal statement,
the Governor said that Democrats should choose ''as open a process as possible''
in seeking a nominee.

Carey Phones Cuomo

Mr. Cuomo was absent from the crowd of officials in the Capitol's Red Room,
where Mr. Carey made his statement. Mr. Cuomo was the Governor's choice for
Lieutenant Governor four years ago and had been a close friend and ally of Mr.
Carey.

The two men have feuded publicly in recent months, and Mr. Carey explained that
he had ''summoned the Cabinet'' to the Capitol and Mr. Cuomo was ''not a member
of the Cabinet.''

But the Governor made a small gesture toward Mr. Cuomo, telephoning him after
his news conference.  Mr. Carey's announcement will make him the first Governor
in more than a quarter of a century to face a Legislature in the knowledge that
he would not serve another term. In 1954, Gov. Thomas E. Dewey announced he
would not seek re-election, but his plans were not made known until late in the
year.

Since then, two Governors - W. Averell Harriman and Malcolm Wilson -have been
defeated for re-election, Mr. Wilson by Mr. Carey in 1974. Gov. Nelson A.
Rockefeller resigned in 1973 toward the end of his fourth term.

New Revenue Sought

The Governor's announcement came as he prepared to propose his 1982-83 budget,
which the state's Budget Director, C. Mark Lawton, said today would cause
''screams and yells.''

Mr. Carey is expected to ask for increases both in state fees for a variety of
services and for an increase in the gasoline tax to finance the rebuilding of
the state's roads and bridges. Later, he may ask for a further tax increase to
help finance education. Many programs are expected to be cut severely.

Mr. Carey's aides said that the program would be a difficult one to put forward
in any event and that it would be especially hard to win support for such a plan
if the Governor w ere fighting for reelection.

Some of Mr. Carey's aides likened his decision to that of President Lyndon B.
Johnson in 1968. Mr. Johnson said then that he would not seek re-election in
order to improve the chances for a resolution to the Vietnam conflict.

Fink Considers Impact

But other officials said they believed the Governor's decision would create new
problems because it would lead to a departure of officials from the
administration and because the Governor could no longer threaten reprisals or
promises of political spoils over four more years.

Also in question is the effect the Governor's decision will have on Speaker
Fink, a central figure in determining the fate of Mr. Carey's program in the
Legislature.

''Quite frankly,'' Mr. Fink said at a news conference later in the day, ''I am
kind of in the unique situation. I don't believe that I have the luxury right
now as many other candidates seem to have because I don't really know what
impact my testing the waters, so to speak, will have on my obligations as
Speaker of the Assembly.''

The other central figure in the Legislature, the Senate's majority leader,
Warren M. Anderson, Republican of Binghamton, issued a brief statement offering
the Governor ''good wishes as he returns to private life.'' Mr. Anderson, who
ruled himself out of the race for Governor last year, said he and Mr. Carey
would have to ''bend our backs'' to deal with the state's problems.

Carey Record Assailed

Mr. Anderson has frequently been critical of Mr. Carey but has often worked with
him during crises. He has enjoyed an unusually good relationship with Mr. Fink.

Democratic leaders generally praised Mr. Carey. Mr. Fink said that ''Hugh Carey
will be known as the Governor who led this state through some of its most
perilous times.''

Richard Rosenbaum, the former Republican state chairman who is also running for
Governor, said that Mr. Carey's tenure had ''led to a precipitous decline in the
quality of life for the people of the State of New York.''

James L. Emery, the Assembly's minority leader and another Republican candidate,
said Mr. Carey's decision had left him with ''a sense of optimism for the future
direction of the state.''

Handling of Crises Recalled

However, Comptroller Edward V. Regan, another Republican who would like to be
Governor, issued a relatively warm statement.  ''His record in many areas stands
up to sophisticated scrutiny,'' Mr. Regan said. ''He will be remembered as a
Governor who performed well in crisis situations.''

Mr. Carey has often pointed to his handling of the fiscal crises of New York
City and State in the 1970's as the high points of his tenure.

''Because together we made the agonizing decisions that some critics said we
would never make and stood by those decisions in 1978,'' Mr. Carey said today,
''New York pulled through, the vitality of its economy restored, the solvency of
government agencies and municipalities assured.''

Defeated Wilson in '74

Mr. Carey took office in 1975 with the state on the brink of those crises. He
won an overwhelming victory in 1974 over Mr. Wilson, who took over after the
resignation of Governor Rockefeller.

At the time, Mr. Carey was a largely unknown member of the House of
Representatives, even though he had considerable influence in Congress,
especially on fiscal matters. He won a surprise victory in the Democratic
primary and then went on to win the election in part because a widely regarded
television advertising campaign put together by David Garth.

Mr. Carey won re-election in 1978 over former Assembly Speaker Perry Duryea in a
much more difficult contest. Mr. Carey entered the race at a major disadvantage
in the polls but began a counteroffensive that emphasized his performance on
financial matters and his program of $1 billion of tax reductions.

The Governor's second term was much more troubled and characterized by few
visible achievements on the order of Mr. Carey's handling of New York's
threatened insolvency. Mr. Carey's aides emphasized that the Governor had, under
difficult circumstances, managed to cut taxes further while avoiding major
reductions in services. The Governor asserted frequently that his administration
had been scandal free, and his supporters pointed to Mr. Carey's steadfast
opposition to the death penalty as a sign of courage.
An Increase in Attacks

But the last year saw a rise in attacks from both legislative leaders and the
voters. The legislative leaders in both parties charged Mr. Carey with
indifference on a number of issues and set out on an increasingly independent
course.

Mr. Carey's highly public courtship of his future wife produced a variety of
embarrassments, and the Governor made a number of statements he later regretted,
including a pledge to drink a glass of polychlorinated byphenyls.

Through it all, Mr. Carey maintained that while he made some personal mistakes -
he once blamed his ''flip statements'' on ''incautious Carey humor'' -the
performance of the government he ran was honorable.

''Quarrel with the Governor,'' he said last year. ''Don't quarrel with the
government.'' Aides and friends said Mr. Carey had been personally hurt by last
year's harsh criticisms, particularly those involving his personal life, and
that he had essentially decided not to run for re-election last November.

Staff Split on Move

His resolve strengthened over the Christmas and New Year's holidays. Mr. Carey's
staff was divided on whether Mr. Carey should seek another term, with his
commissioners and certain key aides strongly favoring it. Mr. Carey's wife also
reportedly took this view.

Robert J. Morgado, the Governor's top aide, was known to have opposed another
race by Mr. Carey. In recent weeks, h owever, he and his allies so ught to
de-emphasize Mr. Morgado's role, arguing that the decision was Mr. Carey's
alone.

The Governor has long harbored Presidential ambitions, and he has recently
relished his role as a Democratic spokesman against the policies of President
Reagan's Administration.

Today, Mr. Carey said he had no plans to seek ''any other office at any other
day,'' but promised, ''I shall not be prominent, but I shall be active.''

In his formal statement, Mr. Carey promised to speak out for ''those least able
to care for themselves, those most threatened by the studied indifference of the
Federal government.'' These groups, Mr. Carey said, ''desperately need someone
to speak for them, someone to prevent them from being made the scapegoats for
our economic problems.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gov. Carey photo of Gov. Carey with chief aide
Robert J. Morgado

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOSTAGES, FAME FADING, RESUMING A NORMAL LIFE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3410 words


The Hostage Crisis: One Year Later First of three articles. By ROBERT D.
McFADDEN

The cheers and the yellow ribbons have faded. The glittering parades have
thundered away. The stacks of mail, endless telephone calls and embarrassing
stares of strangers have yielded to more tranquil days and occasionally restless
nights for America's 52 hostages, as they may always be known.

A year after their release from Iran and their tumultuous, emotional homecoming,
most of the former hostages have resumed productive, normal lives, taking up new
assignments, renewing family ties and friendships and adjusting remarkably well
to an unsought status as national heroes.

Memories of the 444 days of captivity, from Nov. 4, 1979 to Jan.  20, 1981, have
softened too, most say, and time appears to have helped heal all but the most
deep-seated psychic wounds.

Most of the diplomatic and military personnel have remained with the State
Department and the armed services and are in posts here or abroad. Two of the 29
hostages who were with the State Department have retired. Six of the 21
servicemen have chosen such civilian pursuits as attending college and selling
insurance.

Three May Run for Three former hostages are considering political races. E ight
are writing books. Thirteen are in colleges, most while on lea ve from
Government posts, and a dozen regularly give speeches abou t their experience,
calling it cathartic. Several have criticized what they consider the failure of
American officials to examine the roots of the Iran hostage-taking. Four have
been married and others have begun new relationships, while many speak of
finding deepe r meaning in their lives.

For about a dozen, however, the last year has been a time of continued hardship
and difficult adjustment, of haunting, painful memories of the harsh treatment
and deprivation in captivity and of deep resentment against the Iranian
Government and thoes who confined them in dark cells and windowless dungeons.

Some have suffered harsh physical, psychological and family problems. Many have
nightmares. A few have been divorced and one has been unable to find a job.
While most have overcome their difficulties, a few are still trying to cope with
the anguish of the Iranian experience.

These are the principal conclusions drawn from interviews in recent weeks with
37 of the hostages and from the accounts of relatives and friends of all 52, as
well as discussions with State Department officials and the Family Liaison
Action Group, known as FLAG, a private, Washington-based organization
representing the hostages and their families.

For nearly all the hostages, the year has been one of indulging in long-denied
comforts, such as ample meals and time to relax, and of choosing whom to see and
where to go, the everyday things most Americans take for granted.

A New Pursuit of Values

But many say the year has also brought deeper meaning to life, with less accent
on careers and other matters of self-interest and more stress on personal
relationships and spiritual values.

Many say it has been a time of regeneration in terms of the subtler joys of
freedom: woodland walks in the Appalachian spring and soft summer evenings in
the South, autumn sunrises in the Rocky Mountains and vistas of silent winter on
the Great Plains.

''This is a group of individuals who have come to recognize, and to cherish,
what they lost for 14 1/2 months: their freedom, their homes and families and
particularly their sense of belonging to America,'' said Katherine Keough, the
president of FLAG and the wife of a hostage, William F. Keough Jr.

''Most of them are adjusting well,'' Mrs. Keough added. ''They are integrating
back into their families and enjoying their freedom.''

Gratitude for U.S. Support

Because of the support Americans gave them in captivity, many say they feel
obligated to respond to reporters or to strangers who approach them with
all-too-familiar questions. But many have refused to discuss their feelings or
submit to yet another interview. They express wonder at continuing public
fascination with their lives.

Some acknowledge bitter feelings toward their Iranian captors, the Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini and the Teheran Government. Some are critical of the American
Government for barring their lawsuits against Iran and for setting a
$12.50-a-day limit on compensation for their time in captivity.

Some also continue to criticize former President Jimmy Carter for allowing the
Shah of Iran to come to the United States for cancer treatment in October 1979,
the event that led to the embassy takeover two weeks later, and for the aborted
rescue raid that led to the deaths of eight American servicemen.

But personal problems, not public issues, have dominated the lives of some
former hostages in the past year.

Many Have Physical Reactions

There have been many physical ailments: ulcers, migraine headaches,
claustrophobia, high blood pressure, intestinal disturbances and, for some,
rounds of compulsive eating and dieting that have led to sharp weight gains and
losses. A few have suffered a stress-related disorder that expresses itself in
teeth-grinding and jaw-clenching.

At least 10 have experienced mental problems ranging from nagging fears and
recurrent nightmares to severe depression, insomnia and long bouts of
uncontrollable crying. Some were helped by psychiatrists; two who underwent long
periods of hospitalization have emerged much improved.

Four former hostages have been divorced or are separated; a few other marriages
are troubled. The children of several hostages have had psychiatric treatment.

It is unclear to what extent the hostages' problems are related to their ordeal
in Iran, but those willing to discuss them say that the sufferings of captivity
have been a major fact or in marita l and medical difficulties.

Iran Appearance Not Forgotten

The stories of some are not pleasant. William Gallegos, 23, a quiet former
marine, was the first hostage interviewed on television in the crisis. He said
that none of the hostages were being mistreated and that he favored the return
of the Shah to Iranian soil, as demanded by the revolutionary regime.

The interview raised intense controversy, despite his explanation that he had
spoken under duress.  Last February, in a bar in his hometown, Pueblo, Colo., a
stranger attacked Mr. Gallegos, hit him in the mouth and ran away. His injury
required 22 sutures. This, plus crank calls and bomb threats, caused him to go
into seclusion. He ate compulsively and gained 50 pounds.  Throughout the year
he has had trouble sleeping.

Since leaving the Marines last April, Mr. Gallegos has been unable to find a job
and, without money, all but gave up hope of attending college. But the State
Department has given him a scholarship; he plans to enroll at the University of
Southern Colorado.

One Serviceman Denied Honors

Former Sgt. Joseph Subic Jr. of the Army, who criticized the United States in an
Iranian film and became the only serviceman-hostage denied a Defense Department
commendation for his service in Iran, was discharged last summer. He has not
encountered ill-treatment.  Married last spring, he is writing a book and
attending George Washington University, where he has been elected vice president
of the student council.

In defending himself against charges that he provided intelligence information
to his captors, Mr. Subic, who was a document custodian in the embassy, has said
that he cooperated only after his captors pieced together documents that had
been shredded. The State Department has not commented.

Apparently because he was held in a dark cell, Mr. Subic's eyes are extremely
sensitive to light. He said he has not had a good night's sleep since he came
home: ''I wake up in the middle of the night four or five times. I guess I have
to get peace of mind with myself.''

Mr. Gallegos, Mr. Subic and others have experienced nightmare-like
''flashbacks'' of beatings, Russian roulette and other terrors they suffered at
the hands of Iranian captors. Mr. Subic has seen a psychiatrist but said it has
helped ''only a little.''

Sgt. Donald R. Hohman, an Army medic, has found it hard to forget the terror,
especially the day of the embassy takeover, when he was taken before a shrieking
Iranian crowd ''that wanted to rip me to shreds.'' He suffered a delayed
reaction to the stresses of Iran.

When he came home, he recalled, ''I had no psychological problems initially.''
Then, after the parties and the novelty of celebrity began to wear off, problems
began to emerge. Amid pressure to ''act like a hero,'' he went with other former
hostages to the Mardi Gras in New Orleans in March. Then it happened.

Suddenly Began Crying

''I started dripping tears in my soup in a restaurant on Bourbon Street,'' he
said. ''There I was, crying all over the place, and I didn't know why. I was
emotionally and physically drained.''

An Army psychiatrist helped him. Since then, he said, his fear of crowds, his
insomnia and his anger toward Iranians have subsided. He has returned from an
assignment in Frankfurt and plans to enroll in a medical course at Fort Sam
Houston, Texas.

Sgt. John D. McKeel Jr., 28, a marine, also attended the Mardi Gras, but had
trouble of a different sort. Returning home to Balch Springs, Tex., he was
accused of accompanying 10 policemen on a March 27 midnight raid at a home where
a family was harassed.

Lawrence and Judy Watson said that Sergeant McKeel was with a group of officers
who broke Mr. Watson's toes, humiliated Mrs. Watson and shot the family dog. The
sergeant, a former reserve officer in the town's police force who often went
with officers on assignments, declined to comment on the family's allegations,
made in a lawsuit filed in December.

Another hostage, Phillip R. Ward, was shocked by the depth of his reaction to
captivity. He sobbed uncontrollably on the flight from Teheran to Algiers, and
the crying continued for weeks. After his return, he was hospitalized six weeks
for physical and emotional problems.

''It really helped and I'm feeling much better now,'' said Mr.  Ward, a State
Department communications specialist who is back at work but has occasional
nightmares.

Many hostages came home with bitter feelings toward t heir captors and the Islam
ic regime of Ayatollah Khomeini. But more complex feelings assa iled John W.
Limbert Jr., an embassy pol itica l officer whose links to Iran were
longstanding and intimate.
Closely Identified With Iran

He studied Iran's history at Harvard, served in Iran as a Peace Corps volunteer
in the 1960s and taught at Pahlavi University from 1969 to 1972. He married an
Iranian and two children, a girl now 12 and a boy 10, were born in Iran. Both,
with his wife, have dual Iranian and American status. The family also had many
Iranian friends.

Iran was a ''wonderful'' assignment, he said, but after the embassy seizure he
felt only ''a sense of betrayal.'' Though his wife and children were safe in the
United States, they, too, had mixed feelings of love of their homeland and
animosity toward Iran's Government.

Now Mr. Limbert, who is with the State Department, teaches at the United States
Naval Academy. His children go to school in Annapolis.  ''Even now, when people
say something bad about Iran, they get mad,'' his wife said. Mr. Limbert admires
Iran and Iranians, but said, ''I yield to no one in my dislike for this
regime.''

None of the hostages have returned to the Middle East, but several have taken
overseas assignments. Steven M. Lauterbach is a vice consul in France, Frederick
L. Kupke is bound for Thailand and Richard I. Queen, the so-called 53d hostage
who had multiple sclerosis and was released in July 1980, is a vice consul in
England.

After the long captivity, some hostages wanted to wrap their arms around the
American landscape. Gary E. Lee, a 38-year-old State Department administrative
officer, and Michael J. Metrinko, 35, a former Peace Corps volunteer who was an
embassy political officer, each felt a need to travel through and rediscover
their homeland.

Six Months on the Road

Mr. Metrinko, after 10 months in solitary confinement, bought a car and went on
the road for six months. He traveled to the South, the West, Alaska and back
across the Middle West to Boston, where he now attends Harvard. He saw the
nation through ''a stranger's eyes'' and found himself ''a reborn patriot,'' he
said.

In his six weeks of travel, Mr. Lee said, ''I wanted to get reacquainted with
the vastness of the country, to see the country as a whole.'' The ordeal of Iran
and the experiences of the past year, he said, have changed his outlook toward
himself, his family and his career.

''I used to think I wanted to become an ambassador,'' he said.  ''Now I have
different priorities. I'll go anywhere, but I'll only spend one night away from
home. I do that so I can stay with my family. If it's a choice between going to
a meeting at the State Department or speaking with a group of students, I'll go
talk to the students.''

Kevin J. Hermening, 22, the youngest hostage, has also been traveling. He was
discharged from the Marines last June, and has given 450 speeches to some
260,000 people, virtually supporting himself with fees. He plans to study
political science at the University of Wisconsin and may go into politics.

Three other former hostages are considering political races.

Political Decisions Pending

L. Bruce Laingen, 59, the charge d'affaires, the highest ranking diplomat in
Iran during the crisis, has been asked by Maryland Republicans to run for the
United States Senate seat of Paul S.  Sarbanes, a Democrat. But Mr. Laingen, who
is vice president of the National War College, has made no decision.

Richard H. Morefield, 52, the consul general in Iran, is in a training seminar
for senior State Department officials. He has been asked to run for a
Congressional seat in a newly created district in San Diego. He has said there
is ''an outside chance'' that he will do it.

Col. Charles W. Scott, a military attache in Iran, retired from the Army last
May 1 after 31 years. He lives in Stone Mountain, Ga., and has been working as a
consultant and doing ''considerable'' lecturing on Iran and the Middle East. He
has said that he might run for Congress in Georgia's Fourth District, an Atlanta
seat held by Elliott H. Levitas, a Democrat.

Colonel Scott, a veteran of two Vietnam tours who has won the Silver and Bronze
stars, is critical of the Khomeini regime and of the Carter Administration's
decision to bar lawsuits by the hostages. He and 12 other hostages filed such a
suit, but it was struck down by a Federal court in Los Angeles. An appeal is
pending.

The two hostages who have retired from the State Department are Moorhead C.
Kennedy Jr., a 51-year-old economics specialist who was the embassy's third
highest official, and Robert C. Ode, a consular official and, at 66, the oldest
ho stage.

Several Working on Books

Mr. Ode, a 29-year veteran of the diplomati c service, lives with his wife,
Rita, in Sun City West, Ariz. He wa s hospitalized for 10 days after coming home
with exhaustion and ac ute bronchitis but has since been well. He is planning a
book about his experiences.

Mr. Kennedy directs the Peace Institute of the Cathedral of St.  John the Divine
in New York City. He founded the institute to study the role of religion in
international affairs.

''When I was in captivity,'' he said, ''it occurred to me that we in government
had failed totally to appreciate the strength and durability of a religious
revolution.''

Even now, he said, ''Nobody in the Department of State or the United States
Government really wants to examine what happened.'' Col. David Roeder of the Air
Force, now at the National War College, also is disappointed that many questions
are unanswered.  ''There is tremendous interest, but no response,'' he said.
''There has not been an adequate accounting of how we got into the situation.''

John E. Graves, 53, an official of the International Communications Agency, has
accused the Government and news media of being ''preoccupied with the soap opera
aspects of the hostage crisis to the exclusion of the real questions.''

Says Questions Need Answers

The questions he would like answered include: Why was the embassy seized? Why
were Iranians so angry at the United States? Why was the Shah admitted? And, in
view of the risks to the hostages, why was the rescue raid staged?

Congress ''promised to investigate,'' Mr. Graves said, ''but hasn't come
through.'' Many hostages expressed sorrow for the servicemen who died in the
rescue raid and for their families. Mr. Keough has given about $10,000, the
proceeds of dozens of speeches on the Iranian experience, to scholarships for
children of the servicemen.

Mr. Keough, 51, who ran American schools in Iran and Pakistan and is now with
the United States Department of Education, gave the Carter Administration credit
for the hostages' survival.

''We are here,'' he said, ''because they placed the value of human life over the
cost of national humiliation. There is a lot to be said for that. We are unique
as a nation. We have things going for us.''

Barry Rosen, the embassy press attache, is continuing doctoral studies at
Columbia University on leave from the State Department. He and his wife,
Barbara, are finishing a book on how the hostage crisis affected them. ''I do
think I value things - my family, my own sense of freedom - much more,'' Mr.
Rosen said. ''I'm much less concerned about what will happen tomorrow.''

Family Adjustments Required

Mrs. Rosen, who confronted television cameras almost daily outside her Brooklyn
home, spoke of shouldering many responsibilities in her husband's absence and of
keeping them after he came home.

Mrs. Keough, the president of FLAG, said that many hostage families experienced
such tensions: ''Wives had to learn to cope with all the problems while their
husbands were gone: handling the family, the business, the insurance, even the
mechanics of operating dishwashers and fixing stoves.''

''When the hostage came home,'' she went on, ''he found that many of his chores
had been taken over. This often produced tension and certainly a period of
adjustment. One does not wish to give up one's roles, and this definition of
self was needed then to a greater degree than at any other time.''

Many of the families have been critical of the Federal Government's plan to
compensate the hostages by paying them $12.50 for each day in captivity. Some
have called it too little. Mrs. Rosen said that the sum ''demeans'' their
suffering.

''It leaves sort of a bad taste in your mouth,'' she said. ''It cheapens it.
Barry received the flag from the President, and the medal. Things like that mean
much more.''

Like many of the hostages, Duane K, Gillette, 25, a Navy intelligence
specialist, is not inclined to look back. On leave to study at Franklin and
Marshall College in Lancaster, Pa., he plans to be married in July and hopes to
become a commissioned Naval officer.

For Mr. Gillette, memories of Iran have begun to recede. ''At times,'' he said,
''I kind of wonder if it ever really happened.'' Tomorrow: The year's
developments in Iran.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: table of hostages former and present positions (page 50)
photos of Moorhead Kennedy (page 50) photos o f L. Bruce Laingen (page 50)
photos of Barry Rosen (page 50) photos of Kathryn Koob (page 50) photos of
Joseph Subic (page 50)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR VIETNAM VETERANS, WHAT HONORS?

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 44, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 794 words


In the colonnaded chamber of New York City's Board of Estimate, far from the
mean rumblings of their war, a band of Vietnam veterans reflected aloud on how
the city could best honor and help them.

No decisions were made, but then none were expected in a debate in which
genteelness belied the great passion that the subject can generate. For some
veterans, the important thing was that the city - like much of the country -was
finally getting around to recognizing them.

''It's been a long time,'' said Fred Wilson, who was in the Air Force during the
Vietnam War. ''When I came back, it was like I'd never even left. That was 1969.
No one ever said, 'Hey Fred, good job, you served your country.' ''

The occasion was a four-hour hearing held last Tuesday by a committee that Mayor
Koch appointed to propose a memorial the city could build to honor the men and
women who served in South Vietnam and the 1,344 New Yorkers who died there.

The panel is expected to give the Mayor its recommendations next month. There
have been an abundance of proposals, from statues to cenotaphs to a memorial
park in the Bronx. One site under active consideration is a tiny outdoor plaza
known as Jenrette Park, off the East River in the Wall Street area.

Fund-Raising a Key Problem

Whatever is recommended will have to be financed largely with private
contributions, and the committee is trying to figure ways to raise the $500,000
or more likely to be needed. Then, too, the 27 people on the panel must settle
on types of service programs for Vietnam veterans that they all agree should
accompany any memorial.

It was to hear what veterans themselves thought that the hearing was called, and
committee members were prepared for a stormy session. ''We expected a great deal
of conflict,'' said Franklin J.  Havelick, a special adviser to the Mayor and a
soldier in the late 1960's.

Instead, the debate was mild, although disagreements quickly made themselves
evident.  None of the two dozen speakers challenged the desirability of a
memorial. But some seemed to fear it would come at the expense of programs that
may still be ne eded for a gener ation of veterans suffering from an uncommonly
high incidence o f unemployment and health and emotional troubles.

''A memorial is not enough,'' said Lee S. Covino, a counselor with the Veterans
Outreach Center in Brooklyn. ''There's been a delayed recognition of those
individuals and families unhappily affected by that tragic period known as the
Vietnam era.''
Jobs and Education

Some speakers emphasized the need for job opportunities. Others talked about
education. Still others worried about health questions created by the former
servicemen's contact with the defoliant Agent Orange. A few cited the special
problems that they believe black veterans face.

Arthur Egendorf, a Manhattan psychologist who was in a military intelligence
unit in South Vietnam during the late 1960's, said he thought that any program
should go beyond just helping veterans. It should, he asserted, give former
servicemen ''an opportunity to continue to serve.''

''There's an incredible potential out there for veterans to rehabilitate not
only themselves but also a traumatized society,'' Dr. Egendorf said.

To the degree that there was controversy it came with a suggestion from a
fund-raiser for Vietnam Veterans of America named William J.  Schmick. A
memorial, Mr. Schmick said, should also pay tribute to antiwar demonstrators.

He said he himself was a former marine wounded in the war, who had a brother
strongly opposed to the American involvement in Vietnam.  ''We didn't talk much
when I came back,'' Mr. Schmick recalled.

Suggestion Offends Ex-Official

Eventually, though, they were reconciled. ''There's no animosity on the part of
Vietnam veterans to those peace warriors,'' Mr. Schmick said. ''These peace
demonstrators, in a way, were responsible for saving lives because without them
the war might have gone on two or three years longer.''

The very idea offended Domenick G. Rainone, who during the Beame administration
headed a city office of veteran affairs that was eliminated during the fiscal
crisis.

''Now someone comes and says we should build a memorial for what - for people
who carried placard?'' Mr. Rainone said. ''We should build a memorial for those
who had the guts to go. Without these guys we wouldn't be here. Right or wrong
or indifferent, they went. And they deserve this honor.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of William Schmick addressing panel

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Film View;
FATHOMS DEEP IN THE MYSTERIES OF TASTE

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1673 words


Anyone who thinks that audiences are sheep -docile creatures to be pushed by
critics and other self-appointed shepherds toward movies they otherwise would
never see - should take a minute to look over the recent box office figures in
Variety. To optimists who have faith in the independence of the American
consumer, these reports support their wildest dreams. To the rest of us, they
are a little scary and, even after the fact, more than a little baffling. The
season's biggest hits are not only the films that have been critically acclaimed
or that have prompted serious controversy, like ''Reds'' or ''Pennies From
Heaven,'' but also movies of such fecklessness that even their success can't
teach us any special lessons.

Take ''Modern Problems,'' the mildly amusing Chevy Chase film about a
radioactive air traffic controller, a film with exactly four laughs in it, and
''Neighbors,'' John Avildsen's gross, clumsy adaptation of Thomas Berger's
novel, starring John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd. Both are among Variety's top-10
current moneymakers.

It isn't enough to say that Mr. Chase's huge television following has turned
''Modern Problems'' into the hit it is. He's been in too many flops and
also-rans - including ''Oh Heavenly Dog'' and ''Under the Rainbow'' - for that
argument to be convincing. The same is true of ''Neighbors.'' Mr. Belushi's
reputation was not able to transform the far more favorably reviewed
''Continental Divide'' into a hit last summer. Possibly the combinat ion of Mr.
Belushi and Mr. Aykroyd,comrades from ''The Blues Brothers'' and television's
old ''Saturday Night Live,'' is the secret of the film's success. I don't know.

''Neighbors'' does have the advantage of a good print ad, the one that shows the
bespectacled Belushi, who is o ften at his funniest playing an unconvincing
square, desperately g uarding his front door against the manic invasion of two
lunatic nei ghbors, played by Mr.  Aykroyd and Cathy Moriarty. That the ad must
be at least partially responsible for the film's success is confirm ed by the
fact that ''Neighbors'' always seems to open to smash b usiness, which, after
the word of mouth gets around, immediately st arts to taper off.

Most of the reviews for ''Neighbors,'' like those for ''Modern Problems,'' were
on the tepid side. Yet the Chevy Chase movie, which depends entirely on gags
relating to the hero's telekinetic powers, hasn't been damaged to any
appreciable degree. Twentieth Century-Fox, the film's distributor, knew what it
was doing when it opened ''Modern Problems'' on Christmas Day, without screening
it in advance for the critics, so that the picture would get at least one full
weekend of business under its belt before the reviews were available.

The reviews, of course, are available now, but the public couldn't care less.
''Modern Problems,'' the ads for which suggest a Walt Disney ''Flubber''-like
comedy, may turn into one of the most profitable films Mr. Chase has ever made.

It's never easy to predict what comedies like ''Modern Problems'' and
''Neighbors'' will do at the box office, or to understand why they have
succeeded or failed even after the results are in. I still don't understand, for
example, why Gene Wilder and Richard Pryor were such a phenomenal hit in Sidney
Poitier's ''Stir Crazy,'' though each star, separately, has had his share of
failures. As a team they are only slightly less lovable than Laurence Olivier
and Neil Diamond. Quality, obviously, has nothing to do with it. Nor do laughs.

I also wonder why ''Used Cars,'' a rambunctiously funny, disorderly comedy,
failed at the box office when ''Stripes,'' equally disorderly but nowhere near
as funny, succeeded. The success of ''Stripes'' can't be attributed to the
presence of Bill Murray, since Mr. Murray, too, has appeared in failures no
better or worse than ''Stripes.''

These are the considerations that persuade Hollywood producers to continue
turning out comedies whether they are good, bad or indifferent. Producers know
that talent, or its lack, has nothing to do with a picture's success. So they
just keep stumbling along.

The season's most unexpected, most mysterious hit, however, is not a slapdash
comedy but a sobersided, completely mixed-up melodrama, ''Taps,'' the sort of
picture that, had I been head of 20th Century-Fox production instead of Sherry
Lansing, I would have put on the shelf after looking at the first cut.

''Taps,'' which was directed by Harold Becker (''The Onion Field''), is about
the high-minded but completely wrongheaded takeover of a military school by its
cadets when the board of trustees threatens to sell the property to a real
estate developer.  When I saw the film, I was initially caught up by it,
principally because, for the first hour, it seems to be fearlessly defending
oldfashioned concepts of honor, duty and loyalty at a time when, Vietnam being
still fresh in our memories, most movies find it chic to be skeptical. Here, I
thought, is a movie that dares to be different.

''Taps'' is so uncertain, though, that halfway through it changes sides. By the
end of the film it has become a blood-drenched indictment of the military
mentality that has led its cadets so far astray. O.K., one wants to say, so what
else is new?

I was therefore more than a little surprised when, several weeks later, I was
stopped by a neighbor, a fellow no more than 12 or 13, who asked me if I'd seen
''Taps.'' ''Yes,'' I said. ''What'd you think?'' he asked. ''Not much,'' I said.
''What did you think?'' His unqualified verdict: ''Keen!''

I was astonished that he'd even heard of it and even more astonished that he'd
seen seen it and found it keen. The film, as far as I know, has received no rave
reviews. It's not based on a bestselling novel or a hit play, nor has it been
spun off from a hit TV show. Its only stars are George C. Scott, who is a fine
actor but not exactly a teen idol, and Timothy Hutton, who, though he won an
Oscar for ''Ordinary People,'' is not someone I think of as a box office draw on
the order of Robert Redford or Kermit the Frog. When I asked my young friend how
he'd found his way to the theater, he just shrugged and said all his friends
were going to see it. ''Taps'' is apparently getting its message across, but
how? And what, in fact, is its message?

The answer to the first part of the question is, I suppose, the newspaper and
television advertising campaign. The theme of the campaign, accompanied (in the
print ads) by a shot of Mr. Hutton in uniform, is the line, ''The school is our
home, we think it's worth def ending,'' which, I would have thought, would be
about as inviting to most kids as a call to arms to defend Lincoln Center. Yet
not onlyare the young audiences going to see ''Taps,'' they're coming out urging
their friends to see it and, I've been told, going back to seeit a second o r
third ti me. I doubt that even Sherry Lansin g or anyone else at 20th
Century-Fox knows why.

Early in the film there is a scene in which Mr. Hutton and another cadet have
dinner with the school's commandant, a charming old windbag played by Mr. Scott,
at which the commandant, acknowledging that people like them are obsolete,
stresses the military's code of honor, loyalty, etc., which the young men accept
totally. A little later, after the commandant has accidentally shot and killed a
rude town boy who's been making fun of the cadets, and after the school is
threatened with closing, Mr. Hutton and the cadets take over the campus and arm
themselves with walkie-talkies, rifles, machine guns and bazookas. Unless they
receive some reassurances about the school's future, they threaten a shooting
showdown with the National Guard.

As all this is going on, one supposes that the film approves of the sincerity of
the cadets' behavior, if not being quite sure about the behavior itself. The
sit-in comes to nothing when one pre-teen cadet is killed, and it turns into a
blood bath after one Green Beret-type cadet, who actually wears a red beret,
runs amok and starts machinegunning the National Guard.

Amid this carnage Mr. Hutton is allowed a line to the effect that there must
have been something faulty about the old commandant's thinking or so many people
wouldn't have been killed and wounded in their little operation.

Though the movie finally comes out and condemns its minimilitarism, it has,
until that moment, been entertaining its audience with graphic footage of all of
the terrible things that the unhinged military mind can cause to happen. I doubt
that my young friend liked ''Taps'' so much because he is an ardent
anti-militarist. More likely he enjoyed the fantastic spectacle of youngsters
fighting a war with real bullets.

''Taps'' is a ''Straw Dogs'' for thinking tots who don't mind a bit of muddle.
The best thing that can be said for it is that it is so mixed up that it's
probably impossible for anyone to imitate it.
.  Setting Things Straight Department: Fernando Trueba, the director of the new
Spanish comedy ''Opera Prima,'' was 25 when he made the film, his first feature,
and not 30 as was reported in the review...Alan Alda is the director of ''The
Four Seasons'' and not Robert Alda, who is Alan's father, as I said here three
weeks ago.  That mistake is the result of a mental block that can't be politely
analyzed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUPER BOWL WEEK: THE HOOPLA BEGINS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KATZ

SECTION: Section 5; Page 1, Column 5; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 2681 words


IT begins today, the endless talk show, the swirl of parties, hoopla and hype.
Another Super Bowl Week.  Fred Dryer, the irreverent defensive end who had
experienced one with the Los Angeles Rams two years ago, wondered, ''Who cuts
the ribbon and proclaims, 'We are now officially in Super Bowl Week?' ''
According to several players who suffered the long, almostsurrealistic countdown
to kickoff, the ribbon-cutter must be the National Football League, the
television networks, Hollywood, Madison Avenue - all rolled into a caricature of
the all-American capitalist. The Super Bowl may be just a football game, but
there's nothing like Super Bowl Week to the players who endure and, in some
cases, overcome them.

It can be so bad, suggested Pat Toomay, the former Dallas Cowboy line man, that
it might not be worth the first trip to the Super Bowl for the San F rancisco
49ers and Cincinnati Bengals. The teams play next Sunday i n Pontiac, Mich.

''Deep down, I don't know how many players would admit it,'' said Toomay, ''but
when we lost a playoff game before getting to the Super Bowl, it was never bad
because when you lost, you were free. If you won, there w as the Super Bowl and
the extra m oney, but if you lost, you were out of prison. At least, that's how
I felt.''

The 49ers and Bengals are going to be ''trapped,'' said Matt Snell, one of the
Jet heroes of Super Bowl III, because this year's game is in the Detroit suburb
of Pontiac.

''At least, when you're in California or Florida,'' said Snell, ''you can get
away. We went deep-sea fishing in Miami. In Detroit, where are you going to go
with two feet of snow on the ground? What are you going to do? Watch the cars
come off the assembly line? Every time they turn around, there's going to be
reporters and fans around them.''

The players wonder about the fuss they create. Jack Ham, the Pittsburgh Steeler
linebacker who has played in three Super Bowls, told of the time he and wife
were eating in a restaurant.

''People were lining up at our table for me to sign autographs,'' said Ham.
''Right next to us was Andre Previn. I just have so much admiration for that
man, a real artist, and here were people stepping over him to get to me and all
I do is tackle people for a living.''

''It's like being in a Fellini movie,'' said Dryer. ''Or it's like being an
expectant mother, with everybody else scurrying around and asking how are you
feeling, are you all right?''

''You're in a capsule, it's really not reality,'' said Larry Cole, the former
Cowboy defensive tackle. ''The country has a desire to have more holidays, and
Super Bowl Week is the first of the year. The game is kind of a sideshow.''

''What it is, as I see it, is money,'' said Alan Page, who went through four
with the Minnesota Vikings. ''All you can see is conservatives and money. I
don't see it as the Establishment vs.  Someone. I just see the Establishment.
It's like they're saying, 'We're going to have a party and those who aren't like
us are going to cheer us and salute us.' ''

''It's like selling toothpaste,'' said Mike Garrett, who played in the first
Super Bowl with the Kansas City Chiefs.  The problem, said Dryer, is that
football is ''only 7 or 8 percent of the whole nut.'' ''The game is for kids,''
he said, ''but the Super Bowl is for commercialization of products, just like
Christmas.''

But the one time Dryer made it to the Super Bowl, he had ''lots of laughs.'' ''I
enjoyed Super Bowl week,'' he said. ''It was better than watching TV.'' Doug
France, another Ram, said the Super Bowl made ''you realize the fun of the
game.'' ''All year long, during the playoffs, it's serious,'' said France, an
offensive tackle. ''We played the game in Los Angeles so we stayed at home all
week and we were pretty loose, singing, and happy and partying. We were even
drinking beer during offensive line meetings.''

Maybe it's even ''like New Year's Eve all week,'' as Brig Owens, the former
Washington Redskin safety, said.  But it's a New Year's Eve where the
participants have to be in bed by 10 P.M. Owens remembered the Redskins hired
security guards to enforce bed checks. Players often are locked up in their
rooms with their playbooks, telephones constantly ringing (''The big question,''
said Lynn Swann of the Pittsburgh Steelers, ''is, 'Do you have any tickets?'
''), allowed out only to practice and meet the press. It is a pressure cooker.

''You can blow more intensity by Thursday than you need to play the game on
Sunday,'' said Jim Otto, the Hall of Fame center who appeared in the second
Super Bowl with the Oakland Raiders.

''The carnival atmosphere can be detrimental in itself,'' said Paul Warfield,
the former Miami Dolphin receiver who is now a Cleveland Brown executive.

Some coaches become convinced the only way to protect their players is to hide
them.  ''We had curfews the whole week we were in Anaheim,'' said Owens.  ''We
really didn't have much free time. Usually, the team that is allowed to relax a
little more plays a better game. We played Miami, which had very little
restrictions compared to us, but George Allen, who had coached in Los Angeles,
was paranoid about the influences of the city.

''Imagine, full-grown men with security guards. We had a pretty wild bunch of
guys and they were going crazy. If you look at the record, people under tight
bondage usually lost.'' The record shows also that in only one Su per Bowl game
did a team appearing for the first time be at a team that had been there before.
That was in 1975, when the Stee lers beat the Vikings, 16-7, in New Orleans
after first enjoying Bour bon Street. Let the record show, also, that the
Steelerswere coached by Chuck Noll, who is 4-0 in Super Bowls.

''His idea,'' said Ham, ''was to enjoy it.'' Off the record, the Steelers
enjoyed their first Super Bowl Week, savoring many of t he pleasures of Bourbon
Str eet.  When the Philadelphia Eagles arrived in New Orleans last year, the
entire team, including its 67-year-old adviso r Sid Gilman, got off the plane
wearing green warmup suits. And whi le the Eagles were living a Spartan
existence, the Oakland Raide rs were sipping absinthein New Orleans on the way
to a resounding Sup er Bowl victory.

Jim Clack, who played left guard, opposite Alan Page, for the Steelers in
Pittsburgh's first Super Bowl, said Noll gave ''us three, four days off and so
we were out having a good time while the Minnesota players were sitting in their
rooms with their playbooks. I was reminded of that by Philly and Oakland last
year.''

Herman Edwards, an Eagle cornerback, thinks it was simply a case of his team not
playing well last year.  ''That's taking a little frosting off the cake for the
Oakland Raiders for beating us,'' he said. ''We did what got us there. If we had
won, everyone would be saying, see, hard work did it.''

But Page agreed with the premise that constriction means tightness.  ''We could
have been anywhere for our four Super Bowls,'' said Page, a member of four
losing Viking teams under Coach Bud Grant.  ''We were locked up all four times
and the results speak for themselves. What it does is isolate you from the rest
of the world.  It literally forces you to think about the upcoming game 24 hours
a day. There is no escaping, no getting away to be by yourself. The parties and
the hype are all part of the atmosphere. You can't be part of it, but you feel
the energy, the tension, the excitement, and layered on top of your own energy,
tension and excitement, you end up at the end of the week just a ball of
nerves.''

''The Vikings were free-swinging free spirits,'' said Joe Kapp, the quarterback
of Minnesota's first Super Bowl team. ''We got caught up in the atmosphere and
didn't keep our true personality. We played like it was work and the game of
football should be fun, the way the 49ers play it now, the way the Steelers did
when they were winning Super Bowls, the way Billy Martin's baseball teams play.

''I always said it was a game,'' said Kapp, who was recently named football
coach at the University of California. ''Sure it's our business, but there's
people hungry in the world, there's poor people in this country. Coaches act
like it's everything, but there's a real world out there.''

''Noll told us to get New Orleans out of our systems,'' said Andy Russell, the
linebacker who played in the first two Steeler Super Bowl victories. ''By
Wednesday, we were begging for bed checks.''

Cole, who played in five Super Bowls for the Cowboys, said ''you need a curfew
later in the week.'' ''All you do is go from place to place to place, just
trying to kill time,'' he said. ''If the curfew isn't on, guys'll stay up to 4
o'clock and you'll ride with them. Guys would try to find the nearest watering
hole, just not to sit in the room. You have to play with your mind to relax. In
Miami, I used to walk along the beach, or go shopping for no reason at all, even
take tours.''

When the Jets were in Miami, 18-point underdogs to the Baltimore Colts, ''there
was an air of frivolity'' on the team, reported Dave Herman, the offensive
tackle for that game. Herman said he ''spent the whole week trying to
concentrate, 'How am I going to block Bubba Smith?' and you can't believe how
much pressure that puts on you.''

After one Super Bowl loss, the Cowboys became a more relaxed team under Coach
Tom Landry, said Lee Roy Jordan, the former middle linebacker.

''The first one, we were distracted by the media, but Landry learned to tell us
you have to give of your time to help them make the event,'' said Jordan. ''Yet
he reminded us our job is on game day. He learned little more to handle it as a
coach and we also gained from personal experience.''

If Landry grew on the Super Bowl job, Noll came to it as a fullfledged
psychologist.  ''The night before our first Super Bowl game, he offered to let
the wives stay with the players,'' said Clack. ''I didn't want to spend the
night with Gordon Gravelle, but Saturday night before a game is sacred. I don't
think a guy raised his hand.''

Russell said Noll's pre-game speech ''certainly had to be one of the shortest.''
''Let's go out and have some fun,'' Noll told the Steelers before their first
Super Bowl.  ''Everybody just loo ked at each other,'' said Russell. ''Frankly,
Iwas having a hard time breathing. Both teams come out the same runwayin New
Orlean s. I remember the Viking were standing next to us. They all had their
game faces on. I waved to a couple of guys I knew, but they wouldn't wave back.
Our guys, meanwhile, had cameras and were taking pictur es. The contrast was
staggering; the danger is to be toopsyched, neve r the other way. You don't need
to psyche a team up for the Super Bow l.''

But while Russell praised Noll for being ''able to combine tha t light tough
with intense preparation,'' he sa id ''both games I was involved in were won
because of superior perf ormance more than emotional outlook.''

''Probably not enough is made of the nuances of coaches, what weaknesses they
find in the other team and what adjustments they make in the first and second
quarters,'' Russell said.

Noll had also prepared the Steelers for what Russell called ''the media
crunch.'' ''He told us before we got to New Orleans, 'Don't try to fight it,
it's something you're going to hve to do anyway so you might as well enjoy
it,''' said Ham. ''Sometimes you'd get bored answering the questions so Ray
Mansfield and Russell played games with the press and Lynn Swann, they kept
asking him the same questions, but his stories changed four or five times.''

''Each player had a table for the press interviews and I left mine to sit with
Mansfield,'' said Russell, talking about the former Steeler center. ''We started
telling war stories, how Buddy Parker once cut 13 guys on a team plane before we
got home, or how in training camp, he woke up a trainer in the middle of the
night to have him wrap his hands like a prizefighter because he was going to
fight the players. By the end, nobody was sitting with Joe Greene or Franco
Harris or Terry Bradshaw. When the interview time was up, the writers started to
leave and Mansfield yelled, 'Come back, we're not finished.' It was the exact
reverse of what it was supposed to be.''

Toomay said the coverage of the Super Bowl on television and in newspapers
''makes you wonder what people are doing out there.'' He does not understand
how, during the regular season in Dallas, there are pages on the Cowboys while
he has to search for stories on Poland.

Jordan, his old teammate, said there are priorities on what sells papers and
during football season, ''it often happens to be the Cowboys.''

''I'll bet papers in cities with teams that were also-rans have a lot more on
Poland,'' said Jordan. ''Who's to say how much spotlight should be on these
events and how much should be on Poland. Poland's a long way from South
Dallas.''

Owens was one of several players to see a healthy side to the national
preoccupation with the Super Bowl.  ''Things move so fast in this highly
technical world,'' he said, ''people need to let go their pressures and the game
provides an opportunity for that, an opportunity for people to gather at their
homes. Here you come off Vietnam, with so many people split, and this is one of
the few times you have the nation coming together.'' John Mackey, who played in
two Super Bowls for the Colts, has been to all others since his retirement in
1972. The game has been a market place for Mackey, now a vice president for a
company that supplies oil companies. It is where he takes customers.

''I know the players and they get to see them without their helmets on,'' he
said, ''and it gives me and my wife an opportunity to see old friends.

''I've been with people who partied so hard they had to watch the game on TV
from their rooms,'' he said.  Detroit is not exactly a party town and Mackey
will skip this year's game. Alan Page had to wrestle with his conscience to go
to the Super Bowl this year before accepting an assignment as a radio
commentator for the Public Broadcasting System.

Page said he was ''really torn simply because you have to buy into it and become
part of the sale.'' ''The problem that you face as a writer or a member of the
media,'' he said, ''is you're almost forced to cover it and that means you have
to buy into it, you have to give it credibility.''

He decided to go, he said, because ''all my friends said you can go there and
give a better view.'' And, like Dryer said, ''after the game you can go get
drunk.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Fred Dryer and Dave Herman

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STEVE TESICH TURNS MEMORIES INTO MOVIES

SECTION: Section 6; Page 42, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5373 words


Barney Cohen is a freelance writer.
By Barney Cohen

Steve Tesich knows something about the 60's, which is a good thing because
that's the period in which his most recent film, ''Four Friends,'' is set. The
friends are four teen-agers growing up during that stressful decade.

Tesich was once one of those teen-agers, but he had a special point of view: As
a 14-year-old immigrant boy (he arrived from Yugoslavia in 1957), he spoke
almost no English.

''I used to watch those family sitcoms,'' recalls the man who, first time out,
won an Academy Award for Best Screenplay for ''Breaking Away'' in 1980. ''And I
had to make up what they were saying. I often wonder how well my scripts
correlated with theirs.''

That's how the 1960's began for Tesich, inventing an American experience to fit
the flickering, blue-white images of situation comedies.

The decade ended for Tesich on a Manhattan street with police sirens and
demonstrators screaming all around him. ''I picked up a garbage can and threw it
through a bank window,'' he recalls. ''This scared me bec ause I can remember
thinking ... I was doing it to make a show, to en tertain myself with the
consequences of my idea.''

In between, the boy learned the language, won a wrestling scholarship to Indiana
University, made Phi Beta Kappa, won a graduate scholarship to Columbia
University and, with vague thoughts of becoming an academic, took up the study
of Russian literature.

''Those novels had a strange effect on me, stronger than any of my college
friends had,'' Tesich says. ''Everyone in them was walking around, carrying
their idea, their belief, like a cross - bumping into other people who were
carrying different crosses, different ideas. And this was something like what I
had been feeling about America in the late 50's and early 60's, except that here
the idea in all its diversity wasn't a cross - it was an energizer. I think when
I made that connection between the clash of ideas that was going on in those
Russian novels and the limitless potential and possibility that I felt in
America, I think that was when I first started to think what a wonderful thing
it would be to write.''

The first attempt at a ''Russian novel'' of his own has long since been filed in
the dustiest part of a closet. The vagaries of the writing trade have forced
Tesich into other media. So, while he has always thought of himself as a
novelist (and worked at it periodically), Tesich has written six plays produced
Off Broadway to varying critical success and one savagely reviewed Broadway
play, ''Division Street,'' about aging 60's radicals. There are also three
films. ''Breaking Away,'' his first, was followed by ''Eyewitness'' (1981),
which received mixed reviews. The divergence of opinion about ''Four Friends''
is greater still. It has been called ''movingly real'' and ''the stuff of
legend,'' and The New York Times has ranked it among ''the year's 10 best.''
Other critics called it ''an unmitigated disaster perpetrated by talented
people.'' Most recently, Tesich has adapted John Irving's novel ''The World
According to Garp'' for the forthcoming film.

Not even those who see flaws in Tesich's work deny his talent, which has made
him the first screenwriter in recent years to acquire a reputation equaling
those of the directors and stars who traditionally dominate movie making. Arthur
Penn, director of ''Four Friends,'' says Tesich may be ''the unwitting cutting
edge of a rise of the American screenwriter.'' We do seem to hear more about
Thomas McGuane, John Guare, David Mamet and others of that breed than we have
heard about screenwriters in a long time. Then again, Tesich may simpl y be on
his way to becoming, like the la te Paddy Chayefsky, a special case, which,
arguably, is distinction enough.

In either event, there are several things that make Tesich special. There is the
freshness of his ''immigrant's vision.'' There is an enormous care for and
devotion to detail in every script that Tesich writes - as if it were his
Russian novel. And there is his unwavering desire to base his stories on real
life, real American life, still the immigrant teen-ager filling in dialogue for
characters whose experience will tell him something about America.

Tesich and his wife, Becky, spend most of their time in a one-room log cabin in
Colorado. ''No chickens, no goats, none of that real stuff,'' says Tesich, ''but
there's a view of Pike's Peak out the window.'' Right now, they are using a
Manhattan apartment, arranged for them by Warner Brothers, during the filming of
''The World According to Garp.'' Central Park is outside the window; coffee is
on the coffee table.

The Tesiches travel light. Though they've been in the apartment for more than a
month, there is little to mark their presence save for the telephone number of
the superagent Sam Cohn on a Rolodex card pinned to the bulletin board near
Tesich's portable Olivetti typewriter.

Tesich, a compact, muscular man of 38, seems nervous. He fashions a smile and
pulls at his hair. He's reluctant to talk about ''Garp,'' partly because
Warner's has asked him not to and partly because his mind is really on ''Four
Friends,'' a Tesich original, not an adaptation, which follows four teen-agers
through adolescence to adulthood. ''It's about the 60's,'' he says, ''but it's
not a 60's film.'' He smiles. He has made a slip: 60's films are not supposed to
be good box office. ''But it doesn't matter. This is a film about people.''
Tesich's people. ''It's very autobiographical,'' Tesich admits, ''for whatever
that's worth.''

Like the protagonist of ''Four Friends,'' Tesich was born in Yugoslavia, where
he was raised in a small town near Belgrade. ''My mother was a great storyteller
and I picked it up,'' he says. ''I spent a lot of time making up stories for my
friends, for the old men. There were no young men - the war had taken care of
them. I'd make up stories about my father who was missing. Everyone's father was
missing. So my stories would always be about going to America and finding my
papa.''

Tesich read Mark Twain and Jack London when he could beg or borrow a book -
printed matter, like everything else, was scarce after World War II. And he
would go to the movies.

''We all we nt to see John Wayne movies. The longest line I ever stood on was
for 'Rio Grande.' Of course, as soon as you saw a movie,you played th e game of
that movie. Good guys and bad guys in the local ruin. I magination was a big
part of most people's lives. The real stuff ar ound was not so wonderful.''

Tesich's missing father, who had fled Yugoslavia to join its government in
exile, turned up alive in England. Emigration procedures were slow, and Tesich
did not see his father for 14 years. When they were finally ready to leave, ''My
mother, my sister and I didn't want to move to England,'' Tesich says. ''We
hadn't watched any English movies. We all wanted to go to U.S.''

Tesich never articulates the ''the '' before ''United States.'' It is the last
remnant of the syntax of his native tongue, Serbo-Croatian. His English,
impeccably American at the beginning of an interview, starts to slide, however,
toward the end.

The family was reunited in the United States. Papa being a machinist, Tesich
wound up in one of the belching-smokestack capitals of the world, East Chicago,
Ind. ''It was a shock,'' says Tesich of East Chicago during the winter of 1957.
''It certainly wasn't the Great American West. I tried to keep the thought down
that my old town looked much nicer. Yet I somehow came to believe that, here,
anything could happen. And if it wasn't happening to me where I was living, that
not far away, in another town, things were working out much better. O.K., I
hadn't come to the treasured frontier, but I really believed I had found another
frontier, the frontier of 'possibility.' ''

''Four Friends '' is as full of this sense of possibility as it is of Tesich's
autobiography. Its main character, Danilo, a young immigrant boy, lives in East
Chicago, Ind., with his family. The 60's are about to begin. Danilo and his
friends, all members of the highschool band, have just finished the senior-year
concert and are out in the street at night, laughing and playing phrases from
Dvorak's ''New World Symphony'' and discussing their idealistic hopes for their
future. Georgia, the one girl among them, with whom they all are in love, wants
to be a dancer (old friends say Georgia may be modeled after Tesich's beautiful
older sister, Nadja) -but Georgia has in her eye the look that will become the
vacant, confused stare of the mid-60's hippie. David is facing an eye
examination that he is certain will leave him wearing glasses; not a bad thing
in itself but, like his thinning hair, it is yet another example of how he is
slowly becoming exactly like his father. Tom, the handsome one, has an
appointment not in Samarra, but i n a count ry that few people even knew how to
spell in 1960: Vietnam. Danilo is torn between wanting tobe a poet and wanting
to be a rich American.  Their lives over the next 10 years - especially the
tortuously int ertwining courses of Danilo and Georgia - is what ''Four
Friends'' is about.

The 60's were hard for Tesich, too. Like many, found himself on both sides of
many arguments. He wanted to be free, but he also wanted to be safe. He wanted
to stop Communism, but he didn't want to kill. ''At the beginning of the 60's,''
Tesich says, ''I was trying to keep down the feeling that I didn't know what the
hell I was doing. That's what college was. I was at the mercy of any opinion
that came along.''

Tesich tried life in a commune. ''But I only lasted four days,'' he says,
recalling that he was still the immigrant then, observing his new land rather
than simply living in it. ''I tended to notice silly things - like how, if you
were an activist politically, you held a cup of coffee with two hands, as if you
were sitting around a campfire in Bolivia with Che.'' To Tesich, that was just
bad theater. At Columbia, as a temporary escape from Russian literature, Tesich
wandered into a writing class being taught by the novelist Harvey Swados. At
about the same time, he also met Becky. ''It was a pretty good match,'' he says.
''I was deciding to be a writer and Becky always wanted to be the woman who
supported one of those.'' And, off and on, that's what she did until ''Breaking
Away'' broke away.

The only thing other than Becky that Tesich could believe in unreservedly was
the antiwar movement. ''Probably the most beautiful thing I remember from being
in this country were those L.B.J. days and those peace demonstrations. They
encompassed nearly everything I believe in: having an idea, sharing it with
other people who believe in it and being on the move. Hundreds of thousands of
people being as naive - in a nice way - as I was back in Yugo-land.''

The immigrant's vision is not new to American films, in which foreign-born
directors from Erich von Stroheim to Milos Forman have been outstanding. What
makes Tesich unusual is that he is a foreignborn writer.

''I guess I only think of the novelist Jerzy Kosinski,'' says The New York Times
drama critic Frank Rich, trying to come up with an immigrant parallel to Tesich.
''Kosinski has the same fascination with the archetypal American experience,
although he comes to a different, darker conclusion.''

Milos Forman, who came here from C zechoslovakia and most recently directed ''Ra
gtime,'' explains it this way: ''The vision isn't a conclusion; i t's a
starting-off point. It isn't uniform; it's personal. You see, there comes a
moment, either the first day or the first year, w hen, for whatever reason, you
suddenly feel you are accepted. Thi s is such a strong moment you can never
forget it. It forms a lens in your mind that shapes and colors everything that
comes after i t.''

For Arthur Penn, Tesich's lens focuses ''a sweet, soft optimism.'' George Roy
Hill, the director of ''Garp,'' believes that it filters out ''a chic negativism
that's been going around for a while.''

Tesich doesn't have a counterpart among contemporary screenwriters and
playwrights; he harks back instead to the era of Kaufman and Hart, and to Frank
Capra, with a view of town and family that has much in common with Thornton
Wilder.

Penn thinks the Capra comparison is apt: ''Capra was always dealing with the
American fantasy, and that works because the American fantasy is rooted in the
American reality. Steve Tesich is working with the American reality, which is
rooted in the American fantasy.''

Comparisons with Capra make Tesich uncomfortable. ''His characters are larger
than life,'' Tesich says, pulling at his hair. ''They affect things. They go to
Washington, and make speeches and save something. My characters have to be
life-size. Poor Danilo stands up in high school and makes a speech about the
dignity of the soul and what happens? He gets kicked out of school for the day
and his father beats him up.''

With whom would Tesich like to be compared? He squirms. He blushes. He pulls at
his hair with both hands. ''Chekhov,'' he says. ''Oh, God, I'm sorry. That was
terrible, but I mean I really envy the man so. He was so scrupulous and yet so
dramatic. There was nothing dishonest in him. Nothing is done to have an effect.
I do a lot more of that - going for effect -because, you know, you get nervous
so you reach for a dramatic moment. But what I really prize are those moments of
theater, moments of film, where that's not the case. Just the drama of real life
unfolding.

''I'm not a plot writer. Plots don't move people's lives. Ideas do and emotions
and the energy of change. I can't outline. I can't tell a story point to point
to point. I'm terrible at story conferences.  I give people headaches.''

What Tesich does instead of outlining is something like daydreaming with a
pencil. He calls it ''taking notes,'' an imagining process, born perhaps of
writing his own dialogue as a teen-ager for sitcoms.  The notes constitute about
half of the work t hat Tesich does when he's writing.

Some of these notes are ideas for characters. Some are questions of
philosophical construction. One morning, this was taped to his typewriter: ''I
found myself thinking back most about those people whom I had known the least.''

Most notes are anecdotal biographies. Some are drawn from Tesich's own
experiences, some from friends', some from daydreams. For example, Tesich once
won the ''Little Five Hundred'' bicycle race that climaxes ''Breaking Away.'' He
was also once a janitor, like the main character in ''Eyewitness,'' with a
similar infatuation for a television newswoman.

Tesich puts down actual scenes and sketches, the majority of which - like the
characters who populate them -never actually make it into the final screenplay
or even the rough draft. But they shape Tesich's notion of ''the drama of real
life unfolding.''

''I'll take a character I've been thinking about and say, 'O.K., whom does this
guy live with? A sister. What's she like? What do they say to each other when he
burns a pan?' '' He'll write a scene. Or: ''You go back into your past, last
week or last decade, and think of things you should've done or said and how
things would have worked out if you had - retroactive wish fulfillment.''

Tesich likes characters who take risks, at least take more than he does: ''You
see a pretty girl on a bus. You think you should just get off and follow her.
You don't. I like characters that do. I like extremes - the janitor and the
television reporter in 'Eyewitness.' I like to take cliches that are supposed to
be dead and buried, and resurrect them so that people hear them fresh and say,
'Hey, I've been avoiding that sentiment.' ''

Tesich keeps at this note-taking until he has characters about whom he is sure
of two things: Each has an understandable idea or belief, and each has a voice.

''You write about people you want to be with,'' Tesich says, ''and places you
want to see and things you want to do. It's as simple as that. That's what
inspires.''

The weight of notes taken can exceed that of the eventual screenplay by a factor
of three. Tesich keeps at it until he gets his inspiration. ''Sometimes,'' he
says, ''it doesn't come until you're already into the screenplay itself. You're
on page 30 and all of a sud den s omething happens, someone says something and
you say, 'That's it, t hat's what I meant.' And you throw everything out and
start over. T hen you rewrite a third of that.''

He isn't above making the regimen easier on himself when necessary. ''I have
some stock characters,'' he explains. ''I have a father figure I use a lot. And
there's a lead character, although sometimes, as in 'Breaking Away,' he doesn't
play the lead. There's a character that's me.''

There are also some stock Tesich themes. ''True,'' he frowns. ''I try as hard as
I can to stay ignorant of them. If you're aware of them while you're writing -
'Hey, I'm good at the father-son confrontation, that's my meat' - then you start
to dwell on them and the writing comes out garbage. It takes some concentration
to forget what your strong points are.''

As a young playwright, the strong points of Tesich's writing were darker. ''The
Carpenters,'' his first play, concerned a radical son who comes to kill his
blue-collar father; instead, the father kills the son.

Although there used to be villains in Tesich's work, there aren't anymore. Even
the killer in ''Eyewitness'' is invested with a noble motive - the freeing of
Soviet Jewry. For Tesich, villains have been replaced by the clash of ideas.
Georgia wants to give her virginity to Danilo, but it is 1960 and you don't
sleep with a girl you truly love. Big scene: Two ideas collide. It takes the
entire movie for Danilo and Georgia to find each other again amid the debris.

''Back then,'' says Tesich of plays like ''The Carpenters'' and ''Lake of the
Woods,'' ''I used to begin with a conflict. I don't do that anymore. I am
absolutely 100 percent convinced,'' he says in the way people speak when they
are really only 99 percent convinced, ''that if you invent real characters, give
them a real point of view, set them off against each other and follow the little
things they do, the drama will be there.''

Tesich does have one structural consideration. ''My stuff begins very slowly and
I'm always concerned with not creating a rhythm I can't keep. A lot of movies -
bang! - Let's grab the audience. O.K., you grab them, you've got to do something
with them. For crying out loud, it's all plot and twist and the stuff in between
is garbage.  The people in these stories are just there to set up the next
bit.''

Tesich lights up a mentholated cigarette. ''I tell you,'' he says, ''it's going
to be a tricky time for people like me. The technocrats are in charge. Will
movies like mine be seen? Will they be made? I don't know. My experiences, the
ones that I write about, are primary ones; and more and more these days, movies
deal with secondary experiences derived from secondary sources, u sually other
movies.''

Since Tesich's struggle is to base his films on real life (''or at least life as
I've known it''), he has a chronic low anxiety over whether these two kinds of
films can coexist in the marketplace.

''In 'Raiders of the Lost Ark,' '' he says, ''there isn't one single human
being. Nobody minds this, by the way. In fact, they love it. But they are all
characters from other movies, having no other purpose than to say and do the
things that further the plot.'' But there are critics who would ask whether
Tesich wasn't guilty of the same thing in ''Eyewitness,'' where the mystery of
whodunit is, well, mystifying.

Tesich leans back into the couch and exhales. ''I believe in that janitor and
that girl, I really do,'' he says. ''My hope was to take a genre and turn it
inside out ... that you believe the characters so much that you are forced to
believe the plot stuff.'' Indeed, midway through the first draft of the
screenplay for ''Eyewitness,'' Tesich left Peter Yates, the director, a note
that said, ''Who is the murderer in this story anyway?'' Tesich stubs out his
cigarette and thinks a moment. ''I wanted to show that even in a film of that
kind, there's more than a plot involved. Real life intrudes. That's why, just as
we're about to have 'the thrilling climax,' the whole picture stops - the way
our real lives have to stop sometimes, so that the janitor's father can come in
and have his crisis. There is a danger in doing films like that. There is an
egotistical intent to show that we're better than the people making those
movies. But the genre is very powerful. Grappling with it again is something I
may not do soon.''

''Steve Tesich's involvement in the process of making a movie expands to fill
the limits you set for it, and then it spills over,'' says Arthur Penn, who has
worked with a list of important screenwriters ranging from Lillian Hellman and
William Gibson to Calder Willingham and Thomas McGuane. ''I have never had such
an intense, complete collaboration.''

In his spare office overlooking Broadway near Lincoln Center, Penn, a thin and
sensitive-looking man, seems torn between giving and claiming credit for ''Four
Friends.'' He wheels around in his swivel chair and lifts an original copy of
the first-draft screenplay, still in its dogeared, untitled mailing binder.
''Read it,'' he says. ''It's amazing. You read good scripts and you read scri
pts that are not so good.  But you almost never read a script that is
satisfying, in and of its elf, as literature.''

Penn reads the first line of the screenplay: '' 'The sky is an oxidized
steel-industry red.' You get caught up in those narrative passages. I referred
to them again and again during the filming. I remember them now as well or
better than the dialogue, some of which I have heard several dozen times. They
create a blueprint that is tighter than most screenplays - an atmosphere that is
so beautiful you're forced to follow.''

Tesich even contributed to the musical side of ''Four Friends.'' The composer
Elizabeth Swados, who wrote the score, recalls, ''He made some very specific
musical recommendations - the 'New World Symphony,' Ray Charles's rendition of
'Georgia on My Mind' and the popular music of the years through which the action
passes. There was also some Serbian music. What he wanted the film to sound like
was right there. So even though I created an original score, and thought I was
creating it fresh for the characters, really I was being manipulated all the
way.''

Four years ago, Steve Tesich had to fight long and hard for the classical-music
backdrop for ''Breaking Away.'' He doesn't have to fight so hard now. His
reputation as a collaborator who ''spills over'' is given proper respect.

This is partly a matter of talent, and partly Tesich's good luck in having
worked with the director Peter Yates. ''You have to understand,'' Yates says by
phone from London, ''that we're friends and we go way back to some of Steve's
earliest work at the American Place Theater.'' Yates directed one of Tesich's
early, brooding plays, ''One on One,'' a story about interracial couples. Later,
he got Tesich some rewrite work on a Barbra Streisand film for the producer Ray
Stark. Instead, Tesich talked Stark into putting up $6,000 for an original
screenplay, which turned out to be ''The Eagle of Naptown,'' about a boy with a
fantasy of being an Italian bicyclist who wins ''the big bike race.'' Stark
loved it. Yates loved it. No one wanted to finance it.

It became a sort of calling card for Tesich. It passed from hand to hand, from
producer to director, always eliciting a favorable response, always being passed
on. But at one of these meetings someone asked, ''Why don't you write something
else?'' Tesich spun out the barest outline of four college-town locals working
at a Dairy Queen. ''Everyone fell down loving it.'' However, Tesich's notes took
him so far afield that soon there wasn't a Dairy Queen in the story anymore,
just a family and some friends. Everybody loved it anyway, but again nobody
wanted to finance it. Yates suggested combining the two films. Tesich thought it
was a terrible idea but, needing money, he gave it a try.

When Tesich present ed the finished product, Yates loved it. And this time he
financed it. Gareth Wigan, an in fluential studio executive, with a push from
Sam Cohn, stood u p for the project at 20th Century-Fox, a project called
''Breaking Away.''

''You see the unique situation we were in?'' asks Yates. ''Here I was, working
with an old friend, not just any writer, on a project that we had developed very
much together. And Steve was the expert on everything! The location was the town
where he went to college. The backdrop was the bicycle racing which he'd done
and which I knew nothing about. And the characters were these people of his who,
I suspect, are real somewhere. I had to go to him for everything.''

It may have seemed strange to the people at 20th Century-Fox for a writer -
especially a first-time writer - to involve himself in casting, scoring and even
film editing (''Oh, he's marvelous at that,'' says Yates, ''but what is film
editing if not writing on film?''). But it became the box-office sleeper of
1979, and the Hollywood creed in such situations is, of course, let's do it
again.  ''We worked exactly the same way on 'Eyewitness,' '' Yates says.

Was the collaboration less intense when Tesich worked with Arthur Penn? Penn
laughs: ''I doubt it. We also were friends for a long time. But there's
something more important than that. There's a resonance. We sat up here for hour
after hour on the script for 'Four Friends,' pulling all this biographical stuff
out of ourselves. We discovered huge similarities. I'm a first-generation
American of immigrant parents. Talking about that, we decided to add on that
first scene in the film where Danilo arrives in America. We dredged up our first
sexual experiences, our relationships with women, our mothers, the way we felt
about the random violence of the 60's. We taught each other some things, which
is, I guess, what a really good collaboration is all about.''

The ''Garp'' collaboration has not been so easy. ''It is tough doing
adaptations, given the way I like to write,'' Tesich says.  ''Primarily, this is
because the idea of what the movie is or should be is formed in the director's
head. He's read the book.'' Tesich loses his ''atmospheric'' control.

''The World According to Garp,'' according to Tesich, is an endeavor that
probably never should have been started. Admitting that he is a poor rewriter
and an even worse adaptor, acknowledging that he is a highly personal and
idiosyncratic storyteller, nodding cautiously at the legion of ''Garp'' fans
poised for the kill should Tesich so muc h as alter a hair on Garp's head -
Tesich is hard pressed to te ll why he decided to do it.

''Well, actually,'' says George Roy Hill, director of ''Garp,'' ''at first, he
was very much against doing it. But I talked him into it.''

How?  ''Mostly,'' says Tesich, ''because I wanted to do a movie with George Roy
Hill. But when I read the book, several things struck me.''

One was Garp's life, so similar to Tesich's own. Another was the book's time
span, which takes Garp from birth to death, a period of 34 years. ''I'd always
wanted to do a movie with a long time span,'' Tesich says. ''A whole life was so
much the better.''

'' 'Garp' has an unusual structure,'' says Hill, pointing out something else
that may have appealed to Tesich. ''Because it is a whole life, you have to take
the highlights without making it too episodic. You don't have a conventional
dramatic construction. The ideas, which, by the way, are very much like Steve's
- search for the father, mother lust, anxiety amid optimism - all have to be
done in episodes that don't connect dramatically, but emotionally and
ideationally. The picture will succeed or fail on how well Tesich and I develop
those motifs.''

Hill was surprised at the speed of Tesich's work. ''He turned out an enormous
piece of work in two and a half months. We went through the book and selected
the elements we wanted to highlight and - bang! - he was back.''

The question on not a few lips: Has Tesich been faithful to ''Garp''? ''There
were a lot of surprises,'' says Hill, ''an awful lot. Most pleased me, although
we did go through three versions of the script.''

''I took more notes on 'Garp' than I ever took on anything else in my life,''
Tesich says. ''Yes, there are a lot of things in the movie that are not in the
book. But it was almost as if someone had given me the synopsis of the story and
played me a symphony and said, 'Here are the motifs. What do they do for you?'
''

What they did for Tesich was to reaffirm everything he had ever said before: ''
'Garp' says to me that life can be an adventure. That you must have a life
before you die. That you must dream and strive to make your dream a reality.
That anything is possible here. The only thing holding you back from your dream
is fear or laziness. It is a sin against yourself to have any regrets. That
coffin should hold only a dead body, not dead dreams.''

''My novel is going to be published,'' Tesi ch announces in the borrowed living
room. ''Random House. I've be en working on it forever. I didn't know how to
celebrate when I heard the news. It is something I've been wanting for 14 years.
I s tarted out as a novelist. I've written three of them, two dre adful, one
rejected so Iguess it was dreadful. This will be the first one published.''

Tesich has finished a script for Robert Redford; he's working on an idea for
Yates, and he is also developing a play. But all he'll talk about today is the
novel.

''There was no outline, but there were no notes either,'' he says.  ''I just
began it. In a way, I guess the first 100 pages are the notes.''

What's it about? The little things: ''The things that most people don't seem to
think are worthy of treatment. But they are the things that are important to me.
And when my work is good, I think I can make them important to others. Stay on
the bus; get off the bus.  Follow the girl; don't follow the girl. I think I can
go on forever about those fathers and sons and those points in your life when
change is in the wind and you have to know what the hell you're going to do with
yourself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of William Hurt in Sigourney Weaver photo of
Tesich and Peter Yates photo of Broadway production of 'Division St.' photo of
scene from 'Four Friends' photo of John Irving photo of scene from 'Breaking
Away' photo of Steve and Becky Tesich photo of Tesich as child in Yugoslavia

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Remembering Pearl Harbor

SECTION: Section 6; Page 94, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 93 words


I read William Zinsser's article ''Pearl Harbor: The Way It Was at Princeton''
(Dec. 6) with an insatiable curiosity, bred as a war baby raised on a steady
diet at home, in school and at the movies of the great American experience,
World War II.

This nostalgic remembrance by our elders formed the basis for my own, and many
of my contemporaries', subsequent service in Vietnam.  The irony is, 35 years
from now, or even next year, I wonder who will publish or want to read the war
memories of the Vietnam veteran.
PATRICK E. MARTIN, Mechanicsburg, Pa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Nonfiction in Brief

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1543 words


AGAINST THE GRAIN Southern Radicals and Prophets, 1929-59.  By Anthony P.
Dunbar.  Illustrated. 306 pp.  Charlottesville, Va.: The University Press of
Virginia. $16.95.

The vision and courage of the men and women who dedicated themselves to the
poorest of the poor in America's South in the 1930's shine through every page of
this moving history. Although his cast is large, Anthony P. Dunbar focuses
especially on two figures, Howard (Buck) Kester and Claude Williams. Kester was
a Socialist, close to Norman Thomas; Williams was a Marxist, close to the
Communists. Both belonged to the small group of Southern Christian preachers of
the ''radical gospel movement, which conceived that the world might be redeemed
not through man's good works but through the rising up of the poor.'' Out of
their labors was forged the Southern Tenant Farmers Union, which brought the
word sharecropper and all the misery that it connoted to the attention of the
nation.

Moved to action by a system that kept landless farmers in a state of near
peonage, the preacher-organizers soon found that economic justice in the South
could not be divorced from racial justice. Mr.  Dunbar tells how Southern-born
organizers who could not keep down the food taken at their first meals with
blacks then went on to risk their lives as ''nigger-lovers.'' Their objectives,
which seem mild today, were quite enough to get them ridden out of many a
Southern town - old-age pensions, workmen's compensation, collective bargaining,
unemployment insurance, the abolition of child labor, schools for the children
of farm workers and equal pay for equal work regardless of sex, race or
nationality.

They had their victories. But the powers of the Old South beat them back with a
combination of money, violence and political muscle. The respectable clergy, the
A.F.L. leadership, the big-wheel Democrats - all were wary of those who were
bent on shaking up the economic and social structure of the South. In the end,
the radical movement, which was remarkably peaceable given the provocations, was
riven by the national struggle over Communism. The Communist Party, typically,
was ready to turn the sharecroppers' movement to its own political ends, and the
hunters of Communists did not trouble to make nice distinctions among radicals.

Mr. Dunbar observes that the pressures of the 50's ''forced the issues of
economic equality and racial equality to become separate and pushed the civil
rights struggle in a direction that posed no challenge to the vital elements of
the American economic system.'' Still, if today that system is blessed by
amenities that seemed out of reach in the 30's, some credit must go to those who
had their eyes fixed on them all along.
THE UNWANTED SYMBOL American Foreign Policy, the Cold War, and Korea, 1945-1950.
By Charles M. Dobbs.  239 pp. Kent, Ohio: The Kent State University Press.
$18.50.

How did a rem ote country of no great strategic importanc e to the United States
become a critical testing point for American foreign policy? Charles M. Dobbs,
who addressed himself to that qu estion as agraduate student at Indiana
University, finds the answers largely in the inattention of Washington's
planners, the incompetence of its emissaries, the inanity of Congress, the
intransigence of the Russians and the intrigues of Syngman Rhee, the highly con
servative Korean nationalist who outmaneuvered his more moderate opp onents and
outplayed his Western patrons.

After World War II, when a liberated Korea was divided rather like Germany, with
American troops to the south of the 38th parallel and the Russians to the north
(and much closer to home), no one in Washington seemed to have any plans for the
country beyond a desire to get quit of it as fast as possible. It soon became
evident that the Russians did have a plan, to turn it into a puppet regime on
the order of East Germany. With Mao on the march, the Truman Administration
found itself under pressure from the ''Who gave away China?'' bloc in Congress
to make a stand in, of all places, Korea.  Suddenly, it became a ''foothold of
democracy in Asia'' and ''a symbol of American determination to resist Soviet
aggression.''

Beware of a foreign policy bearing symbols. Mr. Dobbs finds less villainy than
bad luck and confusion in America's portentous commitment to South Korea. He
analyzes lucidly the international and domestic pressures that left the United
States with ''a politically repressive regime to legitimize, a shaky economy to
maintain and rebuild, a strong insurgency movement to combat, a strategically
indefensible half-peninsula to hold.'' That indefensibility was acknowledged by
Secretary of State Dean Acheson, whose public exclusion of Korea from the
defense perimeter of United States interests in the area may have invited the
June 1950 assault from the north. By then, we were trapped. Washington's
obsession with Soviet aggression had overwhelmed even simple self-interest and
set this country on a path to ''25 tragic years of involvement on the Asian
mainland, contesting Asian anticolonialism but believing it was resisting
Soviet-directed Asian Communism.''

Mr. Dobbs does not quite say that we should not have fought back once the South
was attacked, but his book leaves us with an uncomfortable question: Would the
world be in a sorrier state than it is now if our leaders had decided that
Korea, and Vietnam, were not worth all that blood?
THE LANGUAGE OF CLOTHES By Alison Lurie.  Illustrated. 273 pp. New York: Random
House. $20.

Alison Lurie, best known for her novel ''The War Between the Tates,'' serves as
retail merchant for this engagingly illustrated volume about the uses of
clothing in Western society. The chapters are boutiques, with such motifs as
''Youth and Age,'' ''Fashion and Status,'' ''Male and Female,'' and the goods,
all honestly labeled, came from such accomplished designers as James Laver,
Quentin Bell, J.C. Flugel and Thorstein Veblen.

Miss Lurie's contribution, in addition to sorting and organizing other people's
creations, appears mainly in the form of droll observations and pithy asides,
especially about sex. After describing the many-layered costume inflicted on
Victorian women, she notes, ''Although she was so heavily armored against a
frontal assault, the Mid-Victorian woman was often readily accessible in another
direction, since she had no underpants.'' She reports that the compulsion to
change outfits each day seems to be strongest among women who work in offices,
''for whom the fact that a colleague arrives at work on Tuesday in the same
costume she was wearing on Monday is positive proof that she spent the
intervening night unexpectedly at somebody else's apartment.'' And it occurs to
her that ''the fashion pages of magazines such as Cosmopolitan now seem to
specialize in telling the career girl what to wear to charm the particular wrong
type of man who reads Playboy, while the editorial pages tell her how to cope
with the resulting psychic damage.''

Her assays at deeper interpretation are not by and large as shrewd. She tends to
overreach, for example, in connecting the present popularity of Western garb to
''the recent right-wing shift in United States politics.'' That sounds right
only to the extent that Ronald Reagan and Larry Hagman happen to look so natural
in boots and 10-gallon hat that they are being copied, as celebrities often are.
In an untypically tendentious spirit, she attributes the return of uncomfortable
shoes for women to an effort by somebody or other ''to handicap them in
professional competition with men.''

For the most part, however, the goods here are fashionable without being trendy,
the display is attractive, and Miss Lurie is anything but a pushy salesperson.
Her observation about the tendency of blue jeans to call attention to rounded
behinds may be applied, more appropriately, to her own elegant collection -
''What all this may mean is difficult to say.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAN OF MANY HATS PUTS ON A NEW ONE FOR THE PINELANDS

BYLINE: By ANTHONY DePALMA

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 1, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1726 words


MEDFORD RIC DAVIDGE, the new Federal appointee to the state's Pinelands
Commission, asks people to judge him by his performance, not his past.

Mr. Davidge, special assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Fish, Wildlife and
Parks of the Department of the Interior, was named to the commission last
November by James G. Watt, Secretary of the Interior. He is recognized as an
expert in Federal land acquisition and the effect that actions by state and
local governments have on private property rights.

His work in these fields, as well as on an Interior Department task force
looking into ways to protect valuable land without buying it, makes Mr. Davidge
ideally suited to sit on the 15-member Pinelands Commission, which oversees
development and protection of the largely wild, 1.1-million-acre pinelands
region.

It is, nontheless, difficult to overlook Mr. Davidge's past.  Before joining the
Interior Department last April, he was a dancer (he once performed in a
classical ballet for an audience of Eskimos in a remote Alaskan village), a
musician, an Army drill instructor and medic, a reporter, a leader of glacial
expeditions, a teacher, a chaplain's assistant, a dance instructor, an assistant
to Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska, and an air-traffic controller.

Mr. Davidge was shot at in the Dominican Republic and wounded in Vietnam. He
danced with Bob Hope and Ann-Margaret on a U.S.O. tour, supervised an Army
swimming pool in Korea, fought to transfer scholarship money from football to
the fine arts in California, organized 30,000 college students in Alaska into a
lobby and played a principal role in the ''sagebrush rebellion,'' in which
Western property owners united against further Federal land purchases.

''I put mys elf in challenging positions so I have time to rethink who I am and
what I think,'' said Mr. Davidge, who, at age 36, has now settled i nto a home
in Washington with his wife and two children.

He calls his appointment to the Pinelands Commission ''a hell of a challenge.''
But how does a former dancer, etc., get to be an Interior Department official
and a member of the Pinelands Commission? Mr.  Davidge's story is a long one,
but it boils down to two principal considerations.

''I spent 20 years of my life in the entertainment business, starting at age
5,'' he said in a recent interview in Burlington County community of Medford,
where the Pinelands Commission meets each month.

'I got tired of being hungry, and I wanted to make a living doing something that
I had some control over.'' Mr. Davidge said he also questioned what, as an
entertainer, he was contributing.  ''I was satisfied for a long time that my
music and choreography were significant contributions,'' he said, ''but I became
politically frustrated at the lack of attention paid to the arts, particularly
in the university system.''

In 1963, as a teen-ager just out of high school in San Fernando, Calif., Mr.
Davidge joined the Army. He left the service for good six years later after
asking himself the same kind of question: What kind of a contribution could he
make as a soldier?

Mr. Davidge said he believed strongly in the elected representative form of
government, and decided that it was the area in which he would concentrate.

Working in student government organizations at the University of Alaska brought
him quickly into the political field; in a state of 400,000 residents, a bloc of
30,000 is a potent political force.

For a while, Mr. Davidge continued pursuing his interest in fine arts, working
toward a bachelor's degree in t heater, with a minor in music. But after
graduation, he enrolled in a graduate program in public administration.

Now, several pounds heavier and sporting a full, but well-trimmed, beard, it is
hard to picture Mr. Davidge's ever having performed classical ballet.

It was during a two-year stint working with Senator Stevens that Mr. Davidge
first became closely involved in land-use issues. Senator Stevens had asked him
to prepare a study on land-acquisition policies, expecing the project to last a
month. It took more than three years.

''It was massive, monolithic,'' Mr. Davidge recalled. ''It took me three years
to understand what the scope of the problem really is.'' The land-protection
policies of the Federal Government now focus, according to Mr. Davidge, on ''how
to manage sensitive resources and how to manage the human use of those resources
without crossing the fine line into abuse.''

Even before being named to the Pinelands Commission, Mr. Davidge was familiar
with the debate over Federal legislation establishing the Pinelands National
Reserve and the unique partnership between Federal, state and local governments
that is trying to oversee the area.

When he first addressed his fellow commission members last November, Mr. Davidge
told them that he endorsed ''the concept of protecting nationally important
areas through the partnership of several levels of government and the private
sector.''

Despite some of the differences that have plagued implementation of the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan, the planning and zoning document that
sets development guidelines for the area, Mr. Davidge believes that the whole
concept is working quite well.

''It is very important to keep in mind that the plan is in existence only one
year,'' he said. ''If you match that up against the history of the pinelands,
it's relatively insignificant.''

Mr. Davidge favors giving pinelands communities more time to conform to the
master plan. So far, only three of the 52 towns have had their master plans
approved by the commission. The original conformance deadline passed last
Thursday.

What is taking place in southern New Jersey's seven pinelands counties is, Mr.
Davidge believes, a ''social revolution.'' The idea that the natural resources
of the pinelands - the bountiful Cohansey aquifer, the rich agricultural
acreage, the recreational and cultural resources - extend beyond the boundaries
of any single jurisdiction marks such a revolution, he said. That, he added,
will take some time to get usaed to.

Over the last few years, the entire state of Alaska has grappled with the issues
of protecting land while extracting valuable resources necessary for the state's
economy. Although he was not involved in these issues in anything but an
academic sense, Mr.  Davidge, who plans to return to Alaska after his work with
the ReaganAdministratio n, said he favored resolving the land-use issue ''in
oneway or anothe r so that people could get on with their lives.''

At the last commission meeting, Mr. Davidge appeared carrying a black plastic
case, the type used to carry a chain saw. He said it was a gift from
Commissioner Robert C. Shinn of Burlington, who sells the saws in his business.

''Because I was appointed by Jim Watt, people had certain expectations about my
personal philosophies,'' Mr. Davidge said.  ''Everyone wanted to know where my
chain saw and bulldozer were.''

Mr. Davidge said that his and Secretary Watt's views were not inconsistent with
those of people seeking to protect valuable land.  He said he felt that the
media had unfairly represented Mr. Watt's views and had done such a shameful job
of reporting his true actions that, as a personal protest, he (Mr. Davidge) was
refusing to pay his dues to Sigma Delta Chi, the national journalism fraternity
to which he has belonged since his school days.

''If the Secretary of the Interior was the man I read about in the papers, I
wouldn't work for him,'' Mr. Davidge said.  The misinformation about Secretary
Watt is nearly matched, in Mr.  Davidge's opinion, by misconceptions about the
Pinelands Comprehensive Plan as to what it does and does not do, how people are
affected by it and which appeals processes are available.

Many of those identified as opponents of the plan really are not, Mr. Davidge
said.  ''I have not met one person in Washington or in the pinelands who
advocates elimination of the commission, elimination of the plan and repeal of
the state and Federal laws,'' he said. ''But I have met those who are very
concerned with the application and interpretation of the laws. It gets down to a
question of degree.''

Being an outsider will help him act as a mediator in some of the commission's
thornier problems, Mr. Davidge said. He also feels that, by being in Washington,
he will be able to kee p the Secretary of the Interior informed of developments
in New Jers ey.

He can also let New Jersey officials know what is happening in Washington, Mr.
Davidge noted, although he is not optimistic about the chances for more Federal
funds to purchase sensitive pinelands tracts.

The Federal Government has much at stake in the Pinelands National Reserve, and
Mr. Davidge believes that the area can serve as a national model for land
preservation that provides ''eyes on the land'' resource management. This is
generally recognized as being the most efficient method.

Mr. Davidge said that, although he was certain that the Federal Government
should be involved in protecting the pinelands, he was not sure exactly why.

''When I ask myself if the pinelands are of national significance,'' he said,
''I wonder how a kid in Watts (in Los Angeles) feels about it. Or an income-tax
payer in Louisiana. Or a kid living in the ghetto in Atlanta.

''I don't know anybody who would say that Yosemite is not a national treasure,
but maybe that's because we all understand that it's beautiful and unique.

''What about the pinelands? I just don't know.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Connecticut Guide;
BENEFIT FOR POLAND

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 8, Column 6; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1339 words


Zbigniew Brzezinski, former national security adviser and now honorary chairman
of Arts Against Hunger, will speak at a reception from 5 to 7 P.M. on Jan. 26 in
the Old State House, 800 Main Street, Hartford. His talk will coincide with a
special exhibition and sale of art, on display until Jan. 29, to raise money to
send CARE food packages to Poland.

Among the pieces are a collection of posters from Warsaw, designed for museum
openings, concerts, jazz festivals and circuses, and priced at $12, which is the
cost of one CARE food parcel. Other works by Polish and American artists include
graphics, paintings and sculpture ranging from $20 to $150.

The exhibition is open from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily and from noon to 5 Sunday;
admission is free. However, there will be a $12 charge for the Brzezinski
reception. A half-million dollars is expected to be raised nationwide by Arts
Against Hunger in its effort to dispatch food packages to Poland. For more
information, call 522-6766.

LIFE WITH O'CASEY

Life with Sean O'Casey will be the subject of a talk by the late playwright's
wife, Eileen, who has been named the Lucille Lortel Distinguished Guest Lecturer
at the University of Bridgeport. Her talk will be given at 7:30 P.M. Thursday in
the Recital Hall of the Bernhard Center and again at a luncheon in the Tower
Room Friday.

Mrs. O'Casey has published two books on her turbulent marriage to the author of
''The Plough and the Stars'' and other plays, which helped save Dublin's Abbey
Theater from bankruptcy in the 1920's.

The O'Caseys' stormy relationship was marked by the death of a son from leukemia
and the revival of an old love affair that culminated in an abortion. However,
the couple's devotion was constant, and Mrs. O'Casey was at her husband's side
when he died in Torquay, England, in 1964.

For more information and luncheon reservations, call 576-4022.
FOUR NEW PLAYS

The first of four new plays to be performed in rotation opens Tuesday at the
Yale Repertory Theater in New Haven, and will run through Feb. 27. ''Beef, No
Chicken,'' by Derek Walcott, the only previously produced playwright of the
four, is a comedy set in an auto repair shop in Trinidad and Tobago.

Dare Clubb's ''Flash Floods'' was presented as a staged reading at the O'Neill
Theater Center's 1981 National Playwright's Conference.  It is described by a
Yale Repertory spokesman as ''a poetic tale of brutality and murder.'' Mr.
Clubb, who grew up in Montana, where his play is set, is a doctoral candidate in
dramaturgy at the Yale School of Drama.

''Going Over,'' by Stuart Browne, concerns recollections of World War I by a
Welsh coal miner 50 years after the armistice. Mr. Browne holds a Master of Arts
from Cambridge University in England and is a candidate for a Master of Fine
Arts in playwriting at the Yale School of Drama.

Terri Wagener, who won the International Drama Students' Playwriting Award at
the 1980 O'Neill Conference, is the author of ''The Man Who Could See Through
Time.'' Her play is a dialogue between a fading science professor and a budding
sculptor for whom he is a model.

Performance times are 8 P.M. weekdays and 8:30 P.M. Saturday, with 2 o'clock
matinees Wednesday and Saturday. Ticket prices range from $6.50 to $11.50. For
detailed schedule information and reservations, call 436-1600.

STAND-IN FOR MASSELOS

Last-minute substitutions when a musical artist cancels an engagement are hard
to come by, which accounts for the sighs of relief heard around the Stamford
Symphony Orchestra over obtaining the services of Claude Frank. The noted
pianist will appear at 8:30 P.M. Saturday in Westhill High School, filling in
for William Masselos, who is ill. He will perform the Brahms Piano Concerto No.
1 in D minor under the baton of Roger Nierenberg. Mendelssohn's ''Scotch''
Symphony No. 3 is also on the program.

Mr. Frank has performed with most of the major orchestras, including the New
York Philharmonic, the Cleveland and Philadelphia Orchestras, the Royal
Philharmonic, the Chicago Symphony and numerous chamber-music ensembles. He is
best known as an interpreter of Beethoven, whose 32 piano sonatas he recorded on
the RCA label, recordings which were cited as one of the year's 10 best by Time
magazine.

Tickets at $6 to $12.50 may be reserved by calling 322-5623.

ART AND MUSIC TO MIX

Interrelationship of the arts is receiving a lot of attention these days, most
recently in an exhibition called ''Soundings'' at the State University of New
York in Purchase and in experimental performances at Real Art Ways, Hartford.

In three weekly concert-lectures, Danielle Rice, curator of education at the
Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, will explore these relationships through the
wedding of pictures and objects in the museum collection and musical
performances of the same period.

At 3 P.M. today, Miss Rice will deal with the Baroque, focusing on Caravaggio,
Poussin, Van Dyck and Rubens. Denise Hamilton, Mary Ellen Jacobs and Jean Tai
make up a quartet supplying complementary music.

The program on Jan. 24 concerns art of the 18th and early 19th centuries,
including works by David, Delacroix and Boucher and music by the Wenlock String
Quartet. The final session, Jan. 31, will move through the Impressionists and
into the 20th century with Mondrian, Stuart Davis, Pollock and de Kooning,
accompanied by a contemporary jazz quartet whose members are Gene Bozzi, Thomas
Majesky, Tyler van Ostrand and Robert Gatzen.

Among the art works to be scrutinized in which sound and visual concepts are
actually combined is a sculpture by the Baschet Brothers. By dipping a finger in
a container of water and rubbing some glass rods the viewer may create sounds
that are directed and amplified by a curved metal plane.

''There are many contemporary artists who are breaking out of traditional
roles,'' said Miss Rice. ''They are not painters or musicians or sculptors; they
are working in all media toward the integration of all media. The conthe
integration of all media. The concert-lectures will try to show that there has
always been a relationship between the arts, but contemporary artists are more
concerned with it and are putting it to use.'' The sessions will be informal and
Miss Rice will field questions from the audience.

There is no charge, other than the $2 admission to the museum, or $1 for
students and the elderly. Call 278-2670 for more information.

2 'BARBERS' AVAILABLE

Two versions of ''The Barber of Seville'' will be presented by the Hartt Opera
Theater of the University of Hartford Thursday through Sunday in the Millard
Auditorium. The familiar Rossini score, directed by Nico Castel, a member of the
Metropolitan Opera Company, may be heard at 8 P.M. Thursday and Saturday.

The lesser-known opera by Giovanni Paisiello, staged by John Zei, will be
performed at 8 P.M. Friday and 2:30 P.M. Sunday. Both versions will be conducted
by Moshe Paranov. Settings tumes by Sue Lyons. Tickets are $11 and may be
reserved by calling 243-4442 from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. weekdays.

DIARY OF DANIEL BERRIGAN

Daniel Berrigan, activist and poet, winner of the Lamont Poetry Award in the
1960's, one of the Catonsville Nine and, more recently, one of the Ploughshares
Eight who protested the use of a nuclear plant in Pennsylvania, will read from
his ''Night Flight to Hanoi,'' the poetic diary of his trip to North Vietnam in
1968, at 7:30 P.M.  Wednesday in the New Haven Colony Historical Society, 114
Whitney Avenue. The reading is part of the Phoenix Poetry Series. Admission is
$2. Information: 484-2220.  Eleanor Charles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BONN'S 'VALIANT EFFORT' AGAINST WAR CRIMINALS

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 357 words


To the Editor:

While Tom Bowen's thesis of ''The Thwarting of Denazification'' (Op-Ed Jan. 9)
is generally correct, it is somewhat misleading because of a failure to
distinguish between denazification proper and prosecution of crime.

Oenazification meant purging those who had helped the Nazis to rule Germany,
such as civil servants, teachers, professors. Most of these had not participated
in criminal activity, and their accountability should have meant elimination
from office, so as not to be in a position to hamper the building of a successor
democracy.

The failure of the Western Allies' attempt to thus denazify West Germany was
pointed out as early as 1948 in my article ''The Fiasco of Denazification in
Germany'' in the Political Science Quarterly and has now been detailed in every
aspect by a German professor, Lutz Niethammer, in his ''Entnazifizierung in
Bayern'' (''Denazification in Bavaria'') (1972).

Prosecution for war crimes is a different matter. It is wrong to put chief blame
on the British for failure to do something about this.

Thus John McCloy, as American High Commissioner for Germany, pardoned industrial
leaders who had been found guilty of enslaving foreign labor (see Benjamin
Ferencz's account in his ''Less Than Slaves'' (1979)).

But the Federal Republic at least made a valiant effort to bring the holocaust
criminals to justice. True, many of the West German trials (from the one on
Auschwitz to the recent one on Majdanek) resulted in too lenient verdicts. But
at least an attempt was made to clear Germany of the legacy of a criminal
regime.

How many co untries have tried ''their very own'' after wars or after the dem
ise of a criminal regime? Not Americans after Vietnam (with the My Lai trial the
one and only exception); not the British, French or Bel gians after atrocities
committed against colonial populations; not the Russians after the atrocities of
the Stalin regime were r evealed.

The Nazi holocaust has been the crime of this century. But he who is free of any
kind of wartime or state criminality may throw the first stone.
JOHN H. HERZ, Scarsdale, N.Y., Jan. 9, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOR CRAVATH, LIFE AFTER I.B.M.

BYLINE: By DAVID M. MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1649 words


Sixty years ago Paul D. Cravath, the patriarch of one of Wall Street's most
prestigious law firms, described the qualities he looked for in the young men he
hired.

''Brilliant intellectual powers are not essential,'' he told an audience of
Harvard Law School students. ''Too much imagination, too much wit, too great
cleverness, too facile fluency, if not leavened by a sound sense of proportion,
are quite as likely to impede success as to promote it. The best clients are apt
to be afraid of those qualities.''

Cravath, Swaine & Moore has loosened and livened up considerably since then. But
for the International Business Machines Corporation, represented by Cravath for
13 tortuous years, the attractions of the firm remain the same. The traits that
Paul Cravath cherished - industry, precision, patience and perseverance -were
responsible, they say, for the dismissal of the Government's case against them
and their vindication in courts throughout the country.

''A firm like Cravath works almost compulsively, insisting on totally thorough
preparation and a willingness to sacrifice,'' said Nicholas deB. Katzenbach,
I.B.M.'s general counsel. ''They don't permit anyone to wing it.''

66 Million Pages

''We wouldn't have felt we had done our job if we had settled this case,'' said
a partner, Ronald S. Rolfe. ''Each of us came to Cravath because we thought it
was the best firm in the country. There was something beyond us; the Cravath
name drove us to places we wouldn't normally have gone.''

The I.B.M. cases - in which the United States Government and private parties,
including the Telex Corporation, the Greyhound Computer Corporation and
California Computer Products Inc., charged the computer giant with violating
Section 2 of the Sherman Act - produced more than 66 million pages of documents.
The Government action a lone took up 726 trial days and 104,0 00 pages of
transcript; the defense called 856 witnesses and cited 12 ,280 exhibits.

The mood is generally upbeat these days at Cravath's I.B.M. outpost in White
Plains, where dozens of lawyers have labored in total anonymity on the case for
as long as 10 years. There, the staff is busily engaged in the lawyerly
equivalent of striking the big top - deciding which materials to ''archive'' or
to ''access,'' stuffing records into boxes marked ''Confidential Waste,''
''Document Retention'' and ''Otherwise Disposable.''

But the I.B.M. cases, like any mammoth piece of litigation, did not come to
Cravath without cost. Fearful of getting buried in tedious, professionally
unrewarding work, many promising law school graduates stayed away from Cravath
recruiters. There were questions about the capacity of those who elected to work
on the case to handle smaller, more traditional trial matters. And the case
caused divisions within Cravath's own partnership. The firm now faces the task
of decompressing from what amounted to a 13-year long obsession with I.B.M.

'Big Shot in the Arm'

''It's true there have been great tensions i n the firm over this case, when ta
x, corporate and trusts partners spent weekends reading documents and taking
depositions,'' said Thomas D. Barr, the partner who led Crava th's effort for
I.B.M. ''But because so many people had a hand in thi s, it's a victory for the
firm - and a great big shot inthe arm for a lot of people.''

Although partners anticipate some logistical problems in redeploying the 20
associates working on the case, they said there would be plenty of work for them
to do. Even when Cravath was most consumed with I.B.M., the work never accounted
for more than 10 percent of the firm's annual earnings. Like most law firms,
Cravath has never disclosed its earnings. Among the firm's other clients are CBS
Inc., the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Time Inc., Chemical Bank, the
Nestle Company, the First Boston Corporation and the Shell Oil Company.

Cravath partners will not discuss the fees generated by their work for I.B.M.
The most conservative estimates put the figure at more than $50 million, the
largest in history though only one-fifth of the total expenses borne by the
company in its own defense.

''We might have been able to do it for a twentieth the amount,'' Mr. Katzenbach
said. ''But with the amount at stake you just could not afford to do it in any
way but the right way.''

Criticism of Antitrust Chiefs

Both Mr. Katzenbach and Mr. Barr say that United States v. I.B.M.  could have
been settled long ago had the Government been willing - or competent - to do so.

Mr. Barr was especially critical of the former antitrust division chiefs, Paul
Kauper and John Shenefield. Mr. Kauper, he said, ''didn't know what the I.B.M.
case was all about and had no desire to find out.'' He referred to Mr.
Shenefield, who served from 1977 to 1980, as ''a political four-flusher who had
no experience as a trial attorney.'' Mr. Shenefield had criticized I.B.M. and
its lawyers for slowing the progress of the case.

He would not comment, however, on Judge David N. Edelstein, who heard the case -
and tangled with Cravath lawyers - from its inception.

During the trial, Judge Edelstein compared certain Cravath lawyers to Sammy
Glick, the opportunistic hero of Budd Schulberg's ''What Makes Sammy Run.'' He
called Mr. Barr, among other things, ''a very spoiled brat,'' a ''bad boy'' and
a ''baby'' and accused him of turning the trial into ''a stevedore's brawl.''

In 1979, I.B.M. charged Judge Edelstein with taking ''virtually every measure
within his power to buttress and promote the prosecution and to restrict,
harass, and punish the defense,'' and sought, unsuccessfully, to remove him from
the case for bias.

An I.B.M. Subculture

Four Cravath lawyers were assigned to the I.B.M. case when word of the
Government's investigation of the company first leaked out in 1967. In the next
13 years, an entire subculture developed around the litigation, one that in many
ways ran counter to many of the firm's proudest traditions.

Always one of the toughest places on Wall Street to find work, Cravath had to
scramble to find recruits willing to subject themselves to the drudgery of
preparing so vast a case. In those instances in which the Cravath name no longer
sufficed, a variety of blandishments - free use of cars, summer homes in
Westchester County and bonuses of up to $10,000 - often did.

For the first time, furthermore, Cravath hired litigators from other law firms -
a practice once frowned upon by Paul Cravath, who thought it bad for employee
morale. Mr. Cravath's insistence that his lawyers be exposed to a variety of
cases to broaden their knowl edge of the law did not fare much better: While as
sociates working on the I.B.M. case were nominally free to move elsew here after
two-year stints, many believed such requests hurt thei r prospects at the firm.

''Most of us never had the guts to ask to be transferred,'' said one lawyer who
was involved in the litigation.

Case Was a Formative Experience

In American legal history, the Government's suit against I.B.M. may turn out to
be what Howard Hughes's ''Spruce Goose'' is in the annals of aviation: a
cumbersome curiosity. The evolution of a less activist Governmental policy on
antitrust enforcement and soaring legal costs make it unlikely there will ever
be another case of its magnitude.

''You won't see another case of this kind for a long time, just like you won't
see another Vietnam War for a long time,'' said David Boies, a Cravath partner.
For him, as for other partners nurtured on the case, this was one of the
formative experiences of a lifetime.

''It was not only the biggest antitrust case going, but the bi ggesttrial, and
we were into the guts of one of the most exciting companies in the most exciting
industry,'' said Mr. Boies, who began working on th e case eight months out of
Yale Law School, in 1967.  ''It's too si mple to say if it hadn't been for this
case there would have been ano ther one. Without I.B.M., we'd be different
lawyers and we'd be diffe rent people.''

Cravath's Transformation

The case transformed Cravath, long considered a ''corporate'' firm whose
speciality lay in negotiating transactions for its clients.  Since the beginning
of the case, the number of litigation partners - whose work revolves around
court cases - has grown from 6 to 18, most of whom are experienced at large case
litigation. The number of corporate partners has remained at 25 since 1968.

''We have developed a lot of techniques in using computer retrieval and
conducting a big case that we probably aren't even aware of yet,'' said Mr.
Barr. ''For us, it's just the normal thing.''

No one at Cravath seems especially concerned that its I.B.M.- trained lawyers
are any less versatile than litigators elsewhere. Mr. Barr pointed to Cravath's
role as defense counsel in the aborted trial of the Iranian hostages as evidence
that the litigation skills acquired on the case were readily transferrable.

Nor, they feel, will recruiting difficulties during the past decade have any
long-range impact on the firm.  ''Frankly, I think the firm is better off
without those people,'' said Mr. Boies. ''You can't do well here unless you want
to practice law and push the state of the legal art. If you want to try cases 9
to 5, this is not the place.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of members of the law firm Cravath, Swain & Moore

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PIRACY IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA

BYLINE: By PAMELA G. HOLLIE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 960 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Jan. 17


On Sept. 25 Burton T. Kyle, director of the Office of Ship Operations of the
Maritime Administration in Washington, sent out this advisory to international
fleet managers:

''Mariners are advised to use caution while transiting waters in the approaches
to Singapore, and especially the Strait of Malacca in the vicinity of Phillip
Channel, because of recent attacks on vessels by pirates.''

Stopping piracy, especially for Sin@gapore, now the second-largest port in the
world and the third-largest oil-refining center, is crucial, since the
city-state has based its economic plans in large part on the growth of shipping
and refining, both of which are threatened if pirates are allowed to interfere
with the orderly operation of shipping lanes or the safe anchorage of ships in
Singapore's harbor.

Over the past year, there have been 29 reported incidents of piracy in the
Phillip Channel, the narrow, five-mile sealane 13 miles south of Singapore, in
Indonesian waters. The channel is the only passage for ships going from west to
east through the Strait of Malacca into the South China Sea.

Motorized Method

Lurking in the waterways in the Riouw Archipelago, the pirates use fast
motorboats called prahu to pull alongside vessels in the channel, then use ropes
and grappling hooks to board the ships.

''Normally, there are about six men in the prahu,'' said Ong Eng Say, acting
superintendent of Singapore's Marine Police. ''One stays in the boat while the
others go on board the ship. Once on board, they go straight to the captain's
cabin and hold him up.''

The attacks come at night, or at the point when large ships have slowed to
negotiate the narrow passage of the Phillip Channel. If fully loaded, the ships
sit low in the water. Attack at this point is easy for pirates and the most
dangerous for the ship, said Captain Hartwig Maly, a representative of the Mobil
Shipping and Transporation Company.

''A collision or grounding in these narrow waterways could lead to a major
pollution disaster,'' he said.  A number of cases of piracy have occurred while
ships were at anchor. Last September, five men armed with long knives used
grappling hooks to board the 95,000-ton Konan Maru, anchored in sight of
Singapore's dramatic skyline.
Increased Countermeasures

Singapore, with the aid of the Malaysian and Indonesian governments, has stepped
up measures to fight piracy. In the past six weeks, the Singapore Marine Police
claim to have halted the growing incidence of piracy, although such companies as
the Mobil Oil Corporation, which was hit twice since last August, have
instituted their own measures, employing extra night watches and patrols. Crew
members are trained to use high-pressure streams of water from fire hoses to
repel pirates tryin g to board a ship .

Piracy in Southeast Asia has had a long and dishonorable history.  A thousand
years ago, pirates stalked tribute ships bound for China.  In the 1500's,
Portuguese trading vessels were favorite targets. In its modern and most
sophisticated form, piracy has been used to defraud companies and countries.

Last year, Indonesia's national oil company, Pertamina, uncovered a plot that
had cost the oil company millions of dollars in barrels of petroleum products
lost between Indonesian ports and Singaporean refineries.

Tanker captains claimed that raiders were boarding their ships off Sumatra and
siphoning off refined gasoline. The pirates turned out to be oil company
executives who had enlisted the help of crew members in a scheme to sell the
gasoline on the blackmarket.
A Plausible Plot

The Pertamina plot was believable, because, since the mid 1970's, Southeast
Asian waters have been teeming with fishermen-turnedpirates,
refugees-turned-pirates and enterprising young criminals wh o were branching
into to piracy. The waves of boat people, some of whom carried gold to finance
their new lives, encouraged a resurgence of piracy.

The United Nations high commissioner for refugees estimated that up to
one-quarter of the 1.2 million refugees who fled Vietnam had been attacked by
pirates. As the exodus slowed, pirates turned to other prey, including
supertankers and other British, Japanese and American vessels using major
shipping lanes.

Last August, pirates raided the 30,000-ton tanker Corsicana, a vessel chartered
by Mobil and bound for Jakarta from Singapore.

Robbing Crewmembers

The pirates took about $8,000 in cash and personal effects such as watches and
radios. A month later, pirates attacked the 80,000-ton Diana, a Japanese vessel
also under charter to Mobil, heading to Mobil's Ferndale, Calif., refinery.

''All the ships attacked are manned by officers and crew - civilians - who are
of course unarmed and defenseless when faced with armed pirates,'' said Captain
Mally, of Mobil.

But the fact remains that piracy of a supertanker may be easier than piracy of a
smaller ship. Because supertankers are highly automated, the crews are small,
often less than two dozen men. The more modern the ships, the more vulnerable
they are.

Thus far, no lives have been lost. The pirates only seem interested in cash and
watches - items that they can easily carry.  ''The pirates have only bothered
the crews,'' said Chan Kim Lim, executive secretary of the Singapore National
Shipowners Association. ''So far, the piracy has not involved a loss of cargo.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of Indonesia Detailed map of Indonesia

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ARMY AIDE IS SLAIN IN PARIS NEAR HIS HOME

BYLINE: By RICHARD EDER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 912 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 18


An American military attache was shot dead outside his home this morning by a
solitary gunman.  The killing of the attache, Lieut. Col. Charles Robert Ray,
came two months after the attempted shooting of Christian A. Chapman, the charge
d'affaires at the United States Embassy here. The police said the two attacks,
which they assumed were the work of a terrorist group, had ''a great
similarity,'' but they were not able to identify the group involved.
Mitterrand Calls It 'Dastardly'

In Beirut, a group calling itself the Lebanese Armed Revolutionary Faction said
it was responsible for Colonel Ray's death. The same group, about which little
is known, had also said it was responsible for the attempt on Mr. Chapman.

President Francois Mitterrand sent a telegram to the Unit ed StatesEmbassy calli
ng the killing ''dastardly'' and promising that the attack would be thoroughly
investigated. The United States Ambassador, E van Griffith Galbraith, who went
to Elysee Palace a few hours after t he shooting for a previously arranged lunch
with Mr.  Mitterrand, s aid he was ''revolted by the cold-blooded murder of
Colonel Ray.' '

Colonel Ray, 43 years old, had been stationed in Paris for 18 months. He was a
decorated Vietnam War veteran on his first assignment in the
intelligence-gathering job of assistant military attache.

Colonel Ray was killed at about 9 A.M. as he was walking to his car, which was
parked 100 yards from his apartment on the Boulevard Emile Augier in the
residential 16th Arrondissement. His wife, Sharon, was at home at the time; his
two children, Mark, 15, and Julie, 17, had left for school.

According to the police, who cited an unidentified witness, Colonel Ray was
approached by a man who pulled an automatic pistol and shot him once in the
forehead, killing him instantly. The gunman, described as short, poorly dressed
and with long hair, paused to examine his victim, who had toppled backward onto
the sidewalk. The gunman then walked briskly away.

Weapon Favored by Arab Gunmen

Marcel Leclerc, commissioner of the Criminal Brigade, said the assailant
appeared to be Middle Eastern. He cited the witness's description and the
weapon, a 7.65-millimeter pistol, which he said was much favored by gunmen from
Arab countries.

Commissioner Leclerc stressed the similarity between today's attack and the
attempt on Mr. Chapman, who was also attacked as he left his home in the
morning. Mr. Chapman's attacker used a 7.65-millimeter pistol. Mr. Chapman
managed to duck behind his car, and his assailant, after firing six shots, ran
off.

Treasury Secretary Well-Guarded

After the killing of Colonel Ray, two Marine guards lowered the flag at the
United States Embassy to half-staff. Shortly afterward, a heavily guarded
motorcade left the embassy, just off the Place de la Concorde, to take the
visiting Secretary of the Treasury, Donald T.  Regan, to the airport.

Mr. Regan had attended a meeting of finance ministers here and was on his way to
New York. Special security arrangements were made at Orly Airport; passengers
aboard Mr. Regan's Pan American World Airways flight were ordered to leave the
plane for individual checks, and the plane was searched.

Ambassador Galbraith, on his way to see President Mitterrand, expressed his
outrage and said: ''We carry on as he would have carried on. We weep for those
he left behind.''

'There Will Be Changes'

After the lunch, Mr. Galbraith said security would be increased at the emba ssy.
''We certainly are going to do all we can t o prevent any further attempts,'' he
said. ''There will be changes.  It is a question of whoit is and how far down
you extend the securit y measures, and obviously these had not gone far enough.
Colo nel Ray was not very active in public. He was attached to the mili tary
office at the embassy and was not a public man. It never oc curred to us that he
ransuch big risks.''

Embassy officials are pessimistic that the kind of attack made on Colonel Ray
can be prevented. After the attempt on Mr. Chapman in November, he was given
special protection, and special security arrangements were made for Mr.
Galbraith and for the United States delegates to Unesco and the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development.

''But there's no way we can protect all the counselors and first secretaries
round the clock,'' one official said. As one of four assistant military attaches
at the embassy, Colonel Ray was roughly equivalent to a first secretary.

Mr. Galbraith said he had no indication as to who was responsible for the
killing of Colonel Ray. Asked by a French reporter whether he thought the attack
could be linked to the foreign policy of the Reagan Administration, the
Ambassador replied, ''There are people in the world who have crazy and stupid
ideas which have nothing to do with President Reagan's policy.''

Was Born in New York

Colonel Ray was born on Sept. 14, 1938, in New York. After having graduated from
the University of Santa Clara in California with bachelor's and master's degrees
in history, he was commissioned in the Army in 1960.

In 1962 and 1963, he was a counterintelligence adviser to South Vietnamese
forces, Army records show. He returned to Vietnam three years later and served
as an intelligence officer based in Saigon.  His Army de co rations include the
Bronze Star with two oak-leaf clusters, the Army Commendation Medal with one
oak-leaf cluster and the Meritorio us Service Award.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of investigators examining body of slain American
military attache

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Market Place;
Analysts Differ Over E.D.S.

BYLINE: By Robert Metz

SECTION: Section D; Page 10, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 835 words


THE Electronic Data Systems Corporation is doing well at a time when some other
computer service companies are suffering in the recession.

Yet E.D.S. shares have declined with the rest of the market.  S elling as hi gh
as 25 in late December, they closed yesterday at 22, up 3/8.

E.D.S. first became popular with investors as a pioneer processor of Blue Cross,
Blue Shield, Medicaid and Medicare claims. Under its flamboyant founder, H. Ross
Perot, a former I.B.M. salesman, E.D.S.  enjoyed explosive growth from its
beginnings in 1962 until late in the decade.

By 1970, Mr. Perot was a billionaire on paper with almost 82 percent of one of
the hotter stocks on the Big Board. He then attempted a highly publicized rescue
of two ailing brokerage firms following the back-office paper crunch that nearly
wrecked Wall Street in the mid-1970's.

E.D.S. management then shifted attention to Mr. Perot's investment in the
floundering duPont-Walston brokerage business. By that time, the company had
become heavily dependent on a relatively small number of large contracts. The
loss of the duPont-Walston and Texas Blue Shield insurance contracts thereafter
brought flat earnings in 1974 and earnings setbacks in 1975 and 1976.

On his own, Mr. Perot became involved in a series of quasipolitical adventures,
including a spectacular but unsuccessful effort to fly a planeload of supplies
to American prisoners in Vietnam. And he thrust himself into the spotlight with
repeated efforts to secure their release.

In 1979, he inspired a commando-style raid on an Iranian prison that set free
two of his company's engineers and 11,000 other prisoners.

Mr. Perot has dipped into his fortune to finance his various Wall Street and
political rescues. At present, his holdings in E.D.S.  account for 53 percent of
the total and, with a share price at a level a third below its peak, his E.D.S.
holdings are worth roughly $325 million.

Some in Wall Street were relieved when Mr. Perot stepped aside in mid-1979 to
become chairman. He turned the shop over to a more conventional executive,
Morton H. Meyerson. As president, Mr.  Meyerson has broadened the customer base
and profits are up.

At this point, medical claims, life and casualty insurance account for slightly
less than half the revenues, while banks, credit unions, travel agencies,
petroleum companies and retail chains - the fastest-growing segment of the
business - make up 27 percent. The Government segment, a new market for E.D.S.,
accounts for 20 percent.

In a recent report, Stephen T. McClellan of Salomon Brothers forecast earnings
gains of at least 25 percent during the fiscal years ending June 30, 1982, and
1983. He regards the balance sheet as ''stalwart,'' with debt accounting for
only 11 percent of E.D.S.  capital.

He writes: ''E.D.S. has compiled a consistent growth record during the past five
years and has recorded average annual gains of 28 percent in revenue and 23
percent in net income. Return on equity is 25 percent.''

He added that in the next 18 months E.D.S. would bid on a ''large wave'' of new
contracts, including about 43 p ercent of all Medicaid processing done in the
United States.

''If the company obtains a fair share of this business,'' he said, ''earnings
growth will accelerate. Moreover, contracts that are scheduled to expire during
the next 12 months will have a modest effect on E.D.S.''

Perhaps because of lingering doubts about Mr. Perot's style, E.D.S. has ''weak
sponsorship'' in Wall Street despite its impressive record, Mr. McClellan said.
The shares carry a lower price/earnings multiple than either Automatic Data
Processing or Tymshare. Those two companies have suffered earnings setbacks and
slower growth rates. Both have weaker balance sheets and lower dividend yields
than E.D.S., Mr. McClellan added.

On the other hand, the Value Line Investment Survey said that investors could
not ''whip up'' much enthusiasm for ''expensive'' stocks such as E.D.S. in this
uncertain economy. Investors fear excessive volatility, though, as Value Line
notes, E.D.S. shares have not been especially volatile.

John J. McManus of Shearson/American Express is basically neutral on the stock.
''I still think the business is somewhat unpredictable,'' he said, with
occasional loss of contracts large enough to affect revenues and profits.

''But my real problem,'' he added, ''is that the company is still run as a
private concern. They don't tell you much. It is difficult to analyze E.D.S.
without spending an inordinate amount of time with their customers. Moreover,
they are getting increasing competition from Computer Sciences in health care.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 20, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CHILDREN'S RIGHTS, INCLUDING WALTER POLOVCHAK'S

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 288 words


To the Editor:

Your editorial is perplexing in its shortsightedness and alarming in its casual
attitude toward human rights.  Advocating the return of a 14-year-old emigre to
his parents in the Soviet Union is shortsighted because it neglects the obvious:
If an 18-year-old Walter decides to return to the Ukraine, there will be no
barriers in his way; if an 18-year-old Walter attempts to leave the Soviet
Union, the barriers will likely be insuperable, the Helsinki accords
notwithstanding. More disturbing, however, is your flippant disregard of human
and constitutional rights. Adolescence is not a bar to the exercise of
individual rights in our nation; the Supreme Court, in Tinker v. Des Moines
Independent Community School District, pronounced the First Amendment right of
students aged 13, 15 and 16 to wear armbands to school in protest of the Vietnam
War. The right to choose one's residence is another crucial pillar in our
pantheon of liberty.  Indeed, in th e Polovchak case it is the linchpin on which
all other rights will depend.

As Justice Douglas wrote in eloquent dissent in Wisconsin v. Yoder, dealing with
the religious rights of children: ''Where the child is mature enough to express
potentially conflicting desires, it would be an invasion of the child's rights
to permit such an imposition without canvassing his views.''

To forcibly return Walter Polovchak to the Soviet Union would be another in the
parade of enormities to which contemporary man has become accustomed. Whether
justified by parental rights, norms of international behavior or the cynical
cant of realpolitik, it would be an unforgivable act and an insult to our
constitutional tradition.
JEROME M. BALSAM, MARK TOBAK, CURT ROGG-MELTZER, New York, Jan. 7, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 20, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
KISSINGER VS. REAGAN

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 863 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 19


Former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger has published in the pages of The New
York Times and other major newspapers of the world a really tough criticism of
United States and NATO foreign policy.

He hesitated to do so for a long time, but the Polish crisis, and the reaction
to it by the Reagan Administration and the Western allies, apparently alarmed
and persuaded him to express in public what troubled him in private for months:
that maybe we were getting into deep trouble. And he decided to speak out, even
if this meant an open break with President Reagan and the Republican Party. For
example:

* ''I campaigned for Ronald Reagan,'' Mr. Kissinger said, ''... and continued to
believe that the Administration embodies the best chance for free peoples; that
its success is of vital importance for our country and those who depend on it.
And yet it is precisely its friends who have a duty to warn when a crisis like
Poland reveals fissures and uncertainties, that, if long continued, may become
unmanageable.''

* ''Freedom-loving Poles,'' Mr. Kissinger said, ''who looked West saw dithering
procrastination, sophisticated justification for impotence, rhetoric incapable
of rising to serious action. ...''

* ''The emptiness of the Western reaction to Poland,'' he wrote, ''underlines
and compounds the disarray of the Western alliance. ...  Europe's leaders have
little to be proud of. But neither have we put forward a clear signal. European
fecklessness is becoming an alibi.  It is not the sole cause of Western
difficulties.''

Obviously this public attack by Mr. Kissinger on the Reagan Administration and
the NATO alliance has irritated Washington, including Mr. Kissinger's old
buddies in the State Department, who admire him but think his criticism is
unfair. There is a tendency to believe here that he is sore because he was
identified with Richard Nixon, Vietnam and Watergate. Also, he was Nelson
Rockefeller's agent, no friend of the Republican conservatives. He was even
rejected by his liberal colleagues in the universities, some of whom thought he
was wrong on policy, and many of whom were envious of his position at the State
Department and the White House.

In addition there are others, more objective, who reject his suggestions about
what should be done about the Polish crisis.  ''I believe,'' Mr. Kissinger wrote
in The New York Times, ''it would ulti-mately have served the cause of
negotiations far better had the United States, early in the Polish crisis,
declared a moratorium on high-level contacts with the Soviet Union until martial
law was lifted in Poland, the Solidarity leaders were released, and the military
rulers began some form of dis cou rse with the Church and the Union.''

All the original premises of the Reagan foreign policy, Mr.  Kissinger insisted,
were being thrown overboard - linkage was the watchword in the early days of the
Reagan Administration; arms control, they said, had to follow a military buildup
in the West; high-level talks were to reflect careful preparation, and reward
restrained Soviet conduct - but all this was now being reversed.

Mr. Kissinger said much more, but his meaning was clear. He had launched a major
attack on the Administration's conduct of foreign policy, and has in effect
separated himself from the leaders of his own party with a public bill of
divorcement.

All this is understandable but regrettable, and was probably avoidable. he is no
doubt disappointed that he is no longer at the State Department or in the White
House. He knows better than Mr.  Reagan how many enemies he has in the press,
Congress and the universities. Therefore he understands why he was rejected by
the President. Wha t I think he doesn't understand is why nobody in the
Administratio n was even interested in talking to him seriously and privately
abo ut his own concerns.

It is not at all clear that his criticisms were entirely right. If the Reagan
Administration had summoned the allies to declare Poland in bankruptcy, and cut
off all high-level contacts with Moscow including the nuclear arms talks in
Geneva, and the grain shipments to the Soviet Union, and suggested that Henry
should negotiate this proposition - the chances are that there would have been a
crisis of major proportions in the alliance, even more than we have at the
present time.

Yet it's not clear why Mr. Kissinger and the White House need a public row with
one another at this critical point. On foreign policy, Mr. Reagan needs all the
help he can get, and he has a lot of help available to him from many leaders of
both the Republican and Democratic Parties, including Henry Kissinger.

Mr. Kissinger is only a symbol of the problem: President Reagan could get a lot
of help around this town, for he has many potential supporters he has just
forgotten to remember.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 20, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GEORGE VECSEYSports of The Times Bugner Loves His Manager

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words


JOE BUGNER's manager never goes to the gymnasium to watch him train. Joe
Bugner's manager has seen only one boxing match, lifetime. But every evening
when Joe Bugner trudges back from a hard day in the ring, his manager is waiting
in the hotel room.

''It can get bloody boring when you're sitting around a hotel room by
yourself,'' Bugner says. ''It's much better to be with somebody you love.''

Joe Bugner loves his manager, Marlene Carter Bugner, a journalist and his wife
of five years. When they met, the only fighting she had seen had been in Vietnam
and Israel - in wars, not boxing matches.

Marlene Bugner is now handling the business details of her husband's latest
comeback, at the age of 31. Like any good manager, like any good spouse, she was
infuriated yesterday when Gerry Cooney canceled the four-round exhibition he was
supposed to have fought with her husband Friday night.

''I have never in my life seen such a pampered fighter with so little ability
who gets so many injuries for no reason,'' she en unciated in a crisp Australian
accent.

She was upset because Bugner had counted on the exhibition as part of his tuneup
for a real fight with Michael Dokes in Las Vegas, Nev., March 15, the same night
Cooney will allegedly meet Larry Holmes. She has engineered both those
contracts, and she insists that the $10,000-plus expenses contract with Cooney
is valid despite his sudden withdrawal.

''Those are the only contracts I get,'' she says. ''I never understand managers
who blame the promoters f or bad contracts. How can a promoter rob you if you
know what you w ant? We are always well taken care of.''

It wasn't always that way, according to Joe Bugner, who says he was encouraged
by a past manager to fight Ron Lyle in 1977 despite having a broken bone in his
foot. Bugner, who once fought Joe Frazier and Muhammad Ali, says he lost
interest in boxing until he found a manager he could love.

In the grand tradition of boxing managers, Marlene Bugner says Joe is ''very
intelligent, in A-1 condition, 100 times the fighter he used to be.''

She adds: ''I'm making sure he takes the right vitamins and salt tablets because
he never knew anything about diet until we met. He looks at pictures of himself
at 19 and says he wished he knew then what he knows now.''

A few boxers occasionally listen to their wives about diet or business strategy,
but Marty Monroe is the only other contemporary heavyweight who considers his
wife to be his manager. Marlene Bugner wonders why it isn't done more often.

''Might as well keep the money in the family,'' she says.  She contends that she
has already introduced a revolutionary concept to Bugner's boxing career - a
contract. When she worked out a written agreement for his fight with Gilberto
Acuna in 1980, her husband asked: ''What's that? I never had one of those with
my other managers.''

Following Joe's introduction to a contract, Marlene had her own new experience:
watching her husband knock out Acuna in six rounds.  ''I wasn't worried about
Joe in the ring,'' she says. ''When he watches me play polo, he knows I know
what I'm doing. He told me what round he thought he would knock Acuna out, and
he did it.''

That knockout, in October 1980, was not totally characteristic of Bugner,
handsome, blond Hungarian emigre who usually fought defensively, as if
protecting his classic profile. After the disputed loss to Lyle, Bugner retired,
to spend more time with his new wife.

Joe and Marlene Bugner had pooled their five children from previous marriages:
three of hers, two of his. They have two homes in California and one in Rome,
and money was apparently not a problem, but, he says, ''I needed an outlet.''
His good looks and boxer's poise gained him roles in five British films, the
most memorable of which is ''Buddy Goes West,'' a kind of a Yorkshire-pudding
western.  He played a sheriff who tried to steal a gold mine. Even when making
movies, he would slip away to the gym to train.

''I could see he wanted to fight,'' Marlene Bugner recalls. ''We went to
California and signed with Harold Smith, who was one of the kindest, nicest
people I ever met. He paid us every penny we had coming.''

The problem was that Smith, whose real name was Ross Fields, may not have been
spending his own money. When Smith ran into legal problems that may keep him out
of boxing well into the 21st century, the Bugners waited for their contract to
run out, and began planning a major comeback last fall.

After passing a literal audition in a Las Vegas gym - in which television agents
inspected his workout -Bugner was signed to fight Cooney last December. He felt
good in training but suspected he was too good for his own good when he saw some
strangers inspecting his workout.

''I said, 'Marlene, you watch, there's not going to be a fight,' '' Bugner says.
''Sure enough, Cooney said he injured his back, and the fight was off, but I
noticed he went out discoing and boogying the same night.''

In some circles, those are fighting words. Even before Cooney's withdrawal
yesterday, Bugner was openly claiming that Cooney had ducked him last month in
order to protect his health for the lucrative March date with Holmes. Nothing
that happened yesterday changed the minds of Joe and Marlene Bugner.

Bugner was furious because he had spent the last week doing roadwork on
Manhattan's icy streets when he could have been running in California. Between
training sessions, he has been sharing a Manhattan hotel room with his manager.

In the old days, managers used to enforce a number of rules involving their
fighters, including the tradition that boxers should be celibate in the weeks
before the fight. Asked what his manager says about sex before a fight, Bu gner
used to quip: ''Oh, she insistson it.'' This week Bugner reported a new
development: ''My manager has bought a 10-pound metal chastity belt and made me
wear it. Only she knows the combination.''

The boxer says he is delighted that his wife has become his manager because
''We're all human beings, let's face it, and being stuck in a hotel room, you
either go out to dinner and get drunk or you get into mischief. There's no
chance of that now.''

The manager says: ''I have no problem divorcing being a wife and being a
manager. While he's in training, we g et a room with twin beds. It gives me more
time for my writing. I 've written two Harlequin novels under an assumed name.
I'm w orking on a third one this week.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 21, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM POST-MORTEM: DID ARMY ALTER FACTS?

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 702 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 20


In a 90-minute television program, CBS News asserts that there was an effort by
American intelligence officers to ''suppress and alter'' estimates of the size
and strength of Communist forces in Vietnam before the 1968 Tet offensive.

The program, which will be broadcast at 9:30 P.M. on Saturday, is based on
interviews with retired military intelligence officers and former Central
Intelligence Agency officers who were specialists on the Vietnam conflict.

Some of the former officers assert that efforts to report an increase in enemy
strength in 1966 and 1967 were blocked within the United States military
bureaucray in Saigon in order to prevent ''gloomy'' news reports that would
contradict official forecasts that the war was being won.

In the interviews, conducted by the correspondent Mike Wallace and by the
producer and reporter George Crile, these points were made:

- General William C. Westmoreland would become distressed and refuse to accept
or forward to Washington evidence that there had been an increase in the number
of Vietcong guerrillas.

- An ''arbitrary'' ceiling of 300,000 was placed on estimates of Vietcong
strength in 1967, and evidence to the contrary was suppressed.

- Estimates of the number of North Vietnamese Army troops infiltrating into
South Vietnam rose by about 100,000 in the five months before the offensive
began, but the new estimates were arbitrarily r educed and concealed from the
American public and Congress.

James Meacham, a former Navy commander, and Russell Cooley, a former Army
lieutenant colonel, reported that the American military bureaucracy in Saigon
had refused to pass on estimates of increased Nor th Vietnamese infiltration
before the Comm unists launched their Tet offensive.

They said that Daniel O. Graham, a retired Air Force lieutenant general, had
blocked the higher infiltration reports and ultimately ordered the destroyal of
some data in the intelligence computer used by the American command in Saigon.
General Graham had then been a colonel in charge of intelligence estimates at
the command's headquarters near Saigon.

General Graham, who was also interviewed for the taped broadcast, denied that he
had blocked infiltration reports, saying, ''I'm not that dumb.'' He added, ''I
never asked anybody to wipe out the computer's memory.''

General Westmoreland, who was also interviewed at length, accepted
responsibility for decisions to cease counting Vietcong ''selfdefense militia''
and political personnel among the guerrillas on the ground that they had no
''offensive capability'' and were not a significant military force. But he
denied any part in the arbitrary reduction estimates of enemy strength.

Joseph McChristian, a retired major general who had been General Westmoreland's
intelligence officer in 1966 and part of 1967, and Gaines Hawkins, a former
colonel who had been on his staff, said they had argued for a substantial
increase in the estimate of Vietcong strength. They said General Westmoreland
had rejected their plea for an increase in the official estimate of 285,000
Vietcong to reflect captured documents and other evidence.

In the interview, General McChristian said the arbitrary limits on enemy
strength estimates were a ''falsification of the facts'' and ''dishonorable.''

George Hamscher, who was then a lieutenant colonel working on enemy strength
estimates, said there was ''manipulation'' to keep intelligence evaluations
within totals that the command in Vietnam ''could live with.''

Colonel Hawkins said enemy strength estimates made by the United States military
command in Saigon in 1967 ''weren't worth anything.'' Mr. Crile, who directed
and produced the program, said Sam Adams, a former analyst for the C.I.A.
specializing in the Vietcong, had interested CBS News in the project and served
as a paid consultant for about six months. The interviews were conducted over a
period of about 12 months, Mr. Crile said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 21, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
THURSDAY, JANUARY 21, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 934 words


International
Israel has reassured the United States that it will not make attacks in Lebanon
unless there is a ''clear provocation'' from Palestinian or Syrian forces,
according to Israeli and Reagan Administration sources. The pledge was made,
they said, by Prime Minister Begin in a letter to President Reagan. (Page A1,
Column 1.)
Washington vetoed a resolution in the United Nations Security Council that
called for punishing Israel for annexing the Golan Heights.  (A13:1-3.)
A conciliatory stance by Moscow appeared to be indicated by Prime Minister
Nikolai A. Tikhonov. Speaking at a Kremlin luncheon, he said that Moscow ''does
not seek confrontation'' with Washington and was doing all it could ''to direct
the course of events into constructive dialogue.'' (A1:1-3.)
Poland's severe shortage of bread and flour was acknowledged by the martial law
regime, which announced measures designed to force farmers to sell grain to the
state. (A7:1.)
The U.S. military command in Saigon suppressed and altered estimates of the size
and strength of Communist forces before the 1968 Tet Offensive, according to
former American intelligence officers. In a TV program, they told CBS News that
the changes were made to prevent ''gloomy'' news reports from contradicting
official forecasts that the United States was winning the Vietnam War. (A9:1-3.)

National
Temporary rises in gasoline taxes as well as higher excise taxes on cigarettes,
whisky and wine but not beer will be sought by President Reagan, according to
Administration officials. They said he had made the final decisions on the new
budget. (A1:6.)
Massive new military spending is in prospect, according to Congressional
officials. They said that the Pentagon had recommended to President Reagan that
50 of the biggest cargo planes be bought to start a multibillion-dollar
transport program for the Rapid Deployment Force. (A1:2.)
Young men who failed to register on time for a possible draft have until Feb. 28
to sign up without fear of prosecution. Announcement of the grace period was
made by the director of Selective Service.  (A 14:3-5.)
Auto labor talks were suspended after negotiators for the United Automobile
Workers and General Motors and Ford failed to reach agreement on job security,
the size of wage and benefit concessions by the workers and the duration of a
new contract. But officials of G.M. and the union said that an agreement in
principle to link concessions by the workers to lower car prices would remain in
effect. (A1:3.)
Enforcing bans on the export of American technology to unfriendly countries is
extremely difficult. This is illustrated by the 1978 sale to Libya of 400
heavy-duty trucks. Libya guaranteed in writing that the vehicles would be used
only for agriculture, and the manufacturer argued that it would be very
difficult and expensive for Libya to modify the trucks for military use. Today,
the 400 trucks are hauling Soviet-made tanks in Libya. (A1:4-6.)
The President has been successful in persuading Congress to embrace his economic
policy in his first year in office but less successful with the economy itself.
The recession is one reason Democrats no longer worry about losing their House
majority next fall. However, most people say they believe that the Reagan
program will help the economy in the long run. (A1:4-5.)
At least three miners were killed and four were trapped and feared dead after an
explosion blackened a mountainside and hurled debris into treetops in
southeastern Kentucky. Rescue crews who had dug through the rubble for nine
hours said they believed there were no survivors. (A14:1-2.)
Two flight recorders were retrieved by Navy divers from the wreckage of the Air
Florida jetliner that crashed a week ago in the Potomac River in Washington,
killing 78 persons. The devices were reported to be in excellent condition.
(A14:1-3.)
Metropolitan
An outside-jail work progr am was confirmed by New York City officials. They
said that, for four months, i nmates from the Rikers Island complex had worked
part time in cleani ng and rehabilitating city parks. All the prisoners, they
said, wer e convicted of misdemeanors and sentenced to no more than 90 days in
jail. (A1:1-2.)
Frederick W. Richmond was rebuked by a State Supreme Court justice who voided a
$1 million fund voted to the Representative as a pension by a corporation he
controlled. The justice, Martin B.  Stecher, ruled that the money, payable over
10 years beginning in 1978, constituted ''an illegal gift of corporate assets.''
(B1:3-6.)
A Nazi concentration camp survivor who was slain in a Brooklyn robbery Monday
was buried after a funeral service in Flatbush. Sol David, a 67-year-old retired
tailor from Czechoslovakia, was murdered in a playground in Canarsie as he was
going home after a day of baby-sitting with his grandchildren a few blocks away.
(B1:2-3.)
Minor subjects at two major schools in New York City are stirring a controversy.
Board of Education officials have directed the academic high schools Stuyvesant
and Bronx Science to give added importance to such subjects as music, art and
drafting. The new policy is opposed by many students and faculty members.
(B3:2-3.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN FORCED BY EVENTS ABROAD TO TEMPER HIS HARD LINE POLICIES;
Reagan's First Year Fourth of six articles.

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2360 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 21


In his first year in office, President Reagan has found it hard to translate the
tough anti-Soviet oratory of his campaign into a consistent foreign policy and
has had to moderate, reshape or even defer some early objectives because of
frustrating realities abroad. Except for his one major initiative, on reducing
nuclear arms in Europe, the President has not displayed the personal
involvement, enthusiasm, conviction or sure sense of command in foreign affairs
that has characterized his economic program or his legislative disputes with
Congress.

By leaving leadership to others, he has suffered the price of public disarray in
the eyes of the Washington political community.  Even his recent appointment of
William P. Clark, an old friend, as national security advise r may not resolve
high-level policy disputes or impose the coherent policy that appears to have
eluded the Administratio n in the last year.

President Carter's policies on human rights, the spread of nuclear technology,
economic relations between developed and developing nations and limiting arms
sales to the third world have been set aside or given lower priority as the
Republicans emphasized security arrangements and improving relations with
pro-American governments in the third world. But events abroad have often
hampered the Administration's plans.

The crisis in Poland, a test case of the Administration's global anti-Soviet
stand, illustrates the obstacles and the pragmatic evolution of foreign policy
over the last year.

The strong impulse of the President and top advisers like Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. and Secretary of Defense Caspar W.  Weinberger is to make
the Soviet Union pay heavily for the repression in Poland. But the reluctance of
Western Europe to join in forceful sanctions and concern for domestic
repercussions have made the Administration moderate its position and move more
slowly than it prefers.

So frustrated was Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, chief United States delegate to the
United Nations, that she reportedly grumbled about resigning because of what she
saw as the ''soft'' line on Poland, although she said later that she had never
had any intention of leaving.

Elsewhere, too, reality has forced adjustments and compromises that have irked
ideological conservatives. Many are angry that President Reagan has continued
draft registration and abided by President Carter's arms agreement with Moscow,
though Mr. Reagan attacked both policies in the campaign.

A year ago, Mr. Reagan and his aides took office with the singleminded intention
of offsetting and gradually rolling back Soviet power, minimizing regional
issues, as they built up the American strategic arsenal and pushed to reassert
American influence abroad.

With some success, they have stepped up military spending; refurbished ties to
regional friends like Pakistan and Saudi Arabia through new arms aid; warmed
relations with right-wing Governments in Argentina, Brazil and Chile, and tried
to draw the line against pro-Soviet moves in Central America.

In the Middle East, their plan was to form a ''strategic consensus'' of Israel
and moderate Arab countries to help contain Soviet aspirations. In Europe, they
believed that a strong American lead would inspire willingness to share the
costs of opposing Moscow, both militarily and politically.

Reagan's Hopes Are Dampened

But in the Middle East, Arab-Israeli tensions have confounded the
Administration's hopes for an anti-Soviet grouping. In Latin America, fears in
the United States of an incipient Vietnam curbed any plans for military
involvement in El Salvador beyond about 50 training officers and caused the
White House to soft-pedal the issue. In Asia, continuing arms sales to Taiwan
have slowed the effort for broader cooperation with Peking.

In Europe, public demonstrations against the scheduled deployment of 572
American medium-range missiles on the Continent speeded Washington's entry into
arms talks with the R ussians and prompted Mr.Reagan's proposal Nov. 18 to scrap
the Americ an missiles if Moscow pulls back its own growing European missile f
orce.

It was the President's boldest, most successful diplomatic stroke.  It threw the
Soviet Union on the propaganda defensive, seemed to stem a divisive trend in the
Atlantic alliance and cooled European comment about the tough-talking ''cowboy
President.''

But now, new differences, especially with Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of West
Germany, over how to react to the crackdown in Poland have reduced the impact of
the Administration's economic sanctions against Poland and the Soviet Union.

Two Approaches to Policy

Behind the tactical differences, moreover, are more fundamental disagreements
over how to deal with the Soviet Union and how to achieve Western security. The
Reagan Administration is prepared for confrontation with the Kremlin, while Mr.
Schmidt, still favoring detente, sees German security served by protecting
East-West trade and political ties.

Inside the Administration, two conflicting policy schools emerged over this
issue.  Some officials, like Mr. Weinberger, Mrs. Kirkpatrick and William J.
Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, have reportedly pressed for sharper
sanctions, including the threat to declare Poland in default of its debts and
risk disruption of most East-West trade.  They tend to favor ''global
unilateralism'' - going it alone - on issues where other Western allies are not
ready to move together.

Another gro up, the ''multilateralists,'' including Mr. Haig, Treasury Secr
etary Donald T. Regan and Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige, hav e advocated
the more moderate approach of the limited sanctions ado pted so far. They want
to keep Washington in step with Western Europ e, arguing that going it alone
will not work and that tougher econo mic sanctions could have domestic economic
and political con sequences.

''It's a classic example of where Reagan philosophies begin to collide with each
other, of where the President's hard line against the Soviets collides with his
economic goals at home,'' one policy maker said. ''For if we really want to
punish the Russians with a grain embargo, for example, we wind up by punishing
ourselves.''

It took nearly a month's patient nudging by Mr. Haig to get the Council of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization on Jan. 11 to issue a collective denunciation
of the Soviet Union, accusing it of actively supporting repression in Poland and
warning that Western Europe might join in the American sanctions. Mr. Haig urged
more action to let the Russians ''know that there can be negative or positive
consequences, depending on their conduct.''

The Administration itself stands accused of inconsistency.  Conservative critics
like the columnist George F. Will chastise it for allowing huge grain sales to
the Soviet Union; resuming the nuclear arms talks in Geneva; planning for Mr.
Haig to meet with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko of the Soviet Union in
Geneva next week, and even talking of a meeting this year between President
Reagan and Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader. Ideological conservatives see
a pragmatic retreat from the hard line taken in the Presidential campaign.

''This Administration evidently loves commerce more than it loathes Communism,''
Mr. Will charged. Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger accused the
President of backtracking from his earlier insistence on linking American
diplomacy to Soviet behavior and on carefully preparing for summit talks. This
weekend the Committee for the Free World is providing a forum in Washington for
further conservative critiques of the Reagan foreign policy.

As if responding to hard-line critics, the Administration said today that it was
cutting Mr. Haig's meeting with Mr. Gromyko next week from two days to one;
playing down the possibility of a Reagan-Brezhnev meeting; shying away from
announcing a start of strategic arms talks, and planning to focus on Soviet
responsibility for martial rule in Poland.

A Record $208 Billion for Arms

The President has kept closer to campaign promises on military issues,
prevailing whenever challenged by Congress. He won approval last month of a
record $208 billion military appropriations bill and will probably ask for $245
billion for next year.

In the process, he successfully defended plans to build the B-1 bomber and to
place the MX missiles in improved but existing silos rather than in a mobile
system. He beat back opposition to his $8.5 billion arms package for Saudi
Arabia and got an $11.5 billion foreign aid bill.

The military budgets are the first installments of the $1.5 trillion, five-year
Reagan-Weinberger military program, reflecting an increase of $158 billion above
the Carter levels. This surge has already tilte d budget priorities, and as it g
athers momentum in the mid-1980's, it will spur the arms industry wh ile other
sectors and regions hit by the recession lag. It is also affecting foreign
perceptions of American strength.

''In this Administration, the U.S. has changed course dramatically and is now a
far more reliable ally,'' Mr. Weinberger said. ''The Europeans and Japanese and
others know we are decreasing domestic spending and increasing military
spending.''
Questions From Democrats

Some Democrats, such as Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, a specialist on military
issues, applaud the direction of Reagan arms policy. But they question whether
the President can sustain Congressional support for his ambitious buildup and
whether there is enough money even in Reagan military budgets to finance all the
expensive weapons envisaged. They also ask whether the United States can still
afford to man and finance protection of Europe, Asia and the Persian Gulf region
or whether it must soon make hard choices about trimming back foreign
commitments.

''There is a very large gap between the programs they've outlined and the
dollars they have earmarked,'' Senator Nunn said. ''I can't see, for example,
how they hope to go from 475 ships to a 600-ship Navy by 1990, as they claim.''

Increasing reliance on the Navy hints at Secretary Weinberger's inclination to
project American power at sea if the allies do not support a major Western
buildup in Europe. The Pentagon has increased funds to base cruise missiles at
sea, for example, in case the arms talks with Moscow fai l and European
governments balk at accepting land-based Am erican missiles.

In the third world, the global rivalry with the Soviet Union has taken priority
over human rights and the spread of nuclear technology. The shift in the Reagan
approach from President Carter's policies is typified by the $3.2 billion,
six-year military and economic aid package with Pakistan signed last September.

''The Carter Administration told the Pakistanis that there would be no military
aid unless they improved their human rights record and stopped their nuclear
program,'' said one policy maker in the Reagan Administration. ''We concluded
that you couldn't persuade the Pakistanis to give up their nuclear program by
denying them conventioned weapons. We set out to be more reliable partners.''

This approach was reinforced by the arms package for Saudi Arabia; the sale of
F-16 jets to Venezuela; the Administration's declared willingness to sell
weapons to China, and its continued F-5E jet deliveries to Taiwan; its pressures
on Japan to do more in the military sphere, and continuing heavy arms supplies
to Israel and Egypt.

The Administration has broadened its Caribbean policy, initially focusing on
militarily countering leftist guerrillas in El Salvador but later proposing a
regional economic program as well. In Africa, Reagan Administration diplomacy
has run into a stumbling block in seeking withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola
as part of a political settlement in South-West Africa, or Namibia, that will
satisfy South Africa.

In the Middle East, more than any other region, the Administration has met
frustration. Sharp tensions between Israel and Saudi Arabia have dashed hopes of
forging an anti-Soviet consensus, and Mr. Reagan has yet to establish a workable
relationship with Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel.

Each time the two Governments paper over their squabbles, differences erupt
again. While the Reagan Administration pursues the belief that American and
Israeli interests are both served by accommodation with moderate Arabs, the
Begin Government has reacted angrily to Washington's arms sales to Saudi Arabia
and its favorable reaction to Saudi negotiating terms. At times Israel has
seemed bent on disrupting American links to moderate Arabs.

Many diplomats now fear that time is running out on the Camp David process and
that it will end, perhaps after the scheduled Israeli withdrawal from Sinai on
April 25, without achieving a full Arab-Israeli peace.

Lately, Secretary of State Haig has appeared on the verge of undertaking
eleventh-hour diplomacy to push for agreement by Egypt and Israel on Palestinian
self-rule. But few experienced diplomats see much chance of substantial
agreement by late April. After that, many suspect that Egypt will move back
toward the other Arab countries.

----

Tomorrow: Deregulation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Jeane J. Kirkpatrick (Page A8) Photo of
Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Page A8) Photo of Casper W. Weinberger (Page A8)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA IS AT PRESENT 'NOT IMPORTANT' TO THE U.S.

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 613 words


To the Editor:

In his Jan. 10 Op-Ed article, Richard Holbrooke exaggerates the difficulties in
U.S.-Chinese relations and worries unnecessarily about Peking's reactions to
American relations with Taipei as well as America's ability to deal with those
reactions. resident Reagan has long stated his intent to carry out the Taiwan
Relations Act while continuing to improve relations with the People's Republic
of China, and he has done both: aircraft will be sold to Taipei, and Peking has
assurance that it, too, can buy modern weapons. The Administration has tried to
deal with both Chinese states even handedly and should continue to do so.

There are two Chinese states, both sovereign, each claiming to represent the
territories controlled by the other. When Peking's leaders agreed to normalize
relations with the United States, they also implicitly accepted the Taiwan
Relations Act. They did not like it, but they have lived with it.

If this Administration and future administrations will honor the Taiwan
Relations Act and treat issues such as Taiwan's defense separately from issues
related to China and other countries, Peking will continue to accept that state
of affairs and live with it. It has no choice. Downgrading relations with the
U.S. harms its interests far more than it does those of the U.S.

Why? Because China at this time is not important to the United States. Mr.
Holbrooke's essay rests upon the assumption that it is.  Four seemingly powerful
reasons are usually advanced to show how indispensable China is to U.S. foreign
policy:

* It serves as an important counterweight to the Soviet Union.  This is patently
wrong, as demonstrated by Moscow's expansionism in Afghanistan and Vietnam and
its accelerated military, especially naval, buildup in the Soviet Far East since
1978. Instead of containing the Soviet Union, China has merely encouraged its
expansion in Asia and provoked its buildup in Northeast Asia.

* It holds down huge numbers of Soviet troops and armor on its northern
frontier, thus relieving tremendous pressure on NATO's flank. There is no
evidence for this. On the contrary, much of the recent buildup came from
garrisons deep in the Soviet Union, and any relaxation of Sino-Soviet border
tensions would merely mean returning those troops and armor to garrison duty.

* It will become a powerful modern state within two decades and therefore must
be taken seriously. There is no evidence that China will modernize in this
century or even in the next. Its domestic problems are legion, and it will be
fortunate indeed if it can avoid chun-fa, disintegration into warring states,
which has occurred so often in its history.

* It can be depended on to become a firm ally and friend of the U.S. There is no
assurance that this will ever happen. China's Marxist-Leninist-Maoist leaders
view the world as divided into three tiers: the competing superpowers (U.S. and
U.S.S.R.), developed countries and underdeveloped countries. In having opted fo
r alliance with the Unit ed States against the Soviet Union, they are merely
applying a un ited-front strategy, which they could change at any time.

So the four arguments dissolve into myths. Still, the skill and patience
Holbrooke calls for is good advice, especially when dealing with issues basic to
both China's and our national security. However, it is up to Peking, n ot
Washington, to show the restraint Holbrooke says is necessary. Washington need
only treat issues related to Taipei and to Peking on separate tracks.  RAMON H.
MYERS Stanfor d, Calif., Jan. 18, 1982 The writer is a senior fellow at Stanford
University's Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'Fifth of July' Will Close Sunday After Long Run

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 163 words


''Fifth of July,'' the hit play by Lanford Wilson, will end its run at the New
Apollo Theater, 234 West 43d Street, after this Sunday's matinee. The play,
which opened on Nov. 5, 1980, will have given 511 performances and nine
previews.

The cast of ''Fifth of July'' is headed by Joseph Bottoms as Kenneth Talley Jr.,
a crippled Vietnam veteran, and Laraine Newman as Gwen Landis, a copper heiress
turned rock star. Others in the cast are Amy Wright, Joyce Reehling, Jonathan
Hogan, Ruby Holbrook, Tom McBride and Danton Stone.

Christopher Reeve starred as Kenneth Talley in the original cast.  Others who
have played the role are Richard Thomas, Michael O'Keefe and Timothy Bottoms.

Swoosie Kurtz, who originated the role of Gwen, won a Tony award as well as th e
O uter Critics' Circle and Drama Desk awards for her portrayal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV Weekend;
SUPER BOWL, DRUG WAR, MICKEY ROONEY SERIES

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words


THIS is the weekend, in case you hadn't heard, of football's Super Bowl, always
one of the most watched television attractions of the year. The 16th annual
confrontation will have the San Francisco 49ers facing the Cincinnati Bengals at
the Pontiac Silverdome in Michigan. Sunday's presentation on CBS-TV will begin
at 2:30 P.M.  with assorted reports and commentaries. The game itself gets under
way at about 4.

This seems to be a busy period for news documentaries, perhaps because they
nearly always get low ratings and the networks want to get them out of the way
before the Nielsen national ''sweeps'' period begins in a couple of weeks, the
time when ratings are used to determine the advertising rates of local stations.
In any event, the news departments are suddenly on prominent display, beginning
tonight at 10 with an NBC News production, ''An American Profile: The Narcs,''
produced by Sy Pearlman.

The network describes the program as ''the first in a series of special American
Profile broadcasts in which Tom Brokaw will focus on people from all walks of
life who work under extremely diffic ult circumstances but rarely receive the
recognit ion and acclaim they deserve.'' Mr. Brokaw recently left his chore s as
host on the ''Today'' show and will soon become a co-anch or, with Roger Mudd,
of the ''NBC Nightly News.''

Mr. Brokaw and two camera crews spent six weeks in Florida, interviewing and
watching six members of the Dade County Narcotics Squad. The squad happens to
police the busiest drug-traffic area in the country but, as Mr. Brokaw notes,
they are rewarded with little more than long hours, low pay and a continuing
strain on their family lives. More to the point, after runinng into innumerable
job frustrations, from inadequate manpower and equipment to what they view as
laws protecting the criminals, they ask, ''Does anybody care?.''

The NBC team follows the ''narcs'' on some raids and dealing setups, finding
assorted drug pushers, mostly Spanish-speaking, and huge amounts of marijuana,
cocaine and cash, stuffed like fake Monopoly money into bags. In a rare personal
moment, one of the police officers tells how his daughter used to be beaten up
in school simply because her father was a despised ''narc.''

In the end, Mr. Brokaw says that the drug trade is enormous because of public
attitudes: ''An increasing number of Americans are more concerned about getting
a steady supply of narcotics than about good law enforcement, and too many other
Americans are just indifferent.''

On the new weekly series front, NBC is offering Mickey Rooney in ''One of the
Boys'' tomorrow night at 8. This is the concept that takes up the cause of
elderly persons far too perky to be put away in retirement homes. Mr. Rooney
plays 66-year-old Oliver Nugent, who has moved into an apartment with two young
college students, his nephew Adam (Dana Carvey) and Adam's friend Jonathan
(Nathan Lane).  Evidently the original first episode has been scratched, leaving
certain key plot developments hazy, but I am told that the opening credits will
contain footage, both live and animated, showing how Mr. Nugent managed to
finagle his way onto a college campus.

That leaves Mr. Rooney lovably expending more energy than an oil country's best
customer. He jogs, he dances a jig, he goes into contortions t rying to maneuver
through bookstore aisles. He even doesshamelessly h oary comedy routines.
Preparing a lamb stew, for instance, he opens a bottle of wine and carefully
pours some into a measuring cup . He then pours the rest of the bottle into the
stew.

This episode's plot has something to do with Mr. Nugent's efforts to lose
weight. But that's merely the peg on which to hang the routines, most of them
predictable. His grandson Adam is protective.  Jonathan is charmingly sarcastic.
Mrs. Green (Francine Beers), the landlady, plies Mr. Nugent with chocolate cakes
(''You're chubby now, so you'll be a little chubbier -who'll notice?''). His new
friend Bernard (Scatman Crothers) is also proving that aging can be fun. It all
passes by breezily enough, and Mr. Rooney's personality adds a special glow that
could keep this sitcom around for a while.

Back with the documentaries, Saturday at 9:30 CBS News has a production titled
''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' With George Crile as
reporter-producer and Mike Wallace as correspondent, the 90-minute program
provides an explanation to what is described as one of the great mysteries of
the Vietnam war: ''Why, for so long, our Government apparently believed, and
wanted all of us to believe, that we were winning the war.''

At the outset, Mr. Wallace announces: ''Tonight we are going to present evidence
of what we have come to believe was a conscious effort, indeed a conspiracy, at
the highest levels of American military intelligence, to suppress and alter
critical intelligence on the enemy in the year leading up to the Tet offensive''
in January, 1968. CBS News obtained its material from Sam Adams, a former C.I.A.
analyst who served as a paid consultant for the documentary.

The details are too numerous and complicated to enumerate completely in this
column but, in essence, the program charges that some of America's highest
military and intelligence officials falsified data and lied about the ''nature
and size of the enemy we were facing.'' In interviews, several aides of Gen.
William C.  Westmoreland, then Army Chief of Staff, concede that, under orders,
they participated in the suppression of certain facts. The general himself
appears on camera, at times bristling under the barrage of Mr. Wallace's
questions.

General Westmoreland still insists that the enemy was virtually destroyed at
Tet, but Mr. Wallace concludes: ''Be that as it may, the fighting in Vietnam
went on for seven more years after the Tet offensive. Twenty-seven thousand more
American soldiers were killed.  Over 100,000 more were wounded. And on April 30,
l975, that same enemy entered Saigon once again. Only this time, it was called
Ho Chi Minh City.'' Howard Stringer was the executive producer, Andrew Lack the
senior producer, for this report.

On Sunday at 10 P.M., the first of several television presentations marking the
100th anniversary of Franklin Delano Roosevelt's birth on Jan. 30 will be
broadcast by NBC News. ''Nothing to Fear - The Legacy of F.D.R.'' uses archiva l
material and recent interviews to compile a ''reflective analysis '' on the
charismatic and still controversial President who saw thi s country through the
Depression and most of World War II. John Har t is the reporter, Anthony Potter
the executive producer. A revi ew will appear in Sunday's Arts and Leisure
section.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mickey Rooney

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 391 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 23, 1982 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

'FRONT LINE,' WAR CAMERAMAN

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 523 words


Neil Davis is an unusual kind of war hero: he's one of the intrepid cameramen
who helped bring the Vietnam War into America's living rooms, at enormous
personal risk. Mr. Davis spent 11 years in Indochina, intimately involved in the
events that he recorded on film.

''Front Line,'' which will be shown free starting today at the Public Theater,
is a fine documentary by David Bradbury that has Mr. Davis as its focus. It
examines the many roles that a cameraman can play in wartime. The portrait that
emerges of Mr. Davis is one of a daredevil, an arbiter, a diplomat, a hero, even
a fighter. There were several occasions, Mr. Davis says, when he was forced to
join the soldiers he was filming and open fire on their enemies.

There were also times when he watched his friends die, and kept the camera
running; when h e tried to record what it was like to be attacked by helicopter;
when he watched Vietc ong tanks smash the gates of the presidential palace in
Saigon; when he turned his cameraon a man about to be executed in hopes of
dissuading the m an's captors. Most notoriously, there is the famous footage of
a captured man being shot through the head, point-blank, while the ca mera
observes the whole process.

When Mr. Davis discusses this scene, he accounts for the actions of the
executioner by saying that this man had just found a close friend and the
friend's six children slain, and believed that his captive might have been the
killer. He isn't an apologist, but Mr. Davis has a sufficiently flexible
nonjudgmental attitude to explain why he was able to remain on the wartime scene
for so long, and to get so close to the heart of the matter.

When Mr. Davis, an Australian, is interviewed for this film, he sits by the
banks of an unidentified tropical river, with foliage floating gently in the
background. His present situation remains unexplained, as do certain aspects of
his past. Mr. Davis emerges from ''Front Line'' as such an interesting,
impressive figure that Mr. Bradbury might well have delved deeper into his
character. That tenacity bordering on recklessness could have been a subject for
further scrutiny.

As it is, Mr. Davis's stories of extraordinary bravado must cast light on this
side of his nature - and these stories are told so matter-of-factly that they
ring true. When Saigon fell, Mr. Davis stayed to the very end, only later moving
on to Cambodia to continue his war coverage there. In Saigon, Mr. Davis decided
he could expect a few rough moments with the North Vietnamese, but that once
they got used to his presence everything would be fine. On this occasion, as on
so many others, he gambled and won.

''Front Line,'' an important and memorable work that has already been seen on
PBS, will be shown free for three weekends at the Public Theater, as part of the
theater's Public Service program. It will be shown Saturdays and Sundays at 2
P.M.

The Program

FRONT LINE, documentary produced and di- rected by David Bradbury; camera by
David Perry; edited by Stewart Young; music by De- nise Wykes, Lindsay Lee and
Midnight Oil; a Cinema Ventures release. Running time: 65 minutes. This film is
not rated.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 23, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ARMS CONTROL CHIEF ASSERTS REAGAN IS UNCERTAIN HOW TO USE POWER

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 743 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


Eugene V. Rostow, Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, said
today that, while President Reagan had turned American foreign policy in the
proper direction, the Administration still lacked a consensus on how its
military and diplomatic power should be used.

''There is as yet no consensus as to how military power should be used, or what
it should be used for,'' Mr. Rostow asserted in a luncheon speech before the
Committee for a Free World, a group of neoconservatives.

Mr. Rostow implied that the Polish crisis was one of several examples of
apparent Administration uncertainty on how best to exercise diplomatic leverage.
Other questions, he said, include how the Administration will develop its
relations with China and how far detente with the Soviet Union extends.

Mr. Rostow, a Democrat and former professor at Yale University, praised
President Reagan's commitment to strengthening the American military and said
there had been an end to what he described as the nation's retreat from
challenging Soviet aggression in the wake of the war in Vietnam.

However, he said that it was uncertain whether Mr. Reagan would be able to carry
out his new policy. This Mr. Ro stow pictured as a rededication to President
Truman's doctrine o f containing Soviet aggression.

Says Nixon Wasted Opportunity

''President Nixon had the opportunity,'' Mr. Rostow said. ''He wasted it.
Whether President Reagan takes full advantage of it or not is not yet clear.''

The committee that Mr. Rostow addressed is 18 months old and is composed of
writers such as Midge Decter, Luigi Barzini, Norman Podhoretz, and Tom Stoppard
and foreign policy analysts. It is sponsoring a conference whose first session
was devoted to the ''Transatlantic Crisis.''

Miss Decter, executive director of the committee, and several other members who
strongly supported President Reagan, have recently criticized the Administration
for what they see as a feeble response to events in Poland, a poorly conceived
Middle East policy and hesitancy in combating what they see as Soviet and Cuban
aggression in Latin America.

Disagreement Among Members

Today, Mr. Rostow urged the group to withhold ''final judgment'' about the
Administration's response to the imposition of martial law in Poland.

''We're only at the beginning of the drama of Pol and,'' he said.  ''We'll have
to see how this policy evolves.'' Mr. Rostow praised President Reagan's
''instincts'' but indicated that the fram ework of policy was still being
debated. He said this contest, whic h he termed ''intellectual, rather than
ideological,'' would be prof oundly affected by contributions of the
''intelligent sia.''

''We are the clerks,'' Mr. Rostow said. ''We write. We speak. We are in.'' Mr.
Rostow's remarks seemed to be aimed at allaying the anxiety expressed by many
committee members about the Reagan Administration's policy. He disagreed with
the premise of the theme of today's conference session, contending that there
was no ''crisis'' in relations between the United States and Western European
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, rather merely a ''strain.''

Several participants at the meeting strongly disagreed with Mr.  Rostow's
assessment.  Irving Kristol, the writer, argued that it was an act of ''supreme
idiocy'' for the United States to have decided to base the defense of Western
Europe on the deployment of nuclear weapons there.

He warned that unless the Europeans were willing to strengthen their
conventional forces to deter Soviet aggression, the United States would pull its
forces out of Europe.

Mr. Podhoretz, editor of Commentary magazine, argued that unless the Europeans
were willing to defend themselves militarily and ideologically against the
Soviet Union, ''then we in the United States will be unable to go on with our
commitment to the defense of Europe.''

Mr. Podhoretz, in a paper prepared for presentation Saturday, also criticized
President Reagan's foreign policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 23, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Ban on Vietnam Book Lifted

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 43 words

DATELINE: BANGOR, Me., Jan. 22


Federal District Judge Conrad Cyr today lifted the Baileyville School Board's
ban on ''365 Days,'' ordering that the book by Ronald Glasser about Americans
wounded in Vietnam go back on the Woodland High School library's shelves.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 23, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: IN VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 838 words


Late in ''Dustoff,'' Bruce King's Vietnam play at the Westside Mainstage, a
lethally drunk young G.I., drafted out of an Indian reservation, tells his
buddies of the worst atrocities he's seen in a grueling war. The atrocities
involve rape, castration and throatslitting, and, once they've been described,
what can anyone say? A dead silence hangs in the air, and the actor, Tino
Juarez, takes a pause. Then he stares out at the audience and, in an affectless
voice, says, ''I just stood there and watched it happen.''

Like the on-stage speaker, the author of ''Dustoff'' is of Indian descent and
served in Vietnam. Mr. King was the crew chief of a medical evacuation unit; his
drama is about the men in such a unit at the tail end of the war. Though
''Dustoff'' is not a good play, there's no denying the anguish at its core. The
anguish is that of the witness to horror. Mr. King watched it happen in Vietnam;
he believes in telling those of us who were not there what he saw.

Because of Mr. King's firsthand knowledge - and his journalist's eye for detail
- ''Dustoff'' is inevitably compelling from time to time. Indeed, it's when the
characters talk about the war going on outside their plywood barracks that the
play springs to life. The jargon, the madness, the smells, sights and sounds of
war are all conveyed without artifice, without apology.

It is to Mr. King's credit that he can describe highly charged events without
pausing to moralize or assign blame. He understands that, at this date, the
audience is capable of drawing the morals for themselves. His play's soldiers
are the lowest on the military totem pole, the unwilling grunts who went off to
fight for their country only to find themselves at perilous center-stage in a
bewildering tragedy. Rather than pass judgment on these G.I.'s, Mr. King just
wants to show how they coped with their plight - by turning to drugs, to booze
and, most important, to one another.

Where Mr. Ki ng fails, I'm afraid, is in the rudimentary craft of playwriting.
Though he's good at capturing the stoned camaraderie and pent-up antagonisms of
his men as they talk away a lon g night, hecan't bring the individual
participants into focus. The un it in ''Dustoff'' has been assembled like a
World War II movie p latoon: oneblack from Chicago, one Chicano from Los
Angeles, one Okie , one green recruit, one sneering Southern officer, as well as
t he Indian. Aside from the accents and ethnic references, the men can' t be
easilydifferentiated. With the exceptions of Ted Minos's Chicano and Bo Rucker's
black, the actors, under the direction of Jan Bow es, don't come to Mr. King's
rescue.

''Dustoff'' is also crudely structured. A subplot involving a fragging springs
up out of nowhere late in Act I and, though much talked about, never amounts to
anything later on. Though the action is more or less continuous, there are too
many awkward transitions that break the drama up into disconnected episodes.
Signposting lines abound, as do cliches. Do we really need to be told, by one of
the men, that ''I smoke skag to forget''? Or, by the new, innocent grunt, that
''I thought the war would be like the movies, that I'd be a hero''? Would a
corrupt officer really announce openly that he's involved in ''shady deals'' in
the black market?

It's because the playwright doesn't yet know how to dramatize his material, to
push himself to dig beneath the documentary surface, that ''Dustoff'' is so
often static. But, unlike many inexperienced writers, Mr. King has a subject -
and the passion that comes from genuine pain. Those strengths are ready to be
tapped when he finds his theatrical way.
The Cast
DUSTOFF, by Bruce King; directed by Jan Bowes; costume designer, Margaret Yule;
lighting designer, Wayne Lawrence; sound desinger, Eric Toline. Presented by the
Boston Common, in association with Donna Betts. At the Westside Mainstage, 424
West 49th Street.  Jawbone ................................James Laurence Breed
.....................................Tino Juarez Shank
................................Darrell Troutman Chinatown
...................................Ted Minos Pimp
........................................Bo Rucker HomerScott Wakefield Top
........................................Dan Lauria Jeb
.......................................Walt Willey Lee
...................................Camila Cabrerra Lin
.........................................Bea Soong

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 23, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1135 words


In Soviet, Pasternak heirs fight eviction from his dacha 2
Progress expected at new talks on South-West Africa 3
Two I.R.A. supporters remain in custody in Buffalo 3
Soviet hails Finnish election re- sult 3
Around the World 4
Arms control chief assesses Ad- ministration's foreign policy 4
Four Americans held in Cuba are released 4
Syria accuses Jordanians of creating border incident 6
Greek Bishop reports a scuffle with Archbishop 6

Government/Politics
Coast police chief fears spies pos- ing as Jewish emigres 8

Pennsylvania held in contempt over auto t ests 9
Acting Police Commissioner named to permanent post 26
A Brooklyn Congressman pre- pares for reapportionment 27

General
When a hunter's family falls prey 1
Around the Nation 7
Texas town to fight coin games in Supreme Court 7
Cuban refugees held at Fort Chaf- fee, Ark., are being transferred 7
Prosecutors seek to widen evi- dence in Atlanta trial 8
Opposing fears voiced at Indian Point hearing 26
Reporter's Notebook: Paul Mont- gomery on the Abbott trial 27

PARKING REGULATIONS

Because of snow, alternate-side parking is suspended in New York City today. All
other rules remain in effect.

Arts/Entertainment
''Magic Flute'' is the City Ballet's first new staging of season 11
Donald S. Klopfer, publishing giant, 80 today, still active 11
For the Love of Music offers chamber works 11
''Front Line,'' the story of a cam- eraman in Vietnam, opens 12
Moulton Company presents new- generation dances 12
''The Man Who Lived at the Ritz'' by A.E. Hotchner reviewed 14
''Ravinia'' concert series opens 14
Liz Corrigan sings at the New Ballroom 14
Bruce King's Vietnam play ''Dustoff'' opens 15

Washington Talk
Briefing 9
Lyn Nofziger quits the Reagan staff again 9

Style
De Gustibus: Finding a good croissant 48
Consumer Saturday: winter, shoes and autos 48
Another opening, another Winter Antiques Show 48

Obituaries
Paul Van Anda, a corporation lawyer 21
John C. Leslie, a leader in the aviation industry 21
William V. Luneburg, former A.M.C. president 21

Sports
Three men convicted in point- shaving case are sentenced 16
Nelson's 63 leads at Phoenix by 2 16
Floyd sets world best of 5.22 in 50- yard dash at Coast meet 16

Yankees have mixed feelings about Jacks on's departure 17
Gregg, Bengals' coach, tries to stay loose amid pressure 17
Solomon's injured knee improved 17
Confident Charle Young of 49ers has a reason for everything 17
Hoddy Mahon striving to become full-time Seton Hall coach 17
46
Ira Berkow on the pro football labor picture 19
Nets, on Buck Williams's free throws, beat Suns, 99-97 19

Features/Notes
Saturday News Quiz 14
Going Out Guide 15
Sports People 16
About New York 27
Notes on People 47
News Analysis
Charles Austin on tax-exempt dis- pute on colleges 10
John Holusha discusses import of auto labor talks 29
Edward Cowan discusses the drop in inflation 32

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 22

Whose gravy train of coal?  Backhanded school aid The recidivist Mrs. Gandhi
David C. Anderson: Abbott Letters 22
Russell Baker: right smart o' wind 23
Sydney H. Schanberg: somebody call the cops 23
Joseph S. Nye Jr.: nuclear talks must go on 23
''K-62'': the confessions of a cen- sor 23
Tran Van Dinh: going to Orlando, or, reunion at Tet 23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S CHANGES ON RIGHTS ARE STARTING TO HAVE IMPACT;
Reagan's First Year Last of six articles.

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2318 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 23


President Reagan is beginning his second year in office under a mounting barrage
of assertions that he is undermining the civil rights and civil liberties of
Americans in a broad range of areas.

In his first year, Mr. Reagan's Administration reversed many of the civil rights
policies of his recent predecessors, attacked laws and court decisions on racial
integration built over the past two decades and began dismantling much of the
Government's machinery for enforcing the rights of women and members of
minorities.

Furthermore, he has moved to increase Government secrecy and to give
intelligence agencies broader authority to collect information and conduct
covert operations in the United States.

Sharp Departures Initiated

Mr. Reagan and members of his Administration agree that their initiatives are
sharp departures from the recent past.  They say they are determine d to enforce
civil rights laws without undue Government interference and to give the
law-enforcement authorities and intelligence agencies the tools they need to
carry out their assignments. Nonetheless, the President says he is ''oppos ed at
every fiber of my being to discrimination.''

The initiatives are expected to be put to a test in Congress and the courts this
year. But there is a consensus that the impact of the important changes that
have already taken place in a number of areas will be felt for years to come.

''Nineteen eighty-one was a bad year for civil liberties,'' the American Civil
Liberties Union said in an assessment of Mr. Reagan's first year, adding that
''1982 could be worse.''

Stance on Rights Defended

Mr. Reagan and his assistants have been moving to quell the criticism and assure
the nation that the President is strongly committed to the goals, if not the
methods, of civil rights enforcement and that his moves in intelligence and law
enforcement are no threat to the Bill of Rights.

Much of his news conference Wednesday was devoted to defending himself on civil
rights and civil liberties. Asked to respond to charges that he had ignored the
interests of blacks, Mr. Reagan said, ''I have been on the side of opposition to
bigotry and discrimination and prejudice, and long before it ever became a kind
of national issue under the title of civil rights. And my life has been spent on
that side.''

'At the Point of a Bayonet'

At another point, he said he believed the Federal Government had ''an obligation
to enforce the constitutional rights of even the least individual among us,
wherever he may be, if those rights are being denied, and to do so at the point
of bayonet if necessary.''

When Mr. Reagan entered office, civil rights leadership on the national level
had all but disappeared and popular support for civil liberties was in decline.
In most of his first year, Mr. Reagan's initiatives did not cause nearly the
outbursts that black leaders had leveled against Presidents Nixon, Ford and
Carter; there was a minimum of organized protest when he began making changes.

Norman J. Chachkin of the Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights Under Law said that
it was some months before the direction and intent of the Reagan changes could
be fully discerned. In addition, he said that ''people did not want to let
themselves be isolated as wild-eyed crazies'' by attacking in his first year a
President who had been elected by a landslide.

Revolt by Career Lawyers

Nor was much national attention given to a revolt by career lawyers in the
Justice Department's civil rights division against the new Administration's
actions. Some of those lawyers began divulging documents intended to show that
the department was ignoring law and precedent in its approach to enforcement,
until they were reined in by William Bradford Reynolds, Assistant Attorney
General for civil rights.

Only in recent weeks has the criticism been enough to cause more than routine
concern at the White House. The announcement that the Administration would
revoke the 12-year-old Government policy of withholding tax exemptions from
private schools that discriminate against blacks seemed to break the dam.

There was so much protest that Mr. Reagan announced two retreats from the
original decision. As it stands now, the President plans to ask Congress for
legislation forbidding exemptions for schools that discriminate. That would do
what the Internal Revenue Service has been doing since 1969 under a body of law,
policy and precedent.

Mr. Reagan's explanation was that he favored the policy but was opposed to the
revenue service's ''determining national social law all by itself,'' an
interpretation that ignored the fact that the practice had been upheld in a
series of court decisions.

Harold C. Fleming, president of the Potomac Institute, a leader in civil rights
since the 1950's, said the private school move and other recent actions caused
many to conclude that Mr. Reagan was out to ''dismantle the whole apparatus'' of
civil rights enforcement.

'Insensitivity' in School Case

That opinion, he said, was reinforced by ''the insensitivity displayed in the
private school case.'' He referred to the fact that some Administration
officials contended that they didn't know they were dealing with a sensitive
subject when discussions of revoking the practice of withholding exemptions was
under discussion.

Mr. Fleming said that the Reagan philosophy, which is opposed to government
regulation to achieve social goals, appeared to l eave no room for stro ng civil
rights enforcement based on class-action lawsuits and a systemic approach to
ending discrimination in large segments of t he population.

Enforcement began to move in that direction in the late 1960's.  According to
officials then in power, it beca me apparent that proceeding on a basis of
helping each aggriev ed individual achieve his rights was too slow to assist
many people . It was the threat of the Government to withhold funds from school
districts, for example, that finally brought about racial integration of
Southern schools after more than a decade of delay under court decisions to
admit individual black children.

''If you look closely at what Mr. Reagan is doing,'' Mr. Fleming said, ''you see
that he is trying to reduce the whole area of civil rights to a question of
individuals.'' That theory fits with repeated explanations of Administration
officials that they want to enforce civil rights as much as any previous
administration but want to do it in a different way.

Ambiguity in Affirmative Action

Ambiguity still remains in the highly sensitive area of affirmative action in
employment, but some authorities believe the reason is that the Labor Department
has not yet fully conformed to the policy signals coming from the Justice
Department.

The Labor Department fashioned guidelines for affirmative action based on a
Supreme Court ruling that Brian Weber, a white factory worker in Louisiana, was
not entitled to enroll in a black training program that had been set up under a
voluntary union-management agreement to get more blacks into the work force.

The President, unfamiliar with both the decision and his Justice Department's
opposition to it, said in response to a question at a news conference Dec. 17
that he approved of an arrangement as long as it was voluntary.

The White House subsequently put out a statement that Mr. Reagan agreed with the
Justice Department that the Weber case had been ''wrongly decided'' and with the
statement of Assistant Attorney General Reynolds that elevating rights of groups
over the rights of individuals was ''at war with the American ideal of equal
opportunity for each person.''

''This Administration,'' Mr. Reynolds said in testimony prepared for committees
of Congress, ''is firmly committed to the view that the Constitution and laws
protect the right of every person to pursue his or her goals in an environment
of racial and sexual neutrality.''

Companies 'On a Tightrope'

Barry L. Goldstein of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund Inc. said
companies that had been in the process of setting up voluntary plans based on
the Weber decision and the Labor Department guidelines ''are now on a tightrope
- they don't know what to do.''

At the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, where the full Reagan policies
have not taken hold, the new general counsel has also been talking about moving
emphasis from class action to individual lawsuits.

The commission, made up of appointive members charged with administering fair
employment laws, must make any policy change, but staff lawyers say the general
counsel may frequently decide which actions to pursue. Moreover, when President
Reagan fills two vacancies on the five-member commission, his appointees will be
in control.

Following are some of the actions or policy changes in other areas of civil
rights.  School Integration - On this subject, Mr. Reagan and members of his
Administration stand in direct opposition to a long series of Supreme Court
decisions. Mr. Reynolds announced Nov. 19 that the Justice Department would no
longer seek to desegregate entire school districts but would instead focus on
specific schools where there is evidence of intentional, state-enforced
segregation.

Lawyers on both sides agreed that this would be a drastic change and a reduction
from past enforcement under court rulings, which called for systemwide remedies.
At the same time, Mr. Reagan and his Administration have consistently opposed
busing to achieve desegregation, and his position has encouraged strong
antibusing legislation expected to come to a vote in the Senate early this year.

Voting Rights - Mr. Reagan has endorsed a l0-year extension of the Voting Rights
Act, possibly the most important civil rights legislation of the 1960's. But
rather than accepting the version passed by the House last year, the President
has said he wants the act amended to make it easier for political jurisdictions
to become exempt from its coverage after a period of years.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and other advocates of
minorities say any expansion of the exemption provision would endanger the
effectiveness of the act.

Also controversial is the President's desire that the Government be required to
prove not only that the right to vote was denied in fact but also that there was
intention to discriminate. Lawyers say intent is very difficult to prove.
Whatever the merit of the Reagan position, both sides agree, the scope of Gove
rnment involvement wouldbe reduced under his plan. The House bill is now before
the Senate Judiciary Committee.

Civil Rights Commission - The commission has power only to advise, air issues
and sound off when it thinks the Government is not fulfilling its
responsibilities under the civil rights laws. Last fall, Mr. Reagan dismissed
Arthur S. Flemming, the chairman who had been criticial of the Administration
moves, and nominated Clarence M. Pendleton Jr., a San Diego black who shares Mr.
Reagan's views in some areas of civil rights such as opposition to quotas in
employment.

In some areas of civil liberties, Mr. Reagan favors more Government intervention
and regulation, not less, a position that seems to be opposite to the stance he
takes on civil rights. This is in conformity with the prevailing conservative
view that in formulating policy, particularly in foreign affairs, and in
prosecuting crime and conducting intelligence work, the executive branch must
have more privacy and authority.

In this regard, the President has taken these actions:

- Issued an executive order that would authorize the Central Intelligence Agency
for the first time to conduct covert operations within the United States, an
activity the agency did illegally in the past.

- Proposed amending the Freedom of Information Act to limit public release of
documents in areas of national security, law-enforcement and business trade
secrets.

- Proposed making it a crime to disclose the identity of a covert C.I.A. agent
or informant, even if the information was already in the public domain.

The Administration has moved in other areas, including criminal law enforcement,
to increase official authority. Reagan officials say such changes are needed to
remove through law and policy the restrictions placed on the authorities as a
result of an unpopular war in Vietnam, the Watergate scandals in the Nixon
Administration and general permissiveness of the 1960's and early 1970's.

Groups such as the American Civil Liberties Union, of course, stand on the other
side.  ''The assault on the Bill of Rights that began in 1981 will come to a
head in 1982,'' John Shattuck, the A.C.L.U. legislative director, wrote in an
assessment of the Reagan record. ''Pressure will build for Congress to vote on
the agenda of the radical right, and as the 1982 elections draw near there is
likely to be a national debate on civil liberties.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dr. Cleveland A. Piggie and his son in 1963
photo of President Reagan

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARE BIG DEFENSE DOLLARS HEALTHY FOR THE ECONOMY?

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1272 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The military buildup started by President Carter and accelerated by President
Reagan is said by its supporters to be good for national security and the ailing
economy as well. An 18 percent jump in military spending, to $215 billion, is
one reason White House economists daringly predict a strong expansion in the
summer and autumn that will run right through 1983.

But a number of analysts, and some critics who are ideologically opposed to a
military buildup, look beyond the present recession and question whether the
$1.5 trillion of appropriations the President wants Congress to give the
Pentagon for 1982-86 will prove an unmixed blessing. They assert it will
aggravate inflation, crowd out business investment, hurt productivity, shrink
America's share of world markets and do little to employ the chronically
jobless. They saw a symbol of the high costs of preparedness last week, in the
Pentagon's recommendation of $25 billion for 50 C-5 Galaxy cargo aircraft for
the Rapid Deployment Force.

The Council of Economic Advisers will address some of these issues next month in
President Reagan's first Economic Report to the Congress. Council chairman
Murray L. Weidenbaum, who has examined the inflationary effects of the Vietnam
war, says the present buildup will exert no general inflationary effect, because
of current unused economic resources and future expansion due to the Reagan
economic policy. The 7 percent fraction of the economy projected for national
defense spending in 1986 (from 6 percent now), he points out, would be below the
ratios of the 1960's.

Macro vs. Micro

While there is no dispute from any quarter that the economy now has lots of
slack production capacity and high unemployment, some analysts question whether
an economy-wide, or macroeconomic, approach is a sufficient way to examine the
possible effects of such rapid expansion. A microeconomic approach that examines
particular shortages, such as bottlenecks in the production of airframes or
telecommunications equipment, might pinpoint potential problems that
macroanalysis misses. Analysts such as Jacques S. Gansler, a former Pentagon
official, contend that bottlenecks are the main reason pricetags of military
goods have been rising faster than inflation.

There is no evidence that the Administration made any detailed evaluation -
macro or micro -before the President committed himself to a steep upward path
for military spending. He made the decision on the basis of his view of national
security requirements and left the economic fallout to his economists.
Evaluation of the consequences is clouded by disagreement about prospective
spending levels. The Congressional Budget Office and private analysts such as
Robert D. Shriner of Chase Econometrics contend that the Administration has
understated the buildup's cost, in part by underestimating defense-budget
inflation.

Although Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger insists that the spending ''ceilings''
laid down by the President in September will be respected, it remains to be seen
whether they will be revised upward if inflation exceeds official estimates. The
alternative would be to stretch out the strategic goals. When budget director
David A.  Stockman raised that possibility last summer, White House political
aides expressed fear that a scaled-back Reagan buildup might not look much
bigger than Pre sident Carter's, which ca ndidate Reagan had denounced as
inadequate.

As for the effects on the economy, the possibly adverse consequences can be
summarized under the heading of a collision between military buildup and
expanding industrial investment. By giving business accelerated writeoffs for
equipment, the 1981 tax act was meant to foster a civilian capital goods boom
that would presumably come to fruition in the mid-'80s - at about the time the
Pentagon expects to start taking delivery of the additional aircraft, ships,
missiles and advanced communications equipment.  Competition for scarce
materials, skilled labor and perhaps even financing could drive up costs in both
sectors.

Increasingly, modern weapons embody high-performance guidance and
telecommunications equipment whose design and engineering require special
skills. Similar talents will be required for the advanced, strategic
communications system the Pentagon plans. ''The communications business and the
computer business are almost the same thing,'' says Quinn Mills, an industrial
relations exert at the Harvard Business School. ''The communications buildup
will draw on that short set of specialties,'' he says, presumably driving up
salaries and costs.
The Wrong Capacity

Private analysts say that the slack capacity cited by Mr.  Weidenbaum is found
among large aircraft and missile manufacturers.  But, Mr. Shriner of Chase
cautions, ''unlike prime contractors, defense subcontractors appear to have only
limited unused capacity''; their capacity to satisfy Pentagon needs ''is
seriously questioned.'' Although an expanding market is likely to entice
newcomers, that takes a long time, he sa ys, because of ''the process of
qualifying for defense contracts.'' Similarly, James R. Capra of the Federal R
eserve Bank of New York has said that unused capacity isnot always th e right
capacity. ''The electronics industry is currently ope rating below capacity,''
he wrote in the bank's quarterly rev iew last summer. ''However, defense may
face problems inthis area sin ce the electronics chips needed for missile and
guidance syst ems are more sophisticated and much fewer in number thanthose
needed for electronic games and toys.''

The New York-based Council on Economic Priorities and others have said that the
Pentagon is cost-indifferent, insisting on ''high performance irrespective of
cost'' and ''making defense technology inappropriate for commercial
applications.'' Similarly, Mr. Shriner says that as military projects hire
scientific and technical personnel, there will be ''a further decline'' in
civilian research and, in time, an ''accelerating loss of domestic and foreign
markets to new and improved products resulting from foreign civilian R & D.''

A sweeping criticism from a social viewpoint was offered the other day by the
Rev. Jesse Jackson's Operation PUSH, a Chicago-based antipoverty movement. Its
short paper, ''Bombs or Bread'' by Marion Anderson, an East Lansing, Mich.
consultant, argues ''that military spending has a seriously depressant effect
upon job opportunities for blacks nationwide.'' In other words, if military
dollars were spent for practically any other purpose, jobs would be created - in
manufacturing, services or government - that would be more likely to be filled
by blacks.

The Reagan Administration would answer that if Government action is needed to
shrink black unemployment, cutting the military is the worst way to go. Mrs.
Anderson's larger point, that useful social spending is starved by military
spending could make more of an impact in a year or two if a perception develops
that the defense buildup is strengthening job opportunities for the well
employed and doing little for the chronically jobless.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of tank emerging from cargo aircraft in Idaho
security spending tables

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LAYOFFS ARE JUST ONE U.A.W. PROBLEM

BYLINE: By JOHN HOLUSHA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words

DATELINE: DETROIT


Earlier this month, the United Auto Workers and the nation's two largest
automobile manufacturers began an extraordinary round of contract talks. Before
negotiations were suspended last week, the union demonstrated that even on the
defensive, it could muster some of its old originality.

General Motors promised to link wage concessions to reduced car prices on a
dollar-for-dollar basis, the first time the company has allowed the union a
voice in pricing policy. And Ford is said to have offered a limited version of
Japan's system of guaranteed employment in exchange for concessions. Both
concepts were unprecedented in automobile industry labor negotiations.

Still, the talks with G.M. broke down, over the extent of concessions the
company wanted and strong job guarantees sought by the union. Yesterday's vote
to resume, by union leaders meeting in Washington, even more than the fact that
the talks got under way, reflects the hard times that have befallen the union.

Its membership has dropped to 1.2 million from a peak of 1.5 million in 1979.
But its troubles run deeper than the layoffs, however. For the first time, the
U.A.W. - long a master at winning higher wages and expanded benefits - has been
at the bargaining table discussing less, not more, for its members. And this was
nine months before expiration of the current contract, in response to corporate
threats to shift manufacturing to other companies and other countries.

The union, which shared in the in dustry's era of prosperity, is
nowparticipating in its time of trial. Under intense pressure from Washington, t
he auto workers have already made over $1 billion in concessions t o the
Chrysler Corporation, and face requests for help from American Motors
Corporation and International Harvester.

An auto industry contract has been reopened before expiration only once before,
and that was at the insistence of the union in 1953.  Declaring that contracts
were ''living documents,'' open to alteration when circumstances changed, former
U.A.W. president Walter P. Reuther won greater cost of living adjustments.

Douglas A. Fraser, the union's current president, said a resurgence of
automobile sales could eventually result in the recall of more than 200,000
autoworkers on indefinite layoff. ''But there won't be any jobs for the kids
just out of high school,'' he said, ''and that's a tragedy.'' In fact, it's
unlikely that employment levels of the past will ever be reached again.

A large share of the American automobile market - over 27 percent in 1981 - has
been lost to imports. And then there's automation.  While it still takes 125 to
135 hours to assemble a car in America, Japanese companies have found ways to do
it faster. United States manufacturers have said they will rely increasingly on
robots to cut costs and improve quality.

Earlier this month, Administration analysts predicted that when the industry
finally snaps out of its slump, it will provide nearly 500,000 fewer jobs in
new-car plants and related industries than four years ago.

Most U.A.W. members, essentially unskilled and unable to move easily to other
industries that pay as well, have long been at odds with skilled workers in the
union. Indeed, most union opposition to the current talks has come from the
skilled trades, whose members have brighter prospects of finding other jobs than
production workers do.

Amply funded by workers in an industry that once counted its profits in the
billions of dollars (in a good year, assembly line workers, most of whom start
young, can earn $25,000 to $30,000), and dominated for decades by men who viewed
trade unions as instruments of social change, the U.A.W. has long been involved
in causes beyond the wallets of its members.

Mr. Reuther marched with Martin Luther King Jr. when other unions were more
concerned with seniority rights than minority rights. The U.A.W. opposed United
States involvement in Vietnam although the A.F.L.-C.I.O. hierarchy solidly
supported the war. Efforts to clean up air and water pollution, raise automobile
safety standards and spread trade unionism around the world received active
U.A.W.  support.

But Mr. Fraser is the last of the generation of U.A.W. leaders, groomed by Mr.
Reuther, who came of age during the bitter organizing battles in the 1930's and
1940's. His most frequently mentioned successors, Owen Bieber, head of the
union's G.M. department, Donald Ephlin, in charge of the Ford department, and
secretary general Raymond Majerus, are seen more as labor technicians than
social engineers.
Japanese-style Is Anti-U.A.W.

In the future, the union is likely to be far more concerned with its own
interests. A high priority is the challenge of organizing plants established by
foreign manufacturers, notably the Japanese.  Mr. Fraser has said repeatedly
that the U.A.W . does not care which companies manufacture cars as long as the
wor k remains in the United States.

But Japanese companies are resisting, saying U.A.W. representation would not
mesh with Japanese-style management - worker involvement in quality control and
decision making.

Honda Motor Company is opposing U.A.W. organizers in Marysville, Ohio, where it
produces motorcycles and is to begin making cars this year. Officials of Nissan,
which is building a truck plant in New Smyrna, Tenn., have also vowed to keep
the union out. Toyota has said the presence of the U.A.W. has been a major
reason it has not moved production to the United States, despite the number of
cars sold here.

At the same time, the union's attempts to organize small parts supplier firms in
the South have gone almost nowhere.  The union rejoined the A.F.L.-C.I.O. last
year, ending a separation of 13 years. At the time, Mr. Fraser said organized
labor had to pool its resources in the face of a weakening economy and hostile
Administration. The clear implication was that the U.A.W. no longer felt strong
enough to stand alone.

''Reaffiliation with the federation,'' he said, ''will strengthen the labor
movement in one of the most difficult periods working people have ever faced.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of G.M.'s 1982 cadillacs leaving plant in Mich.
auto industry layoff table

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

War, Intelligence and Truth

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 314 words


A CBS documentary on Vietnam last night has surprising present pertinence. ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' showed that Lyndon Johnson himself was
victimized by mendacious intelligence.

Withheld from him was the fact that the Vietcong had twice the 285,000 troops he
was told they had just before the 1968 Tet offensive. Those ''captured
documents'' of which he boasted were in truth packed with accurate information -
but the summaries he received were doctored, to keep the press from ''drawing an
erroneous and gloomy conclusion,'' in General Westmoreland's words.

What makes this report more than a matter of history is America's continuing
preoccupation with guerrilla wars elsewhere, notably in Central America. El
Salvador is not Vietnam and fortunately the United States's involvement is much
more modest. But as policy is pitched to the strength of rival forces there, the
reliability of intelligence estimates is as important now as before Tet.

Members of Congress already complain that some C.I.A. briefings convey too much
optimism about popular support for the Salvadoran junta that America supports.
There also seems to be an inclination to minimize support for the guerrilla
opposition. As in Vietnam, however, the official analysts do not want to
minimize the danger of the insurgency. They are thus tempted to exaggerate the
importance of outside inspiration, Havana's in El Salvador just like Hanoi's in
South Vietnam.

Even after so many years, General Westmoreland still tries to explain away the
falsification of intelligence, even to the Commander in Chief. President Reagan
would be well advised to protect himself by finding out how much Lyndon Johnson
knew -and when he knew it - about the last war in its most crucial period.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BOOKS OF SPRING '82

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG,
Herbert Mitgang, cultural correspondent for the New York Times has two books,
''Mister Lincoln'' (a play) and ''The Montauk Fault''(in paperback) on the
spring 1982 lists.uary and runs past the summer solstice, and decisions about
what will be published in that time have usually been made several years in
advance. Therefore, I asked some top editors and publishers who are already
deciding what we will be reading a few years hence how the future of publishing
is shaping up for that eventual judge of all the writers' efforts and
publishers' editorial meetings: the American reader.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3536 words


IN book publishing, spring magically starts at the end of January and runs past
the summer solstice, and decisions about what will be published in that time
have usually been made several years in advance. Therefore, I asked some top
editors and publishers who are already deciding what we will be reading a few
years hence how the future of publishing is shaping up for that eventual judge
of all the writers' efforts and publishers' editorial meetings: the American
reader.

Their responses were generally hopeful - at least about some of their ''we're
proud to publish'' books. Yet at this time of economic recession they were chary
about predicting the response of readers in general. Caution was the watchword;
lists have been pared and appear to have few ''fillers.'' And I heard far less
than in other seasons about page-turners, good reads and other euphemisms for
the ordinary.

James H. Silberman, president and editor in chief of Summit Books, suggested,
''If people continue to be uneasy about the economy, they are likely to look to
self-help books - to take control of some part of their lives; or to
entertaining fiction - to live for the moment in another world; and one hopes to
politics - in order to understand what has gone so wrong and how it might be set
right.'' In this respect, Andre Shiffrin, managing director of Pantheon Books,
saw a need for more books analyzing Reaganomics, ''the greatest change in the
American economy since the New Deal.''

''What seems most likely is that book publishing will return increasingly to the
traditional,'' said Donald I. Fine, president and publisher of Arbor House.
''The selection process will be more considered. I anticipate more good books,
even experimental books, of genuine quality.''

Juris Jurjevics, editor in chief of the Dial Press, said that fiction was an
endangered species. ''Still,'' he said, ''the good or ambitious book can win
out; witness the success of 'The White Hotel' and some other serious novels.''

Trade paperbacks were seen as the ''true strength'' of future publishing by
Roger W. Straus Jr., president of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, including both
backlist titles that deserved a second life and new works. Richard Seaver,
publisher of Holt, Rinehart & Winston, noting that the market for the novel was
getting tougher, also pointed out the importance of trade paperbacks in the
total mix: ''We've got a line from Gary Trudeau to Michael Harrington.''

Responding to a question about the distinction between commercial and literary
publishing, Charlotte Holmes, managing editor of the Ecco Press, explained,
''Literary publishers are more often willing to take a chance on a very good
book by an unknown than their commercial counterparts.''

Aaron Asher, executive editor of Harper & Row, wryly defined a literary book as
one that doesn't sell. ''You want everything to do well; in that respect there's
no distinction between commerce and literature. I choose books that interest me,
which leaves me no worse off than those editors who seize upon what they
conceive to be a hot market trend. Uncertainty is very much a part of this
business - the nice part of it.''

Jane Isay, co-publisher of Basic Books, put it this way for 1982 and beyond:
''Despite conglomeration, publishing is still an individual, piecework trade.''

Three European publishers scouting the New York scene in the last few weeks
looked over the new catalogues andconcluded, ''There doesn't seem to be much
excitement on the spring lists.''

They were wrong; the strong titles are there, but you have to dig for them. One
could stack the deck and make spring 1982 look either literary or pandering;
alone, either description would be inaccurate. What follows is a sampling, an
attempt to show not only the highlights but the variety of the list. Of course,
many good books are bound to be omitted; but I hope that the reader will find
them on his own and that bookstores - independents and especially the chains -
will allow them to surface.

To begin with, there are works by six Nobel laureates in literature. Just out
are Saul Bellow's ''The Dean's December'' (reviewed in these pages Jan. 10) and
Heinrich Boll's ''The Safety Net,'' a novel about family and terrorism in
Germany. Elias Canett i writes about his youth in ''The Torch in the Ear'' and
about Kafka's romance with Felice Bauer in ''Kafka's Other Trial: The Letters to
Felice.'' Cze slaw Milosz's first novel, ''The Seizure of Power'' (about World
War II Poland) is being published in English for the first time, a long with a
collection of his essays, ''Visions From San Francisco Bay.'' Patrick White
writes about Australia in his memoirs, ''Fl aws in the Glass.'' And from the old
neighborhood in Poland and Manhattan comes ''The Collected Stories of Isaac
Bashevis Singer.''

In fiction, many other pros will be around. Thirty-five years after
''Gentleman's Agreement,'' Laura Z. Hobson is back with ''Untold Millions.''
John Cheever's ''Oh What a Paradise It Seems'' is his first novel since
''Falconer.'' John Gardner's ''Mickelsson's Ghosts'' is about a professor whose
life is in disorder. John Barth's ''Sabbatical: A Romance'' is also about a
professor - who is part Jewish, part Gypsy and possibly a descendant of Edgar
Allan Poe - and her husband, an ex-C.I.A. officer. A rock star is the hero of
Jerzy Kosinski's ''Pinball.'' Thomas McGuane's ''Nobody's Angel'' is about a
love triangle in Montana ranch country. Also coming: Jerome Charyn, ''Panna
Maria''; Sloan Wilson, ''Pacific Interlude''; Peter Benchley, ''The Girl of the
Sea of Cortez''; Ernest K. Gann, ''The Magistrate.''

D. Keith Mano's ''Take Five'' is described as ''a goy's 'Portnoy.' '' Louis
Auchincloss's ''Watchfires'' has a Civil War background. In Paul Theroux's ''The
Mosquito Coast,'' a disaffected American family seeks happiness in the jungles
of Central America. Anne Tyler's ''Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant'' is a
family novel, as is Mark Dintenfass's ''Old World, New World.''

John A. Williams, who wrote ''The Man Who Cried I Am,'' writes about a black
novelist in ''!Click Song.'' Also: Belva Plain, ''Eden Burning''; Cynthia
Propper Seton, ''A Private Life''; Dan Greenberg, ''What Do Women Want?'';
Joseph Viertel, ''Life Lines''; Marge Piercy, chronicler of the disaffected in
''Vida,'' with ''Braided Lives.'' Rita Mae Brown, who wrote about lesbians in
''Rubyfruit Jungle,'' explores different kinds of relationships in ''Southern
Discomfort.'' Mary Lee Settle has ''The Killing Ground,'' and John Gregory
Dunne, author of ''True Confessions,'' writes about a criminal lawyer whose
daughter is the victim of terrorism in ''Dutch Shea, Jr.'' Also: Paul Horgan
with ''Mexico Bay'' and John Jakes, of ''The Kent Family Chronicles,'' with
''North and South.''

There aren't as many foreign novels available here as there might be (European
publishers bring out far more American writers), but a number of foreign writers
have new books. The exiled Czechoslovak Milan Kundera has a reissue of ''The
Joke,'' in which he observes that ''optimism is the opium of the people''; Doris
Lessing, ''The Making of the Representative for Planet 8,'' fourth in her
otherworldly series; the Indian author R.K. Narayan, ''Malgudi Days''; Canadian
Aritha van Herk, ''The Tent Peg''; Canadian Margaret Atwood, ''Bodily Harm'';
Polish satirist Stanislaw Lem, ''Memoirs of a Space Traveler,'' and Boris and
Arkady Strugatsky, ''Escape Attempt.'' (The Strugatsky brothers are among the
few Soviet authors published regularly here, perhaps because they write science
fiction. Look for the political overtones.)

Also: Gunter Grass, ''Headbirths, Or the Germans Are Dying Out''; Christa Wolf
of East Germany, ''No Place o n E arth''; Hasso G.  Stachow, ''If This Be
Glory,'' about a German on the Russian front; Austrian Jakov Lind, ''Travels to
the Enu,'' modeled after ''Gulliver's Travels''; Junichiro Tanizaki, w ith two
novellas, ''The Secret History of the Lord of Musashi'' and ' 'Arrowroot'';
Kazuo Ishiguro, ''A Pale View of the Hills''; Han S uyin, ''Till Morning
Comes''; Alan Paton, ''Ah, But Your Land Is B eautiful''; South African J.M.
Coetzee, ''Waiting for the Barba rians'' and Mario VargasLlosa of Peru, ''Aunt
Julia and the Scriptwri ter.''

According to conventional wisdom, short story collections aren't immediately
popular, but they often have a long life. May these new ones live and be well:
V.S. Pritchett's ''Collected Stories,'' covering 50 years; William Trevor's
''Beyond the Pale''; Alice Adams's ''To See Again''; Cynthia Ozick's
''Levitation''; Tennessee Williams's ''It Happened the Day the Sun Rose and
Other Stories.''

Thrillers and espionage novels engage our attention because they sometimes say
things about the dangerous world in daring ways. The best are novels in every
sense. Count these among the promising: ''Maigret Has Doubts'' by Georges
Simenon, whose famous inspector not only gets his man but usually reveals
aspects of the French character; ''Cinnamon Skin,'' John D. McDonald's 20th
Travis McGee caper; ''The Menu Cypher,'' a spy spoof by Richard Elman; ''The
Parsifal Mosaic'' by Robert Ludlum; ''Captain Blood,'' Michael Blodgett's tale
about the Los Angeles narcotics underworld; Hank Searls's ''Sounding,'' suspense
in the whale's world in the ''Watership Down'' manner; ''The Peking Agent'' by
James D. Horan and ''Twice Shy,'' Dick Francis' idea of a mysterious
handicapping system.

Also: ''Prizzi's Honor,'' a Mafia story by Richard Condon, author of ''The
Manchurian Candidate''; ''The Case of Lucy Bending'' by Lawrence Sanders;
William Goldman's ''Control,'' where the trouble begins in Bloomingdale's;
Margaret Truman's ''Murder in the Supreme Court''; Sol Yurick's ''Richard A.'';
''Death of a Friend'' by the well-known crime reporter Richard Harris; James
Carroll's ''Sub Rosa''; John Stockwell's ''Red Sunset''; Susan Braudy's ''Who
Killed Sal Mineo?'' featuring a woman detective, and Thomas Chastain's
''Nightscape, '' in which a pack of feral children roam Central Park.

First novels are risky promissory notes; second novels often draw blank checks.
The following firsts (and a few seconds) are being talked up in the trade
houses. ''Lace,'' by Shirley Conran of the home-design store family, is supposed
to be a ''Scruples'' lookalike. Composer-director-playwright Elizabeth Swados
has written her first novel, ''Leah and Lazar,'' about a brother and sister.
Social critic Richard Sennett writes ''The Frog Who Dared to Croak.'' In
''Worldly Goods,'' writer and editor Michael Korda takes a look at his own game,
publishing. At the start of ''The Crying Heart Tattoo,'' by David Martin, the
lad's 14, the lady's 34. ''Celebrity'' is by Thomas Thompson, the ''Blood and
Money'' chap. Linda Gray Sexton, daughter of Anne Sexton, writes ''Rituals,'' a
generational story; John Katzenbach, son of the former Attorney General, writes
''In the Heat of Summer.'' Alice McDermott's ''A Bigamist's Daughter'' tells the
story of a young editor at a vanity press.

''Personals'' by Patricia Roberts is set in New York during the Depression.
''Summer Dreams and the Klieg Light Company'' by Cynthia Applewhite is set in
small-town America, and in ''A Perpetual Surprise'' Sheila Klass Solomon tells
of a Brahmin down on his luck.  Lisa Robinson's ''Walk on Glass'' concerns the
rock scene.  ''Watchdog'' is Faith Sullivan's second, and Sheila Ballantyne, who
was highly praised for her first novel, ''Norma Jean and the Termite Queen,'' is
back with ''Imaginary Crimes.'' Actress Ruth Gordon's first novel, ''Shady
Lady,'' is about a flapper; her husband, Garson Kanin, who's been turning out
fiction longer, writes about a theater couple in ''Cordelia.''

In hardcover and in trade paperback, a fine tendency: bringing back into print
literary classics and early works by well-known authors.  For example, by Dame
Rebecca West: ''1900,'' a history of a year; ''The Young Rebecca,'' her writings
of 1911-17, edited by Jane Marcus; ''The Return of the Soldier'' (1918) and
''Harriet Hume'' (1929). Other happy returns: Giuseppe di Lampedusa's ''The
Leopard'' and Elizabeth Hardwick's first novel, ''The Ghostly Lover'' (1945),
and first criticism, ''A View of My Own'' (1962). Two of special interest: a
30th-anniversary edition of Ralph Ellison's ''Invisible Man'' and a new version
of Turgenev's play,''A Month in the Country,'' because the translator is Isaiah
Berlin, that all-round scholar.

This is one of the strongest seasons in some time for biography and memoirs.
From the wonderful folks who brought you Cambodia and one or two other
adventures, here comes their side of the story: ''Years of Upheaval'' by Henry
A. Kissinger, on the second Nixon Administration, and ''Haig: The General's
Progress'' by Roger Morris, about Secretary of State Alexander Haig, who worked
for Messrs. Nixon and Kissinger.  Explaining his anti-Vietnam role, and with
more than a few anti-Nixon, anti-Kissinger barbs, is former Under Secretary of
State (in the Johnson Administration) George W. Ball, with ''The Past Has
Another Pattern.''

A biography to look forward to is ''Hannah Arendt: For Love of the World,'' from
her girlhood in Germany to her political philosophy, by Elizabeth Young-Bruehl.
Others in this field include ''The Politician: The Life and Times of Lyndon John
son'' by Ronnie Dugger; ''John Foster Dulles: The Road to Power'' by Ronald W.
Pruessen; ''Let the Trumpet Sound: A Life of Martin Luther King Jr.'' by Stephen
B. Oates, a Lincoln biographer; ''Standing Fast,'' an autobiography of Roy
Wilkins, written with Tom Mathews; ''A Man's Life'' by Roger Wilkins, nephew of
Roy Wilkin s; ''Love, Eleanor: Eleanor Roosevelt and Her Friends,'' letters
edited by her biographerJoseph P. Lash; ''Sister: The Life and Times of Aimee
Semple McPherson'' by Charles Howard Barfoot; ''Sket ches from Life'' by Lewis
Mumford; ''Felix Frankfurter and His Ti mes'' by Michael E.  Parris;
''Mussolini'' by Denis Mack Smith; '' Churchill and de Gaulle'' by Francois
Kersaudy (remember when Churchill said his worst cross to bear was the Cross of
Lorraine ?); ''Churchill: The Rise to Failure, 1874-1915'' by Ted Morgan; ' 'The
Woolworths'' by James Brough; ''Nadia Boulanger: A Life in Mu sic'' by Leonie
Rosenstiel; the muchannounced ''Mozart'' by W olfgang Hildesheimer; ''Friend and
Lover: The Life of Louise Bryant '' by Virginia Gardner and ''Kubrick'' by
Thomas A. Nelson, on film maker Stanley Kubrick.

This spring you can take your pick of books about Clare Booth Luce - in fiction
or nonfiction. Wilfred Sheed, who can bat from both sides of that plate, has
written ''Clare Booth Luce,'' part memoir, part biography. Helen Lawrenson, of
''Latins Are Lousy Lovers'' fame, has written ''Dance of the Scorpions,'' which
her publisher says has a central character ''like Clare Booth Luce, of whom the
fictional Carlotta is a contemporary.'' (She becomes an ambassador, too). So,
sight unseen, don't sue me for calling it a roman a clef.

The American scene - political, social, personal - is getting added attention
from authors and editors who feel a strong need to explain the course of the
country to those who don't know that we weren't born yesterday. ''America in
Search of Itself: The Making of the President, 1956-80'' is the product of
Theodore H. White's longtime president-watching. ''Greed Is Not Enough'' by
Robert Lekachman is a critique of Reaganomics. ''Uncivil Liberties'' by Calvin
Trillin includes his humorous essays from The Nation on such celebrities as Mr.
Kissinger and Oscar de la Renta. ''The Kennedy Imprisonment'' by Garry Wills
deals with three generations before and after Camelot.  ''American Journey'' is
by Richard Reeves, who followed the footsteps of Alexis de Tocqueville ''in
search of democracy in America.''

Other books in this area: ''The Underclass'' by Ken Auletta, from his New Yorker
series on the unemployed and unemployable; ''Hometown'' by Peter Davis, about
Hamilton, Ohio; ''American Indians Today,'' edited by Elaine Jarner; ''Black
Life in Corporate America'' by George Davis and Glegg Watson, on making it;
''Under the Canopy'' by Dorothea Straus, on various Jewish attitudes. The cast
of ''Yankees at the Court: The First Americans in Paris'' includes Thomas
Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin and John Jay, from whom the author, Susan Mary
Alsop, is descended. The new volumes of ''The Papers of Ulysses S. Grant,''
edited by John Y. Simon, cover his early battle victories and first meeting with
President Lincoln.

Subtitles sometimes tell the tale: ''Hearts and Minds: The Anatomy of Racism
from Roosevelt to Reagan'' by Harry Ashmore;''The New Class War'' by Frances Fox
Piven and Richard Cloward, subtitled, ''Reagan's Attack on the Welfare State and
Its Consequences''; ''Running Time: Films of the Cold War'' by Nora Sayre and
''Sign-Off: The Last Days of Television'' by Edwin Diamond.

Name your favorite war, hot or cold, and it's on the spring lists - including
some prescriptions for keeping the nukes from flying.  ''Six Armies in
Normandy'' by John Keegan goes from D-Day to Paris.  Also: ''Allies: Pearl
Harbor to D-Day'' by John S.D. Eisenhower; ''War in Peace'' by Sir Robert
Thompson, on conventional and guerrilla warfare since 1945; ''The American
Magic'' by Ronald Lewin, on intelligence in the Pacific war theater; ''MacArthur
in Korea: The Naked Emperor'' by Robert Smith; ''The Unfinished War,'' an
assessment of Vietnam by Walter Capps and ''Planning a Tragedy,'' Larry Berman's
analysis of the Americanization of the Vietnam War.

In ''Russian Roulette: The Superpower Game,'' Arthur M. Cox describes possible
nuclear attacks on the early warning system.  Other political books include
''Controlling the Bomb: Nuclear Proliferation in the 1980's'' by Lewis A. Donn;
''Towards a New Cold War'' by Noam Chomsky; ''Nuclear Illusion and Reality'' by
Sir Solly Zuckerman; ''The Cold War,'' from the Bolsheviks to the Ayatollah, by
Bernard A. Weisberger; ''Iran: The Untold Story'' by Mohamed Heikal, on what he
sees as the illusions of the American position.

The book people are trying to keep up with the crackdown of martial law in
Poland, too. ''The Poles'' by Stewart Steven includes material about Solidarity
and tanks in the streets; ''The Polish August'' by Neal Ascherson is an account
of the struggle of the last year and a half for survival and independence there.

If the world weighs too heavily on the book shelves, one can always turn to
belles-lettres or baseball or other m ore or less cheerful matters that turn up
on the spring lists.

Walking around Scotland must have been fun for Israel Shenker, who writes about
his chosen land in ''In the Footsteps of Johnson and Boswell.'' Herbert R.
Lottman, who is an American in Paris, traces the writers, artists and politics
of Paris from the Popular Front onward in ''The Left Bank.'' Robert Fenster
provides lots of fillins, mazes and anagrams in ''Playing Shakespeare Games,''
in which I won't mind participating, especially if I've first read Robert
Giroux's ''The Book Known as O,'' a study of Shakespeare's sonnets. Actually,
I'd much prefer spending time with Louise Brooks of ''Lulu in Hollywood,''
possibly after enjoying ''A Feast Made With Laughter'' by Craig Claiborne, with
whom I once dined at Chock Full O'Nuts.

And so to baseball, a fatter category than ever before for the Hot Stove League
reader. The lead-off hitter has to be Roger Angell of The New Yorker, author of
''Late Innings,'' which includes the story of a devoted semipro pitcher and his
loyal girlfriend. Two volumes on George Steinbrenner (Ed Linn's ''Steinbrenner's
Yankees'' and Dick Schaap's ''Steinbrenner'') may be twice as many as necessary,
at least for fans who watch the ball, not the egos. For inside stuff, try ''Bill
James's Baseball Abstract, 1982,'' by a statistical guru.  Branch Rickey turns
up in a biography by Murray Polner and again among the sports figures in Red
Smith's ''To Absent Friends'' and yet again in ''Rickey and Robinson: The Men
Who Broke Baseball's Color Barrier,'' by Harvey Frommer. Red Barber writes from
a catbird seat: ''1947 -When All Hell Broke Loose in Baseball.''

Having combed through many titles on the spring 1982 lists, I'm pleased to
report that nobody has dreamed up one called ''The Rubik's Sugar-Free Diet Cube
for Sexy Cats.'' Not yet, anyway.

But it was the prevalence of cats, cubes and calories on the popularity charts
last season that caused historian Barbara W.  Tuchman, biographer Nancy Milford
and novelist Anne Tyler to float an idea at a recent meeting of the Authors
Guild Council: Why not have a separate best-seller listing for the fun-and-games
books? The three respected writers had nothing particular against such tomes as
''Miss Piggy's Guide to Life,'' ''Nice Girls Do'' or even the umpteenth fat-free
panacea; they only pointed out that such manuals tended to displace other,
possibly more significant, works.

Who knows? William Faulkner's advice to aspiring writers was ''Read, read, read.
Read everything - trash, classics, good and bad, and see how they do it.''
Perhaps that could work this spring for trusting readers, too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paul Theroux photo of John Cheever photo of
Anne Tyler photo of John A Williams photo of Elias Canetti photo of Isaac
Bashevis Singer photo of Elizabeth Swados photo of V.S. Pritchett photo of
Calvin Trillin

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AIR FORCE REPORT ON VIETNAM WAR SAYS LAOS WAS SECRETLY SPRAYED

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 3691 words


The draft of an unpublished Air Force history reports that the United States
secretly sprayed herbicides on Laos during the Vietnam War and openly sprayed
them on South Vietnam only after a debate at the highest levels of Government
over whether other nations would criticize it for conducting chemical warfare.

The history, which contains details about how America started and conducted its
herbicide spraying program, also provides insights into how Government policy
was made during the war.

The account says that in the early 1960's, thousands of gallons of military
defoliants were secretly brought into South Vietnam by the Americans in violat
ion of the inspection prov isions of the Geneva accords of 1954, which were
designed to end h ostilities in Indochina and discourage their resumption.
Pledged Not to Disturb Pact

The United States participated in the creation of the Geneva accords and
although it disassociated itself from the ''Final Declaration,'' it pledged not
to disturb the agreement by force.  Later the spraying in South Vietnam was
conducted openly.

The Air Force account, more than 500 double-spaced typewritten pages, was
prepared by Maj. William A. Buckingham Jr. for the Office of Air Force History
as part of a program to document past military activities.

The history was obtained by the National Veterans Task Force on Agent Orange, a
coalition of veterans, religious and environmental groups, in a lawsuit under
the Freedom of Information Act.

20 Pages Remain Withheld

Thomas W. Ainsworth, director of a unit of the State Department that decides
when material should be declassified, sought to block release of th e document,
of which 20 pages remain withheld by the Government, o n the ground that it
''would cause identifiable damage to the nation al security.'' Litigation
continues over the withheld material. Rel easing it, Mr. Ainsworth said, would
adversely affect ''current and future relationships'' with foreign countries.

The draft history represents what is believed the first formal Government
acknowledgment that the United States conducted covert spraying in Laos. The
document says that the defoliation was carried out with the agreement of the
Laotian Government, which was not a party to the war.

The history is titled ''Operation Ranch Hand, The Air Force and Herbicides in
Southeast Asia 1961-1971'' and reports on a wide range of issues. Among the
reports are the following:

- In the South Vietnam spraying program, the United States Government gave
serious consideration to the possibility of asking Air Force pilots to wear
civilian clothes, fly in mismarked planes and agree to their Government's
disavowing any knowledge of them if they were captured.

- The defoliation in South Vietnam, which in recent years has brought charges
from the Vietnamese and American servicemen that the herbicides caused
long-range health problems, was started at the request of President Ngo Dinh
Diem of South Vietnam.

- American officials took pains to mislead the press about the covert spraying
in Laos.

Spraying in Laos Began in '65

The report says the spraying in Laos was begun in December 1965 at the urging of
Gen. William C. Westmoreland, commander of American military forces in Vietnam,
who wanted jungles in southern Laos defoliated to deny hiding places to enemy
troops. He also wanted crops destroyed to deny food to the enemy, according to
the report.

General Westmoreland, asked to comment on the report, said he could not remember
ordering spraying in Laos and had no knowledge now that it had been carried out.
''It could have been done by people in my headquarters without my being
involved,'' he said.

The spraying in Laos started over the ''strong objections'' of William H.
Sullivan, then the United States Ambassador in Vientiane, the Laotian capital,
according to the Air Force history.

Mr. Sullivan ''informed the State Department that he was opposed to using
herbicides in Laos because of current sensitivity among diplomats in Vientiane
of nations friendly to the United States over allegations concerning earlier
uses of chemical weapons in Laos,'' the history says.

Spraying in Laos Confirmed

Mr. Sullivan said in a telephone interview that he did not recall stating his
opposition ''but I wouldn't be surprised if I did make a protest.'' He did
confirm that Laos had been sprayed.

The report does not elaborate on the meaning of its reference to ''earlier
uses.'' Nor is it clear how long the covert spraying continued. Several pages
are missing. However, the report says that by June 1966, seven months after the
program began, 200 sorties were flown in which a total of 200,000 gallons of
herbicide were dumped on roads and trails, to a distance of about 275 yards on
each side, ''north of the 17th parallel in Laos.'' A sortie is a single mission
flown by a single plane.

Mr. Sullivan said in the interview that ''secret'' was not the correct word to
apply to the spraying operation. ''Rather, it was not admitted nor confirmed,''
he said. And he confirmed that it was done with the knowledge of the Laotian
Government, although the Laotians did not want that known.

The report does not say which herbicide was used in Laos, but it does say that
generally in Southeast Asia, th e Air Force used combinations of the phenoxy
herbicides 2,4,5- T and 2,4-D, including Agent Orange, which was a 50-50 mix of
the bu tyl esters of the two compounds.

Warning on 'Bottomless Pit'

The Air Force document also characterizes Mr. Sullivan as having felt that since
''virtually all lucrative targets in southern Laos were dispersed under jungle
cover, to use defoliants to uncover them would 'open a bottomless pit.' ''

But General Westmoreland is reported to have been convinced, in the report's
words, ''that there were sufficient targets beneath the jungle canopy in men and
supplies into South Vietnam. He also reportedly pushed through a request for
permission to destroy crops, although the report says that ''such missions never
became a major part of the herbicide program.''

General Westmoreland is said by the report to have maintained that by reducing t
he North Vietnamese Army's ''ability to live off the land, the Nor th Vietnamese
supply and transportation system would be taxed further and morale would
suffer.''

''He proposed,'' according to the report, ''a total of 13,800 acres of crops for
herbicide spraying, based on a study of aerial photographs, crops which if
allowed to grow until harvest might feed 15,000 soldiers for a year.'' The
report does not say why destroying crops in Laos did not become the major effort
reportedly envisioned by the general.

Further Disclosure Opposed

On Feb. 23, 1981, Mr. Ainsworth filed an affidavit in Federal District Court in
Washington explaining why certain sentences contained in the 20 pages withheld
by the Government from the report could not be released.

Mr. Ainsworth said in the affidavit that the sentences ''would, if disclosed,
confirm officially that the U.S. some years ago gave consideration to the
possibility of military use of herbicides in certain specific countries,
concretely, the use of herbicides to destroy war-making potential.''

Mr. Ainsworth added: ''Confirmation at this time would reasonably be expected to
cause adverse reactions in those countries, and probably others, which would
seriously and adversely effect our current and future relationships and damage
U.S. foreign affairs interests. The U.S. Government is presently a party to
international agreements prohibiting the use of war in chemical and biological
weapons and prohibiting possession or manufacture of biological weapons. The
applicability of the agreements to herbicides is a matter of disagreement
between the parties.''

He observed, ''The subject of possible use of herbicides in war therefore
remains sensitive.''

Student Was Party to Suit

The lawsuit to obtain the history was pressed by Elizabeth G.  Russell, who in
1980 was a Mount Holyoke College student doing research on the military uses of
technology, as well as the veterans group. The plaintiffs are represented by
Lewis Milford, an attorney for the National Veterans Law Center at American
University, and by the Institute for Public Representation at Georgetown
University.

The release of the history comes amid controversy over the use of Agent Orange,
which, many veterans assert, has been responsible for several serious health
problems, including liver damage, nervous disorders, birth defects in their
children and cancer. As yet, the veterans have been unable to induce the
Government to conduct what they consider a broad-based, scientifically sound
review of their health problems.

Public disclosure of the Air Force report also comes at a time when the Reagan
Administration is complaining that toxic chemicals have been used against people
resisting the Vietnamese control of Cambodia and Laos. Richard Burt, director of
the State Department's Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, said last Nov. 10
that the chemical attacks, which are known as ''yellow rain,'' were backed and
controlled by the Soviet Union.

The Air Force history deals with several other issues related to the defoliation
program.  For example, the report says that in 1961, Secretary of Defense Robert
S. McNamara ''continued to hold open the option of disguising the defoliation
program'' in South Vietnam ''as a South Vietnamese operation.''

Scheme Termed 'Outlandish'

Mr. McNamara, asked to comment, said he did not remember favoring such an
option. ''I guarantee you I never suggested anything like that,'' he said. He
called the notion of disguising South Vietnamese defoliation ''insane'' and
''outlandish.'' Mr. McNamara said he was unable to recall the details of
defoliation, or who ordered or approved it.

He also said that ''many of us were environmentalists and would have been
concerned'' about suggestions that America use defoliants in South Vietnam. He
added that he did not think he was a part of any decision to spray, ''but if the
Air Force says I was, I probably was.''

According to the report, U. Alexis Johnson, then Deputy Under Secretary of State
for Political Affairs, proposed that ''U.S.  aircraft be used to conduct a
'major defoliant spray program in South Vietnam,' although the aircraft would
carry South Vietnamese markings and the pilots would wear civilian clothes.''

Former Secretary of State Dean Rusk, asked in an interview if the State
Department had known of discussions of disguising American aircraft, said he
could not recall anything like that, but ''I don't have records and I can't get
into that.''

'Civilian' Label Favored

The America n Ambassador to Vietnam, Frederick E. Nolting Jr., supported the
covert spraying program in South Vietnam, according to the report, a nd
expressed his desire to label defoliant chemicals as ''civilian ca rgo'' in
order to exempt them from the inspection provisions of the Geneva accords of
1954. The accords established the Internati onal Control Commission, referred to
in the report as I.C.C., which was empowered to inspect shipments of military
equipment ent ering South Vietnam.

Mr. Nolting is said by the report to have felt that ''civilian aircraft and
crews would be necessary to maintain consistency with civilian chemicals.'' The
report says that a large shipment of herbicides to be used for crop destruction
- 15,000 pounds of Agent Blue and 20,000 gallons of Agents Pink and Green -
''had by this time arrived covertly in Saigon by military aircraft, bypassing
I.C.C.  inspection. A large sea shipment could not be hidden from I.C.C.
scrutiny, however.''

Mr. Nolting, who now teaches a course on ethics in government at the University
of Virginia, said in a telephone interview that he could not remember saying he
wanted to disguise military chemicals as civilian cargo or anything else about
plans for covert spraying. He said that whenever he did anything, he did it
''openly and almost every week I saw the members of the I.C.C.''

Ultimately, a decision was made to conduct the South Vietnamese operation
openly. A reason, according to the report, is that Deputy Secretary of Defense
Roswell L. Gilpatric did not feel that South Vietnamese markings and the covert
use of American air crews ''would effectively disguise the U.S. role in the
operation.''

Plan 'Made Sense Militarily'

Mr. Gilpatric is said to have conceded that killing crops in remote areas
inhabited by Montagnards, the hill people of central Vietnam, ''made sense
militarily,'' but he was worried because ''the use of chemicals to destroy food
supplies is perhaps the worst application in the eyes of the world.'' The
American Government was also concerned because President Diem ''had no known
plans to resettle the Montagnards.''

In an interview, Mr. Gilpatric said he could not recall saying that and that he
was ''rather surprised'' to be included in the Air Force history because he was
''out of the main line of activity'' regarding Vietnam. He said that if he did
do or say anything regarding herbicide spraying, it would only have been
''because McNamara was away - but it is really just a hypothesis because I do
not have any recollection of it.''

The report also says that American officials decided not to admit that ''the
Geneva accords were being violated'' as a result of arrivals of personnel and
equipment used in the spraying. They agreed to respond to questions with the
following statement:

''The United States has acceded to G.V.N.'s request for expanded aid in men and
material and is determined to help preserve its independence. This is the sole
objective of the United States. The United States will terminate these measures
as soon as North Vietnam ends its acts of aggression.'' (G.V.N. was an
abbreviation for Government of Vietnam.)

Approval of 'Cover Stories'

The report tells of plans to mislead the press, especially about the secret
spraying missions in Laos. According to the report, Secretary of State Rusk and
Secretary of Defense McNamara ''directed that any press queries about the use of
herbicides in Laos would be dealt with according to the standing guidance, which
was to not report, acknowledge, or otherwise comment on U.S. air operations in
Laos except to state that since May 1964 the United States had flown air
reconnaissance over Laos at the request of Laotian authorities.''

Both Mr. Rusk and Mr. McNamara said in interviews that they did not have any
recollection of that directive.  Air Force Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert is
reported to have had a ''concern about the lack of a central point o f
responsibility for thedevelopment of cover stories or public explan ations for
U.S.  activities in Vietnam,'' and that ''all propo sed cover stories'' wereto
be approved by the Secretary of Defense.

''Thus,'' the history adds, ''concern about the defoliation program led to a
restatement of U.S. policy toward the Geneva accords, the removal of I.C.C.
inspection power over shipments of U.S. military personnel and equipment, and
the designation of a central point of authority for developing cover stories for
U.S. operations in South Vietnam.''

The report says that President Diem selected the first fixed-wing spray mission,
flown by a South Vietnamese Air Force C-47 on Aug. 24, 1961. The mission was
conducted over a two-and-a-half-mile stretch of Route 13, some 50 miles north of
Saigon. The chemical used was Dinoxol, which, like Agent Orange, was a mix of
components in the herbicides 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T. Agent Orange later came to be
regarded as more effective.

Concern on Open Spraying

The Air Force history reports that President Diem had a conversation with
several American officials, including Ambassador Nolting, in which he said that
''he heard that there was a powder which could be used to destroy the rice,''
but he understood that President Kennedy ''would first have to authorize its
use.'' There was some confusion about what material could be used for this
purpose, but ''Diem stated that he did not care what was used as long as the
Vietcong could be denied access to the crops in these remote areas.''

The prospect of openly spraying South Vietnam with chemical defoliants was not
relished by Government officials or high-ranking military officers, and the
report suggests that they spent a great deal of time discussing the public
relations aspects of such a move.

In November 1961, the Air Force account says, the Joint Chiefs of Staff issued a
memorandum to Mr. McNamara that said they believed ''that in conducting
defoliant operations against abandoned manioc (tapioca) groves or other food
growing areas, care must be taken to assure that the United States does not
become the target for charges of employing chemical or biological warfare.''

''International repercussions against the United States could be most serious,''
the memorandum continued. ''In this connection, it is recommended that the
operations be covered concurrently with a publicity campaign by Task Force
Vietnam in Saigon.''

According to the Air Force document, Gen. Lyman Lemnitzer, at the time Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs, doubted that the crop destruction program would work
because food was relatively plentiful in South Vietnam and so told Gen. Maxwell
Taylor, military adviser to President Kennedy.
Decision Was Postponed

Mr. McNamara, the report says, responded to the Joint Chiefs' recommendation by
stating that he was also ''concerned about the possibility of an adverse
propaganda impact, but he did not limit his concern to only the food denial
phase.''

The history says that Mr. McNamara ''stated that the American Embassy in Saigon
had been asked to comment on the possibility of persuading President Diem to
assume responsibility for the proposed program and to issue an explicit public
statement which would include the assertion, which was believed at the time,
that the spray would not be harmful to either livestock or humans.''

''Pending the solution to this problem of defending the defoliation program
against adverse propaganda,'' the report says, ''Secretary McNamara said he that
he could not finally decide whether or not to carry it out.''

Mr. McNamara expressed his quandary on Nov. 7, 1961, and a week later, William
P. Bundy, Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security
Affairs, sent Mr. McNamara a memorandum setting out the pros and cons in more
detail.

The report says that Mr. Bundy's memorandum listed the cons as including ''the
distinct probability that the North Vietnamese would exploit propaganda aspects
of a defoliation program by making charges of chemical or biological warfare.''
But in the last analysis, Mr. Bundy is reported to have concluded that ''from
the military standpoint, the program should be approved.''
Rusk Favored Spraying

Mr. Gilpatric made a presentation for the Defense Department to President
Kennedy, in which he reportedly ''calculated that a crop destruction program
could have a net favorable effect and the public relations difficulties could be
mitigated if the problem of resettling and feeding the Montagnards could be
solved.'' He said in an interview that he did not recall the presentation.

Mr. Rusk made a presentation to Mr. Kennedy for the State Department, in which
he reportedly said that the pr oposed defoliationprogram ''does not violate any
rule of intern ational law and is an accepted tactic of war.''

The history says that Mr. Rusk told President Kennedy that although the United
States might be the target of ''germ warfare'' charges, he favored the proposed
spraying program because ''successful plantkilling operations in Vietnam,
carefully coordinated with and incidental to larger operations, can be of
substantial assistance in the control and defeat of the Vietcong.''

President Kennedy approved the defoliation plan on Nov. 30, 1961, in a National
Security Action Memorandum, which said it could proceed ''if the most careful
basis of resettlement and alternative food supply has been created.''

Secretary of State Rusk outlined his early objections in a letter dated Aug. 23,
1962, to President Kennedy: ''The way to win a guerrilla war, basically, is to
win the people.  Crop destruction runs counter to this basic rule. The problem
of identifying fields on which the Vietcong depend is hardly susceptibleto
solution s o long as the Vietcong and the people are co-mingled.  The Governmen
t will gain the enmity of people whose crops are destroyed and whose wives and
children will either have to stay in place and suf fer hunger or become homeless
refugees living on the uncertain bou nty of a not-too-efficient government.''

Last week the quotation was read to Mr. Rusk, who said he could not recall
having written it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of American planes spraying Agent Orange in
Vietnam (page A18)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WAVES OF LEAKS AND THE SHIP OF STATE

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 24


In the inexorable rhythms of political Washington, each new Administration
reaches a time - as the Reagan Administration now has - when the President
becomes alarmed or angered over news reports and orders a clampdown against
leaks, in the name of national security, although officials concede that less
exalted motives are often involved.

Lyndon B. Johnson gained a reputation for fuming over premature reports of
impending high-level appointments or premature revelations that troop requests
for Vietnam had touched off hot disputes among his advisers. In high dudgeon, he
would order investigations, dress down Bill Moyers, his press secretary, and
sometimes even reverse decisions he had made, just to prove the reports wrong.

Other Clampdowns of the Past

Richard M. Nixon authorized a program of wiretapping by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to close what he and his national security aide, Henry A.
Kissinger, considered a leaky sieve of information after The New York Times
disclosed the secret bombing of Cambodia in 1969. The Nixon Administration's
fight in 1971 to halt publication of the Pentagon Papers, the Government's own
history of the Vietnam War, produced a classic judicial test, though the papers
included nothing about current Nixon policy.

Even Jimmy Carter, who had campaigned on pledges of greater openness in
government, tried early in his Administration to dissuade The Washington Post
from printing an arti cle saying that the Central Intelligence Agency had
funneled millions of dollars to King Hussein of Jordan. An d nearly three years
later , Mr. Carter instit uted internal hunts and issued personal warnings that
top offic ials would be dismissed unless they halted disclosures about how some
officials felt that his support for the Shah of Iran was doomed to f ailure.

For President Reagan, the issue of leaks has just exploded into view. At his
news conference last Tuesday, he joked amiably about them. ''I was going to have
an opening statement,'' he chirped, ''but I decided that what I was going to say
I wanted to get a lot of attention, so I'm going to leak it.''

Typically, the President got a laugh. But aides say that Mr. Reagan himself has
been anything but amused by the subject lately. ''The President has been really
ticked off about some of the stuff he's been reading in the press,'' a White
House aide acknowledged, ''and when he got Bill Clark aboard as national
security adviser, who is someone of like mind, he decided to do something about
it.''

As the President described it, he had approved new guidelines on public
appearances, news contacts of national security officials and the use of lie
detectors to try to stop disclosures that were ''destructive to the foreign
policy'' and that ''endangered delicate negotiations that were going on.''

'The Real Villains'

But several senior officials acknowledge that now, as in other Administrations,
more than national security is involved. They say the President has been angered
by reports on political appointments, economic trends and internal government
debates that put pressure on him before he could reach key decisions. ''The real
villains,'' a senior official in another department complained, ''are some of
the President's own staff who put out stuff to try to influence his decisions.''

The art of purposeful leaks aimed at affecting policy decisions or influencing
public opinion is an integral part of bureaucratic infighting in Washington,
practiced by the highest officials.

One technique for killing an opposing faction's pet project is to disclose it
before it has Presidential approval or solid political support. Last summer
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger was forced by premature Air Force
disclosures to backtrack on his tentative plan for basing MX missiles on large
transport planes.

Another standard maneuver is to leak intelligence or economic estimates for
shock effect in order to influence Presidential thinking or policy debate.
Recently, senior White House and budget officials who back tax cuts in 1983 and
1984 gave reporters the Administration's private estimate that the budget
deficit each year would run about $150 billion.

Presidents often feel hemmed in by advisers' maneuvers. White House aides
confirm that Mr. Reagan was irked by New York Times reports Jan. 7 and 8 that
some aides had calculated that a certain tax and budget-cut package would put
the deficits on a downward trend from $95 billion in 1982 to $55 billion in
1984.

Damaging or Embarrassing?

Though Mr. Reagan had not flinched at leaks about appointments before, he was
said to be upset by reports that he was planning two appointments sure to bother
conservatives - Walter J. Stoessel Jr. as Deputy Secretary of State and Lawrence
Eagleburger as Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs. He went ahead
anyway.

Senior officials acknowledge that such reports are a political embarrassment or
irritation rather than a national security concern.  But they say it was
diplomatically awkward to have The Washington Post report on Jan. 11 that the
Administration had decided not to sell Taiwan advanced jets, before Taiwan and
Peking had been officially informed. And they maintain that security interests
were hurt by the New York Times disclosure about Libyan ''hit squads'' being
dispatched to attack the President, publication in Aviation Week of photos
revealing the high accuracy of American satellite cameras and other reports
based on intelligence about the arrival of new Soviet aircraft in Cuba.

The news report that has so far set off the biggest furor, however, was a
Washington Post report on Jan. 8 that top Pentagon officials were informed that
it could cost up to $750 billion more to rearm this country than the Reagan
Administration had budgeted for the next five years.

''That story has national security implications: giving aid and comfort to the
enemy and giving a false and inaccurate picture,'' Mr. Weinberger contended.
''It came from a document which has much more highly classified material in it
and we believe the document is in unauthorized hands.''

But other officials assert that because this was a raw, preliminary military
''wish list,'' it was not so damaging to security as it was embarrassing to an
Administration that contends that it is providing fully for the nation's
military needs. They also note that when it suited Mr. We inberger's purposes,
he declassified estimates of Sovietmilitary capa bilities during the Pentagon
budget debate.

Such complexities and the persistent disagreement over what constitutes a
genuine breach of security leave some career officials less alarmed by the
latest disclosures and less confident that the flow can be stopped than are the
President and the top-level appointees who have a big political stake in his
policies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan photo of Jimmy Carter photo of
Richard Nixon

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Letter: On Vietnam No Time for 'Amateur Diplomats'

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 342 words


To the Editor:

With regard to your Dec. 30 editorial ''Apocalypse Forever?'' pertaining to the
four Vietnam-era veterans who recently visited Hanoi, I am amazed at The Times's
naive view of both the veterans' and the Communists' motives for the trip.

The Reagan Administration certainly did not endorse this Penthouse
magazine-sponsored trip. It was simply that t here was no way to stop it. Thus
the veterans were briefed by both th e State and Defense Departments, to acquire
a quick education on the P.O.W./M.I.A. issue and be cautioned against being used
for propa ganda by the Vietnamese.Members of Congress familiar with this issue
provided similar counsel, as did the National

League of P.O.W./M.I.A. Families.

While the league certainly welcomes help and support from concerned Americans,
it is frankly appalling that Robert Muller and his associates have yet to
contact our organization to brief us on the results of the trip, particularly
since one of their alleged issues was accounting for the 2,500 missing
Americans.

The Times is erroneous in attributing credibility to Hanoi's claims that it
possesses no information on the missing. There is convincing evidence that live
Americans are still being held in Vietnam, and there is valid intelligence data
to prove that the Vietnamese are currently warehousing the remains of over 400
Ameri-cans. The group was briefed on this evidence by the Defense Intelligence
Agency, rendering Mr. Muller's parroting of Communist denials even more
astounding.

P.O.W./M.I.A. families have no desire to prolong the war; we simply want to know
what happened to our men. Hanoi has answers and our Government will eventually
have to deal directly with them to resolve the issue. Giving Mr. Muller the
benefit of presuming his stated motives to be valid, the P.O.W./M.I.A. issue is
a serious problem and there is little room for amateur diplomats.  ANN MILLS
GRIFFITHS Executive Director, National League of Families of American Prisoners
and Missing in Southeast Asia Washington, Dec. 30, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
MONDAY, JANUARY 25, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 944 words


International
The Roman Catholic Church spoke out on behalf of the Polish people.  The Roman
Catholic Primate of Poland, Archbishop Jozef Glemp, said in a sermon broadcast
over the national radio that Poles had the right to honest information from the
Government-controlled news media and the right to know why they were being
deprived of civil liberties. The sermon was followed by a pastoral letter read
in churches all over Poland that warned of the dangers of civil war and said
workers had the right to organize independent trade unions. The sermon and the
letter indicated that the church hierarchy was united in an effort to put
intense pressure on the military rulers on the eve of a major address to
Parliament by Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, the Polish leader. (Page A1, Col. 6.)
The Kremlin turned against Italy's Communist leaders after years of increasing
tension brought to a head by events in Poland. A 5,000-word editorial in Pravda
accused the Italian party leaders, who had condemned the use of ''force and
repression'' in Poland, of following a policy of ''aid to imperialism,''
tantamount in Marxist terms to treason. (A1:5.)
Israel's military superiority in the Middle East is the dominant fact of life
there. It is also clear that the Government of Prime Minister Menachem Begin
intends to preserve and use that superiority to maintain the political status
quo in the region through the 1980's.  In response, the Arab nations are gearing
up to carry their struggle for the Palestinians and the return of remaining
occupied territories to Washington. (A1:4-6.)
Israel would move into Sinai if there was an Egyptian violation of the
demilitarized status of the peninsula after Israel's withdrawal in April,
Defense Minister Ariel Sharon has reportedly made clear to the United States and
Egypt. In his recent talks with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. and
Egyptian officials, Mr. Sharon was said to have stopped short of threatening an
all-out war. (A4:3-6.)

National
Congress will convene today with an agenda dominated by the same economic issues
that it grappled with only five weeks ago. The short, election-year second
session of the 97th Congress is expected to be preoccupied with problems of the
faltering economy, President Reagan's expected call for a new round of budget
cuts and a package of new taxes to reduce an increasaing budget deficit. Such
controversial issues as abortion, school prayerand school busing, which were
overshadowed in the previous session by the President's economic program, are
expected to receive more attention this year.  (A1:1.)
The U.S. conducted chemical warfare during the Vietnam War, secretly spraying
herbicides on Laos, and openly spraying them on South Vietnam. The spraying in
South Vietnam was begun only after a debate at the highest levels of Government
over whether the United States could be criticized by other nations. These
disclosures and other details are contained in the draft of an unpublished Air
Force history that provides insights into how Government policy was made during
the war. (A1:3-4.)
An inquiry into a plane accident at Boston's Logan International Airport
Saturday night has been started by the National Transportation Safety Board. A
World Airways DC-10 skidded and broke in two as it plunged into Boston harbor.
There were no deaths among the 196 passengers and 12 crew members, but four
persons were severely injured. (A12:1-5.)
Medical care costs rose 12.5 percent last year, the largest increase since the
Government began reporting medical costs in 1935. The overall increase was
boosted by a sharp rise in the cost of hospital rooms. (A25:3-6.)
Metropolitan
A New York City ethics case was settled when a former general managerof the
Transit Authority agreed to pay the ci ty $29,115. The principal in the case was
Steven K. Kauffman, who resigned as generalmanager of the Transit Authority on
Nov. 30, 1980 and the next day became president and chief executive officer of
the Safety ElectricalEquipment Corporation, which provides air-con ditioning
units for nearly all IRT subway cars. The New York City Board of Ethics charged
that Mr. Kauffman had violated the Ci ty Charter by accepting a job with a
private employer and assuming re sponsibilities similar to those he had when he
was a transit executi ve. (A1:2.)
The shooting out of 1,000 car windows in recent months in Brooklyn's Bensonhurst
section has led to an arrest. A 22-year-old man who is part owner of two shops
specializing in replacement of broken car windows has been charged with some of
the window smashings. The police said the man, David Merkatz, had apparently
been trying to stimulate business, but there was no indication that the window
replacement work had gone to his shops. He was arrested late Saturday night when
a police officer said he saw him shoot out the left front windows of three
parked cars with an air-powered pellet gun.  (A1:1-2.)
A Manhattan landlord was sent to jail for 70 days after being convicted of
contempt of court. The landlord is Anthony Postiglione, owner of a five-story
rooming house at 175 West 85th Street. He had been accused in Civil Court of
creating conditions in which tenants were assaulted, robbed and locked out of
their rooms and heat and hot water were cut off. (B3:3-6.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WITH SALVADOR'S REBELS IN COMBAT ZONE

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Specia l to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2576 words

DATELINE: ZAPOTAL, El Salvador


El Salvador's political and military leaders call them ''terrorists'' and blame
Communist subversion for the war here. United States officials agree with what
those leaders say: that Cuba and Nicaragua are supplying weapons, training and
men.

But the peasants and their leaders here in the province of Morazan, where the
anti-Government movement is the strongest, contend that theirs is an indigenous
revolution spawned by decades of political and social injustice. The revolution,
they say, is being fought primarily by peasants who were born and raised in the
areas where they are fighting.

For two weeks, this reporter walked and lived with the guerrillas in the
northern part of Morazan, roughly an area stretching from midway between Perquin
and San Francisco Gotera to the Honduran border, in an attempt to get answers to
some of the questions about the movement.

In Memory of a Rebel Hero

All the guerrillas were from the Eastern Front of the Farabundo Marti National
Liberation Army, which was named for a Communist peasant leader killed with
30,000 other peasants in an uprising in 1932.

The Eastern Front, which is generally considered the strongest militarily of the
four revolutionary fronts, operates in El Salvador's four easternmost provinces:
Usulutan, San Miguel, Morazan and La Union. According to the 1976 Government
census, about 1.5 million people, or roughly 30 percent of El Salvador's
population, live in these four provinces, which make up about one-third of the
country's area.

El Salvador's Minister of Defense, Col. Jose Guillermo Garcia, has repeatedly
denied that the guerrillas control Morazan. But in this section of the province,
the peasant fighters, their support forces and sympathetic civilians move
through the mountains with considerable freedom.

Even in daylight, armed guerrillas walk along the paved road that connects
Perquin and San Francisco Goter a, Bu ses and trucks that travel the roads
sometimes stop to offer them a lift or to give them oranges or other food.

Commander Jonas, the 28-year-old guerrilla commander for Morazan, says that
about 60,000 peasants live in the zone, where the guerrillas have set up schools
for children, health clinics and hospitals, military schools and a radio
station. Peasants are cultivating corn, sugar cane, beans and other crops and
grazing cattle.

The revolutionaries' control is sufficient to enable them to hold large
ceremonies in open fields. At a ceremony that honored the graduates of the
military school's fifth class, the shouting of such revolutionary slogans as
''If Vietnam won, we will win!'' reverberated in the hills. At another ceremony
the next evening, two company commanders fired several bursts of their automatic
weapons in a salute to comrades killed in battle last year. Again the echoes
rang through the mountains.

The guerrillas seem to be a ragtag lot. Masking tape and string secured the
stocks and butts of M-1 carbines of Korean War vintage and pre-World War II
Czechoslovak-made bolt-action rifles.

Their shoes and boots were of the kind available in any store, and they do not
wear well in the rugged mountain terrain. Soles were often split from uppers.

Profile of a Revolutionaryt

From conversations with scores of peasants - weathered old men who in the
sweating hea t of day and dark of night lugged supplies on their backs o ver
treacherous mountain paths, adolescent boys who rushed scribb led messages
between field commanders and women who slapped cornm eal into tortillas -
emerged a rough profile of the peasant revol utionary in this zone: born and
raised in Morazan; two years of scho ol; at least one parent or sibling killed
by Government soldiers; liv ing brothers and sisters participating in the
revolution.

''The immense majority'' of the guerrillas in the zone are Christians, according
to the Rev. Rogelio Ponseele, a 42-year-old Belgian-born Roman Catholic priest
who has been in the mountains with the guerrillas and their families since
Christmas Day 1980. He has baptized more than 200 of their children, he said.

''They are motivated by their Christian faith'' to try to bring democracy to El
Salvador, Father Ponseele said in an interview.  Nearly all those encountered
were asked whether they had seen or knew about any foreigners in the zone. The
answers suggested that there were not very many: Father Ponseele, three
Hondurans who are planning to stay three months to acquire first-hand
information about the revolution, and four doctors (two from Mexico, an
Ecuadoran and a woman from Western Europe).

But the most popular and best-known foreigner in the zone is a 39-year-old North
American who goes by the name of ''Lucas.'' He said that he came last March with
the intention of writing a history about the insurrection in the manner of John
Reed and the Russian Revolution but that he has since also been involved in some
combat missions.

'We Can Do It Ourselves'

None of those questioned said they knew of anyone, including the senior
commanders, who had been to Cuba or Nicaragua for training.  ''It is an insult
to say that Cubans and Nicaraguans are helping us,'' a 27-year-old soldier said.
''We are campesinos, but we can do it ourselves.''

''I would like to go to Cuba or Nicaragua some day,'' said Jonas.  ''And to New
York,'' he added as he ate his breakfast of tortillas and beans.

''We want to write our own history,'' Jonas said. ''We don't want others to
write it. Not the United States. Not Cuba. Not Nicaragua.'' ''It's simply
propaganda that we're satellites of Nicaragua or Cuba,'' said a doctor.
''Because the United States has long supported and supplied military governments
and coups in Latin America, you cannot conceive of a popular revolution.''

During two weeks, the only references to Cuba and Nicaragua were in questions
asked of the people here. The guerrillas do, however, frequently compare their
war with the one in Vietnam, presumably because of the United States involvement
in supplying advisers to the Government and in training Government troops and
officers in the United States.

U.S. Charges Arms Smuggling

According to a State Department white paper issued in the spring of 1981, nearly
200 tons of arms were sent to El Salvador, primarily from Cuba and Nicaragua.
Many of the arms entered through Honduras, according to the State Department.

The Eastern Front is generally considered to be the strongest militarily, with
the largest quantity and quality of weapons. Of the revolutionary military
zones, it is the closest to Nicaragua and it has a long border with Honduras.
Thus it would seem that many of the arms that the State Department says the
Salva doran guerrillas received would have come to Morazan.

Jonas said that, as far as he knew, the Salvadoran guerrillas had received no
arms from Cuba or Nicaragua. He acknowledged that arms entered through Honduras
and through Guatemala as well. At one time, they had also come by boat, he said,
but such operations had been discontinued because they were too difficult and
were easy to detect.

The major source of weapons, according to Jonas and other leaders here, has been
the black market.  Jonas said that leftist organizations had obtained about $25
million from kidnappings, bank robberies and ''war taxes'' imposed on
businesses. In addition, they had received donations from groups around the
world, including $1 million from West Germans as a result of a public campaign
there a few months ago.

Arms Purchases Called Easy

With this money, Jonas said, it has been easy to buy arms, particularly in
Colombia and Honduras and throughout Europe. Even the Salvadoran National Guard
soldiers sell their German-made G-3 automatic rifles to the guerrillas, he said.
The rifles are sold for $720 to $1,200, he said, and bullet pouches for about 80
cents.

But the biggest arms market is in the United States, Jonas said.  Wherever there
is the Mafia, there are arms for sale, he said, adding that ''some Mafiosi are
leftists, some rightists, but mos t are just businessmen.' ' A senior guerrilla
commander said he had been on an arms buying t rip to Texas, where he had bought
machine guns, rifles and pistols.

Arms taken from killed or captured Government soldiers has been another major
source, Jonas said. Since Dec. 29, he said, the guerrillas in the Eastern Front
alone have captured more than 50 G-3's, more than 100 older-model rifles,
several M-16's, mortars, a 90-millimeter cannon, thousands of rounds of
ammunition, boots, uniforms, military radios, canteens and other military
equipment.

Still, Jonas said, there are not enough rifles in the Morazan area to supply all
the peasants who want to be combatants.  ''But more important than not having
enough rifles,'' he said, ''is not having enough oil to clean them.'' The
peasant fighters also lack adequate boots and soap to clean their soiled
clothes, he said.

One Woman's Road to Change

A 29-year-old woman, whose three small children are being cared for by
relatives, said she had joined the guerrilla movement because she believed it
was the only way to bring democracy and social change to El Salvador. ''Others
join because they fear if they don't organize, they will be killed by the
army,'' she added.

Day had not yet dawned, but inside the windowless dirt-floor mud hut, which like
hundreds throughout this region is ''home'' for a small military contingent,
teen-age girls were grinding corn on a rock slab in the manner of their Mayan
ancestors and baking tortillos on flat pieces of metal over open fires. Two
thick tortillas three times a day, with beans and a few bites of meat - cured by
hanging in thin strips over a smoldering fire - is the unvarying diet. It is
supplemented by oranges, bananas when available and sugar cane, which men cut
and strip with their machetes.

Many of the guerrilla fighters were still sleeping on the ground or on wood
benches, but a 15-year-old boy whose mother, father and three younger brothers
and sisters had been killed by Government soldiers a few weeks earlier labored
up the hill with a plastic gourd of water on his shoulder. A soldier, using a
broom made of reeds, stooped as he swept the dirt in front of the hut.

On the outskirts of Mozote, a young girl at a communications post said, ''We are
fighting for a new society.'' She said that her parents had encouraged her and
her two older brothers, who are combatants, to join the guerrillas, but that she
had not seen her parents or her 7-year-old brother since they fled to a refugee
camp in Honduras more than a year ago.

Asked how she was going to celebrate her 15th birthday six days later, she said
softly ''With my radio,'' patting her black Japanesemade shortwave radio. She
said she had learned how to operate the radio at a one-week course given in the
mountains.

Repression Is His Reason

Asked why he was supporting the guerrillas, a 61-year-old man carrying a heavy
burlap bag of medicines along a narrow mountain trail replied, ''Because of the
repression.'' (According to the Human Rights Commission of El Salvador, a
private organization that works with the Roman Catholic Church, 16,376 people
were killed by Government security forces in 1981. Of that number, 8,053 were
peasants.)

Two other men in their 60's, whose leathered faces and hands told of years of
laboring in the sun, crept along with equally heavy bags of munitions and
supplies. Before joining the guerri llas, they earned80 cents a day as farm
workers. One said that a son had been killed by Government troops and that
another had bee n killed in combat as a guerrilla.

The men were unarmed, except for their machetes, as are many of the porters,
primarily because there are not enough weapons for everyone. But they were
accompanied by men with M-1 carbines and captured German-made G-3 automatic
rifles. One of the guards was also a guitarist in the cultural brigade; another
worked in a bomb factory.

On another day, in the soft waning hours, a funeral was held. A small wooden
coffin was lowered into the earth on the edge of a slanting field under a single
tree. It contained the body of 12-yearold Luis Hernandez Ramos. He had been
killed while performing his duties as a ''correo,'' or messenger, a job often
done by boys too young to be combatants.

As a teacher from the school that has been named in honor of Luis shoveled dirt
over the coffin, four files of his schoolmates, many barefoot, stood to one
side. They held high a neatly hand-lettered banner that read, ''The tomb was the
Christmas gift that the genocidal junta gave the children of Morazan.''

Children Called the Example

''In their morale, in their discipline, the children are the example,'' said a
31-year-old Mexican doctor who has been in the mountains her e for a year. The
doctor explained that during a search and destroy m ission by the army in
December, children carried most ofthe medicines and surgical instruments to safe
places.

About 65 boys aged 8 to 15, most of whom have never been to school before, are
also learning to read and write in the rubble of a house that was destroyed by
the army. The director of the school, who is a graduate of the Pan American
School of Agriculture in Honduras, abandoned his 80-acre ranch to join the
revolutionaries. The senior instructor at the school has only a second-grade
education.

This is the way Jonas explained the revolutionary movement to several hundred
peasants gathered at the ceremony for Luis Hernandez. The electoral process has
never worked in El Salvador, he began, explaining that a colonel or general had
been president since 1932. Then, in 1972, when Jose Napoleon Duarte won the
presidential election, the army threw him into exile. After that, Jonas said,
peasants, students, workers and professionals began to organize and engage in
marches and demonstrations to protest the absence of democracy and to demand
better living conditions for the poor.

''We were met with the bullets from tanks and machine guns,'' Jonas told the
peasants. ''Now, we must fight with those same bullets.'' The revolutionaries
here say they are confident they will be victorious but they do not boast about
it. Victory will come, they say, like their harvest: because of their labor and
the blessings of God. Even when asked, they decline to give a date or speculate
about when they expect their government to occupy the presidential palace in San
Salvador.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: maps of El Salvador (page A4) photo of wounded guerrilla
(page A4) photo of Jonas, a guerrilla commander

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Jail Terms Begin for Two Guilty of Vietnam Spying

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 88 words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va., Jan. 25


David Truon g and Ronald L. Humphrey,the only people convicted by American
courts of Vietnam War-era spying, surrendered today and began serving 1 5-year
prison terms.

The two were convicted in 1978 of stealing United States documents and providing
them to Vietnamese Communists in Paris. Their appeals were rejected by the
Supreme Court this month.

Mr. Truong, 36 years old, is a onetime antiwar activist; Mr.  Humphrey, 46, is a
former United States Information Agency employee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Legion Backs Memorial For Vietnam Veterans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


The American Legion has pledged $1 million for the Vietnam Veterans' memorial to
be built on the Mall, Jan Scruggs, president of the memorial fund, said today.

Mr. Scruggs made public a telegram sent by the American Legion's commander, Jack
W. Flynt, to Interior Secretary James G. Watt, expressing concern that Mr. Watt
was hesitant about approving construction.

Mr. Flynt's wire said he had found the design to be ''a dignified and eloquent
tribute'' and pledged $1 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 789 words


A little over two weeks ago, Richard M. Walden picked up the phone in his office
in Beverly Hills and called the Polish Embassy in Washington. He asked for the
commercial attache and, after introducing himself as executive director of a
group called ''Operation California,'' said bluntly: ''I'd like to fly a
planeload of medical supplies into Poland.''

Twenty-four hours later the Polish diplomat phoned Mr. Walden and said: ''I
think it can be done.'' Mr. Walden, a 35-year-old lawyer, left over the weekend
for Warsaw to clear the way for the shipment next month of an estimated $500,000
to $1 million in medical equipment, vitamins and supplies, one of the first
major airlifts to Poland since the military crackdown. The supplies will be
distributed through Roman Catholic Church relief agencies.

For Mr. Walden, the decision to slice through bureaucracies and organize a
private relief airlift was hardly daunting. Since 1979, when he and several
friends realized that there was not a single private or Government-sponsored
airlift originating in the United States to the more than 400,000 people in
Southeast Asian refugee camps, Mr. Walden has organized major relief flights to
Malaysia, Cambodia and Vietnam as well as Somalia and Honduras.

''Quite simple,'' said the dapper, bespectacled Californian, who confesses that
he was a bit bored with law when he organized Operation California. ''Private,
people-to-people efforts can succeed where governments and relief bureaucracies
can't.''

The organization itself is heavily supported by the Hollywood community, as well
as oil companies, which donate plane fuel. A televised benefit for Cambodian
relief raised $1.1 million.

''We're not a fancy relief agency with a hierarchy of officers,'' said Mr.
Walden. ''We just pick up the phone and organize.''

T HE word in the capital's speechwriting circle is that, for the State of the
Union Message tonight, Roosevelt is out and Churchill is in as the source of
keynote quotations. There's no further detail on which of Churchill's countless
themes for thought might be featured in President Reagan's address, whether it
be about toil, tears and sweat, or whether the nation should think not of darker
days, but of sterner days.

P OWER is fleeting in Washington, of course, but a certain layer of the
capital's establishment seems remorselessly fixed in position: Lobbyists,
lawyers, diplomats, journalists and wealthy hangers-on.  The establishment
enjoys nothing more than celebrating one of its own, so the fund-raising
cocktail party the other night for the Washington Opera stirred more than
passing interest.

''Henry's an old friend, and when he asks me to go somewhere, I go,'' said David
Brinkley of the crowded party at the Watergate.And Henry A. Kissinger was
utterly delighted. ''I can't tell you how much it means to me to be told I have
this many friends,'' said the former Secretary of State, the chairman of this
year's $2.5 million fund-raising drive, surveying his many friends.

A S Pentagon officials trooped last week to an austere, fluorescentlit room in
the basement to take lie detector tests, part pf the Administration's effort to
identify the culprit who leaked national security information, the mood among
some officials was decidedly gloomy. ''There's more than a whiff of paranoia
around here,'' said one White House official of the tests, so far inconclusive.
And, amid grumblings that the tests were an ''insult'' and an ''invasion of
privacy,'' one official who submitted said it had been ''a singularly unpleasant
experience.'' He declined, of course, to be identified.

S ENATOR DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN is bowing to the pressures of cons tituents. In
his monthlynewsletter, the New York Democrat began with the unsurprising
salutation, ''Dear New Yorker.'' Mr. Moynihan noted, however, that this was a
''new salutation, replacing 'Dear Yorker,' which I have used since commencing
this newsletter.''

According to Tim Russert, Mr. Moynihan's administrative aide, the first issue of
the Senator's popular newsletter, last February, began, ''Dear Yorker.'' At the
time, Mr. Moynihan noted that ''Yorker'' was a familiar l9th century term among
citizens of the state, and as recently as 1940 there were people who called
themselves '' Yorkers.''

Mr. Russert noted that the Senator's personally written newsletter had received
an ''amazing response,'' but that a ''small, vociferous group'' of constituents
objected to beging labeled ''Yorkers.''

Mr. Moynihan promptly acquiesced to the ''New Yorker'' lobby, and, in the
newsletter, observed that he was ''equally proud'' to call himself a ''New
Yorker.'' Mr. Moynihan is up for re-election this year.  Francis X. Clines
Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
LEAK ON, O SHIP OF STATE

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 905 words


It was as predictable as the sunrise, or the changing t ides: about one year
into his term, President Reagan would get his d ander up over news leaks. He
did, and the results of his efforts to s top them are predictable, too: a brief
slowdown in the flow of news,a resumption fairly soon of business-as-usual
between the press and i ts sources.

Right now, Mr. Reagan has his jaw set, just as he used to when he confronted
Hollywood's villains. Over at the Pentagon, they're giving lie-detector tests to
the top tiers of officials, including four-star generals and admirals. In the
White House, communications aides are trying to keep closer track of
Administration interviews with publications and broadcasters.

The President will find out, however, that acting tough won't work as well as it
does on matters within his powers - say, firing the striking air controllers.
The truth is that he can't stop leaks; no President can and no President really
wants to. They only want to stop the leaks they don't like - for example, the
one that gave The Washington Post an account of a high-level ''secret'' meeting
of the Defense Resources Board at which it was alleged that the Reagan military
buildup might cost $750 billion more than advertised.

That set off the polygraph binge at the Pen tagon. But as Lyn Nofziger, the
candid White House political strategist who resigned the other day, told
reporters at his departure briefing:

''I just want to leak my leaks, not your leaks.'' That says much about the
leaking game in Washington. It's one thing when Mr. Reagan's lieutenants want to
use the press calculatedly in their own interests, by leaking what they want to
be known -either as a trial balloon, or because they don't want to take the
responsibility for an official statement. But all Presidents have been angered
and frustrated by stories in the press they didn't want to see there.

Such stories so upset Richard Nixon that he organized his celebrated
''plumbers'' to find the leaks and plug them. He also ordered or assented to the
wiretapping of his own aides. These actions, of course, led to much of the
difficulty that drove him from office; yet, it is not recorded that he managed
to stop unauthorized leaks before or after Watergate.

Lyndon Johnson had a low boiling point, particularly for leaks that accurately
predicted what he was about to do. Mr. Johnson was known to cancel public
appearances and even nominations to high office when word about them got out
before he or his press secretary could make an official announcement. I once
wrote a story, on good authority, naming a man L.B.J. intended to put in charge
of foreign aid; he promptly scratched the appointment, and the gentleman in
question later thanked me for having saved him from doing time in the
Government.

What Presidents are apt to consider leaks, however, are often more nearly the
result of good work by reporters diligent and intelligent enough to ask the
right questions of the right sources at the right time. That was the case when
The New York Times published, just after the Tet offensive of 1968, the story
that American military authorities in Vietnam wanted re-enforce-ments of 206,000
men - an unauthorized but accurate disclosure that produced one of the turning
points of public opinion about the war.

Leaks, moreover, come in all varieties - including the kind that Presidents
themselves give to or cause to be given to favored or well-placed reporters.
President Kennedy personally leaked to Ben Bradlee, then of Newsweek, the news
of the exchange of Francis Gary Powers and the Soviet spy, Rudolf Abel. And a
high percentage of leaks are, in fact, trial balloons - probably, for example,
the recent unsourced stories from the White House raising the possibility that
Mr. Reagan would shift responsibility for welfare and food stamps to the states.

Other leaks are, in effect, internal administration efforts to influence policy
decisions. Numerous unnamed White House officials obviously have been trying in
recent weeks, through leaks to the press, to influence Mr. Reagan to propose new
taxes. Other leaks are of the ''whistle-blower'' variety - when an official
decides to alert the public to some policy or action the official opposes, or
thinks contrary to the public interest.

Government officials, for reasons ranging from crafty politics to high
diplomacy, frequently want the public to know about administration policy,
without having officially to explain or defend it. Secretary of State Kissinger
was a master at the art of telling reporters what he wanted them to know or
think; the resulting stories usually were attributed only to a ''senior
Government official.''

And who knows how many leaks occur because someone in a position of limited
responsibility comes into possession of useful information and makes him or
herself feel more important by telling it to a reporter? Leaks are, in fact, an
inevitable product of human nature and the political animal; so, fortunately for
the public, all Mr.  Reagan's lie detectors will fail in the end to dry them up.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REUNION OF EX-HOSTAGES IS 'SENTIME NTAL JOURNEY'

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: NEWBURGH, N.Y., Jan. 25


The crowds were sparser and the yellow ribbons fewer along ''Freedom Road'' from
Stewart Airport to West Point, but for the 16 former hostages who retraced their
steps on the first anniversary of their return from captivity in Iran, the magic
had not dimmed.

''The spirit is still there,'' said Barry Rosen of Brooklyn, alluding to the
knots of spectators waiting in the cold. Standing on snow banks, the spectators
held signs such as ''The Real Super Bowl: U.S. 52 - Iran 0.''

''It's amazing to see a small but hardy group that remembers,'' Mr. Rosen, a
former hostage, said.  The group of 16, some with members of their families,
attended a ceremony at Stewart Airport, where all 52 former hostages had landed
on Jan. 25, 1981, and where a plaque bearing their names was dedicated this
morning. A six-inch bronze star has been embedded on the runway where they
stepped onto American soil last year.

'Closing the Book'

L. Bruce Laingen, the former charge d'affaires in the United States Embassy in
Teheran, told a crowd of several hundred schoolchildren in a hangar at the
airport that ''This is a kind of sentimental journey, remembering the excitement
out on this tarmac as we stepped on American soil for the first time in 444
days.''

This gathering, which was organized by the local Chamber of Commerce, was also a
reunion for the former hostages.  Robert C. Ode, who is now retired from the
Foreign Service, called it a chance ''to renew acquaintances with some of my
cellmates under more favorable conditions.''

Joseph Subic, now a student at George Washington University in Washington, said
it was a way of ''closing the book.'' ''You have to set some time and say
everything is finished,'' Mr.  Subic said. ''You can only go on so long with
this ex-hostage thing.''

On Sunday night, Richard Queen was playing a video game in the Ramada Inn when
William J. Daugherty, just arriving at the hotel, walked in.

They compared notes. Mr. Daugherty is being assigned by the State Department to
Port-au-Prince, Haiti.  ''Hey, see this white stuff?'' he said, pointing to the
surrounding snow. ''None of it there.'' They both laughed.  Frequently mentioned
by the former hostages were the Americans still listed as ''missing in action''
in Vietnam, and recent violent attacks by terrorists on Americans serving
abroad.

''We have to stamp this evil out,'' said Lieut. Col. Leland J.  Holland of the
Army. Asked if such terrorist attacks would deter anyone from the Foreign
Service, he said, ''I don't think you will find anyone in the Foreign Service,
military or otherwise, who will shirk the assignment. Sometimes you may cross
your fingers, but you will do it.''

The former hostages said that they will not forget the reception they got here
last year, when tens of thousands of people lined the 26-mile route from Stewart
Airport to West Point, where they spent two days being reunited with their
families.

Towns in the area don't want anyone else to forget, either. Along Freedom Road,
as that route is now sometimes called, is a large sign portraying what the town
of New Windsor sees as the two great events in its history: the return of the
hostages and the dismissal of the Continental Army.

The theme of an important chapter in history having been recorded was repeated
at a luncheon at the Hotel Thayer at West Point, where the former hostages and
their families stayed last year.

''You are now a part of the history of this part of the country,'' said Lieut.
Gen. Willard W. Scott Jr., the superintendent of the United States Military
Academy.

After the ceremonies, Mark Trizinsky of Newburgh made a wild scramble for
autographs of those in attendance.  ''I got five of 'em,'' said the
sixth-grader, who added that he planned to have his autographed program of the
ceremonies framed and hung in his room.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bruce Laingen and his wife (page A1) photo some
former hostages pledging allegiance to the flag photo of youngsters greeting
former hostages

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 27, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MIKHAIL SUSLOV, CHIEF IDEOLOGIST, IS DEAD IN SOVIET

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2963 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Jan. 26


Mikhail A. Suslov, chief ideologist of the Soviet Communist Party and one of the
most powerful men in the Kremlin after Leonid I. Brezhnev, died Monday at the
age of 79, the official press agency Tass announced today.

Mr. Suslov's death left a major gap in the Soviet leadership and raised new
uncertainties over the eventual succession to Mr.  Brezhnev, the party leader,
who is 75 years old and has been in doubtful health for several years. (News
analysis, page 4.)

A peasant's son who rose to the Kremlin elite under Stalin, Mr.  Suslov would
almost certainly have had a decisive voice on the leadership question if he had
outlived Mr. Brezhnev.
Funeral to Be in Red Square

Mr. Suslov was an ideological conservative in the post-Stalin period, and was
thought to have figured importantly in the decisions to crush the Hungarian
revolt in 1956, to end the liberalization in Czechoslovakia in 1968 and to press
for the imposition of order in Poland.

The funeral is to be held in Red Square after his body lies in state Thursday
and Friday in the Hall of Columns of Trade Union House in downtown Moscow.

The official death announcement was delayed for nearly 24 hours. In its initial
bulletin, Tass said Mr. Suslov had died after ''a brief, grave illness.'' Later,
a television announcer read a statement signed by eight doctors that said Mr.
Suslov's heart stopped at 4:05 P.M., Moscow time, on Monday, five days after he
had suffered ''a profound loss of consciousness'' because of a disruption of
blood circulation in the brain stem.

Following the pattern established in the deaths of past Soviet leaders, the
medical bulletin gave details of the ailments that led to Mr. Suslov's death. It
said he had long suffered from arteriosclerosis, which had affected the blood
vessels of his heart and brain. He had suffered a heart attack in 1976. The
statement said that he had also suffered from diabetes and that his condition
had worsened progressively after last week's attack.

An obituary notice distributed by the Government press agency Tass for
publication tomorrow in all newspapers was signed by Mr.  Brezhnev, Prime
Minister Nik olai A. Tikhonov and other members of theSoviet leader ship group.
It called Mr. Suslov ''an unbending fighter for the great cause of Lenin.''

''Mikhail Suslov was distinguished by Bolshevik principledness, exactingness to
himself and others, exceptional industriousness and the ability to creatively
approach acute and complex questions of our time,'' the obituary said. ''A man
of a warm heart, of crystal moral purity and exceptional modesty, he won the
deep respect of the party and the people.''

After the 15-minute obituary was read on television, regular programming was
canceled and the rest of the evening was devoted to mournful music.

----

A Communist Purist
By THEODORE SHABAD

As the leading ideologist and spokesman in relations with foreign Communist
parties, Mikhail Andreyevich Suslov was among the Soviet party's top leaders
toward the end of his life, ranking after Leonid I. Brezhnev, the general
secretary, and roughly on a par with Andrei P. Kirilenko, another national party
secretary.

But in length of continuous service, he was senior member of the inner circle of
the leadership. Mr. Suslov be came a national party secretary in 1947 and was
admitted to the rul ing Politburo in 1955, two years before Mr. Brezhnev.

Although the personal attitudes of individual Politburo members on public issues
can rarely, if ever, be clearly identified, Mr. Suslov was generally viewed as a
conservative both in domestic and in foreign affairs.

At home, he was regarded as the guardian of Communist purity, watching over
signs of Western inroads into the arts, literature and morality. Students of the
Kremlin saw his hand in moves against dissidents.

Mr. Suslov's career as the Soviet party's principal liaison officer with the
world's Communist leaders spanned the end of the Stalin era, the period of
Nikita S. Khrushchev and the Brezhnev years. He presided in effect over the
disintegration of the once monolithic Communist system into an array of
nationally oriented parties with varying degres of allegiance, if any, to the
Kremlin.

Disturbed by Eurocommunism

He is believed to have viewed with concern the displays of independence of
Western European Communist parties and to have argued for military intervention
whenever he felt the Soviet sphere of influence threatened, as in Czechoslovakia
in 1968 and in Afghanistan in 1979.

The Polish crisis probably weighed heavily among his concerns as the rise of the
Solidarity trade union movement in August 1980 fostered a liberalization of
Polish life before the imposition of martial law last Dec. 13.

When a Polish Deputy Prime Minister, Mieczyslaw Jagielski, visited Moscow in
September 1980, he met with Mr. Suslov in talks that are likely to have focused
on the political aspects of the strike settlement that led to the independent
labor movement in Poland.

Again, apparently in an effort to induce the Polish party to hold the line
against demands for democratization, Mr. Suslov flew to Warsaw in April 1981 for
talks with Stanislaw Kania, then the Polish party leader.

Earlier this month, Mr. Suslov met in Moscow with the visiting Polish Foreign
Minister, Jozef Czyrek, who is also a national secretary of the Polish party and
a member of the Politburo. On that occasion, Mr. Suslov is believed to have
expressed concern about the possible setback in prestige suffered by the Polish
party as a result of the military takeover led by Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, the
Polish leader.

Professorial in Appearance

By virtue of Mr. Suslov's role, his professorial yet boyish appearance became a
familiar sight to the world's Communist party leaders, many of whom regarded him
as one of the most authoritative figures in the Kremlin.

Non-Communist Westerners, on the other hand, had virtually no contact with Mr.
Suslov, catching glimpses of him only at the rare diplomatic receptions he
attended or at public events, such as sessions of the Supreme Soviet, or
Parliament. In fact, he was believed by some to shun contact with Westerners.
Among the few Americans he received was Senator Hugh Scott, the Pennsylvania
Republican, in 1971.

Despite this lack of personal contact, foreigners always found Mr.  Suslov's
presence unmistakable, even at a distance.  Six feet tall, thin and nearsighted,
and wearing horn-rimmed glasses - until about 1960 he favored pince-nez - in his
public appearances, he often created the impression of a Chekhovian intellect
ual of the late 19th century. The impression was accentuatedby a shock of hair
that would drop across his forehead, the gray double-breast ed suit that was
likely to hang loosely on his tall, lanky frame, and a somewhat carelessly
knotted flowered tie that tended to sag from the collar in the Russian manner.

Although seemingly shy at public functions, Mr. Suslov displayed much nervous
energy when the occasion demanded. After speeches at Communist meetings he
demonstrated a vigorous, flailing style of applause. While other leaders clapped
perfunctorily, he threw his heart and soul into it.

Little was known of Mr. Suslov's private life. Only when his wife, Yekaterina,
director of a Moscow dental college, died in 1972, did it become evident that he
had been married.

In contrast to many of his colleagues in the Soviet leadership, he had his
black, chauffeured ZIL limousine keep to the speed limit of 60 kilometers (37
miles) instead of roaring through Moscow.

Of Peasant Background

Mr. Suslov was born Nov. 21, 1902, in the village of Shakhovskoye in Ulyanovsk
Province of the middle Volga valley. To people familiar with Russian
regionalisms, the long ''o'' acc ent in his speech betrayed the area of his
birth.

Like many high Soviet officials, Mr. Suslov was of peasant background. Official
biographies stressed that he came from the poorest stratum of the peasantry.
But, unlike most other leaders, Mr. Suslov spent his teens in his Volga village,
where at the age of 15 he became embroiled in the upheaval of the Bolshevik
Revolution in the winter of 1917-18.

He promptly joined the newly established Young Communist League and, as a
political activist, worked with the local Committee of the Poor, a revolutionary
rural organization established by the Bolsheviks to induce those who were then
private peasants to relinquish food for the cities and the Red Army.

Having joined the party at the age of 19, Mr. Suslov was sent to Moscow for an
accelerated secondary education at a workers' school.  Upon graduation in 1924
he enrolled in the Plekhanov Institute of the National Economy, a training
ground of economic planners and political economists.

As the Soviet Union embarked on its first five-year plan in 1928, Mr. Suslov
began graduate studies at the Economics Institute of Red Professors, a Communist
Party school in Moscow.

Named to Watchdog Group

During this period, when Stalin was crushing his opposition, Mr.  Suslov also
taught economics at Moscow University and the Industrial Academy, another party
training institution.

His political awareness was apparently recognized early by his superiors, for in
1931 he was appointed to the party's Central Control Commission and the
Government's People's Commissariat of Worker and Peasant Inspection, a combined
watchdog group used by Stalin as an instrument for purges.

Mr. Suslov helped to supervise purges in the Urals and in the Chernigov region
of the Ukraine. When the watchdog group was split by Stalin in 1934 into party
and Government arms, Mr. Suslov remained in the Government branch, where he
worked two more years.

After a brief period for additional studies at the Economics Institute, Mr.
Suslov moved into the party apparatus at the regional level during the height of
the purges in 1937.

He was sent to Rostov on Don, in southern Russia, where he became a department
chief and then a secretary of the regional party organization. In 1939 he was
appointed the First Secretary of the party in nearby Stavropol Territory, a
fertile agricultural region in the northern Caucasus.
Elected to the Central Committee

His regional responsibilities cleared the way for membership in the party's
central agencies. He was elected to the Central Auditing Commission in 1939 and,
two years later, to the Central Committee.

In World War II, Mr. Suslov remained in the northern Caucasus, which was partly
occupied by German forces in 1942. He was a political commissar on the North
Caucasus Front, ruled the unoccupied section of his territory and instructed
guerrilla forces operating behind the German lines.

In 1944 he helped supervise the brutal deportation from the Caucasus of ethnic
minorities accused by Stalin of collaboration with the Germans. Twelve years
later Mr. Khrushchev declared the charges to have been false, and the deported
groups - Karachai, Chechen, Ingush, Kalmyks - regained their civil rights and
were permitted to return to their homelands in the Caucasus.

Mr. Suslov's handling of the Caucasus deportations apparent ly suggested to
Stalin that the young regional official was also the man to handle another
ethnic problem, this time in Lithuania, where the Red Army was meeting
resistance from anti-Soviet guerrillas.

Political Integration of Lithuania

As a member of a Central Committee task force, at the end of World War II, it
was Mr. Suslov's job to supervise the political integration of Lithuania with
the Soviet Union, including the deportation to Siberia of thousands of people
whose loyalty was suspect.

His last regional task accomplished, he was summoned to Moscow in March 1946 to
join the Central Committee apparatus. He remained at the national center of
power for the rest of his life.

When he formally joined the leadership group as a national party secretary, in
November 1947, Western news dispatches commented on his boyish appearance at the
age of 45 and referred to the newcomer at the Soviet pinnacle as a ''young
political philosopher.''

Although Mr. Suslov's first job in the Central Committee was to head the
department of agitation and propaganda, concerned with domestic ideological
controls, it was not long before he was shi fted to foreign relations, which
were to remain hi s principal responsibility.

He participated in 1947 in the founding of the Communist Information Bureau
(Cominform), an organization that was to coordinate the actions of European
Communist parties until its dissolution in 1956, and was a Soviet representative
at the Cominform meeting that expelled the Yugoslav Communists in 1948.

During the period of the last Stalinist purges, from 1949 to 1952, Mr. Suslov
worked briefly as editor in chief of Pravda, the party newspaper, and attended
to domestic ideological matters.

At the 19th party congress in October 1952, Mr. Suslov, evidently high in
Stalin's esteem, was made a member of the party's enlarged ruling Presidium, as
the Politburo was then called. The next month, on his 50th birthday, he was
awarded the first of four Orders of Lenin that he would ultimately accumulate.

Among his other decorations were the title of Hero of Socialist Labor, the top
Soviet civilian award, given to him twice, on his 60th and 70th birthdays.

In Politburo and Secretariat

In the confusion after Stalin's death in 1953, before a new alignment of forces
emerged, Mr. Suslov was briefly dropped from the party's Presidium, but he
rejoined it in 1955. Thereafter Mr. Suslov was one of the few Soviet party
leaders who were members of both the ruling Presidium, or Politburo, and the
national secretariat, the two centers of power in the Soviet political system.

It is unclear where Mr. Suslov stood in the great policy debates of 1955-57
between Mr. Khrushchev and his opponents. But when the showdown came in June
1957, Mr. Suslov voted with Mr. Khrushchev and against Georgi M. Malenkov,
Vyacheslav M. Molotov and Lazar M.  Kaganovich, who had fought against the
post-Stalin liberalization.

But Mr. Suslov was never an outright Khrushchev supporter. As the anti-Stalinist
tide kept rising and receding through the late 1950's and early 1960's, Mr.
Suslov was generally viewed as a conservative.  There is evidence that he
resisted Mr. Khrushchev's attempts to push liberalization further.

In the continuing debate over investment priorities, Mr. Suslov was believed to
have favored heavy industry and military preparedness over consumer goods.

In the summer of 1956, before the Hungarian revolt, Mr. Suslov, ostensibly on
vacation in Hungary, was reported to have made a vain attempt to keep the
Stalinist leader, Matyas Rakosi, in power.

Mr. Suslov's avowed coolness to a rapprochement with the Yugoslavs, after Mr.
Khrushchev had expressed a desire for better relations, led President Tito to
exclaim in 1957, ''Whom shall we believe?''

Although Mr. Suslov continued to devote his time mainly to foreign party
affairs, his conservative voice undoubtedly counted heavily in party councils
when the Kremlin periodically applied the brakes to cultural liberalization.

On the foreign scene, Mr. Suslov's task became increasingly difficult as the
Soviet-Chinese rift widened through the international Communist conferences of
1957 and 1960 to the break that followed the confrontation of the summer of
1963.

Mr. Suslov's innate conservatism undoubtedly also made him a ready participant
in the ouster of Mr. Khrushchev in October 1964. In fact, Mr. Suslov was one of
the speakers indicting Mr. Khrushchev at the Central Committee session that
decided on his removal.

Declined Khrushchev Succession

After the ouster it fell upon Mr. Suslov, together with other Soviet leaders, to
explain the circumstances of the Kremlin's move to foreign parties. It was
reported that Mr. Suslov was considered for the post of First Secretary to
succeed Mr. Khrushchev but took himself out of the picture on the ground of poor
health.

Although he was reported to have shared some of his responsibilities in foreign
affairs with Foreign Minister Andrei A.  Gromyko after Mr. Gromyko was elevated
to Politburo status in 1973, Mr. Suslov continue to concentrate on interparty
relations.

After having supervised preparations for a world conference of Communist parties
in 1969, he traveled frequently abroad as the head of Soviet delegations to the
congresses of other Communist parties.  In that role he visited France in 1972,
Cuba in 1975, East Germany and Vietnam in 1976 and Poland in February 1980,
before the rise of Solidarity was to become a matter of continuing concern to
the Soviet leaders.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mikhail A. Suslov and Mao Zedong (page A6)
photo of Mikhail A. Suslov

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 27, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND DENIES HE UNDERESTIMATED ENEMY

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 707 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 26


Gen. William C. Westmoreland and a number of his associates during the Vietnam
war today indignantly denied the suggestion in a television documentary
broadcast that there had been a ''conspiracy'' to alter and suppress
intelligence on the size and strength of enemy forces.

But, during a long news conference this morning, the retired officials confirm
ed at least some of the factual assertions made during the br oadcast, on CBS
News Saturday night, by retired military and civilian officials about a dispute
in 1967 over Vietnamese Co mmunist force estimates.

General Westmoreland, who commanded United States forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
mid-1968, asserted today that he had been ''subjected to a vicious, scurrilous
and premeditated attack on my character and personal integrity'' in a 90-minute
program entitled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

General Westmoreland also asked that CBS News apologize and make broadcast time
available to show ''the other side of this controversy.''

CBS News, which produced the report, said in a statement that this morning's
news conference did not persuade the network that the program had been
''inaccurate or unfair'' in its reporting or conclusions and that assertions
that there had been impropriety in the preparation and editing of the broadcast
were ''totally unfounded.''
Show of Solidarity

In a show of solidarity, General Westmoreland was joined this morning by
Ellsworth Bunker, a former ambassador to Vietnam; retired Air Force Lieut. Gen.
Daniel O. Graham, who had served as a colonel on the intelligence staff in
Vietnam; Lieut. Gen. Philip Davidson, one of the chief intelligence officers in
Saigon during the war, and George Carver, a former special assistant to the
Director of Central Intelligence and head of a Central Intelligence Agency task
force on Vietnam.

In sometimes emotional tones, General Westmoreland and others in the group said
that it was unfair to attribute disagreements about how to evaluate intelligence
data and to analyze the military significance of Vietcong hamlet militia and
political personnel as a conspiracy or an attempt to deceive Washington
officials or the public.

Mr. Carver said, ''We read the same evidence in different fashions and disputed
mightily as to how it should be read,'' but contended that there had been ''no
suppression of evide nce.'' He said it was, in his view, ''a mistake to
interpret differe nces, even very sharp differences of opinion as necessarily
being e vidence of a conspiracy.''

General Westmoreland was critical of Mike Wallace, the CBS News correspondent,
and said the program, directed and produced by George Crile, had been a
''reprehensible and irresponsible effort to impugn my character and integrity.''


Differences of Interpretation

The group gathered today at the Army-Navy club confirmed, in broad terms,
several of the themes discussed by other retired officers on the CBS News
program - but there were sharp differences in interpretation. For instance,
General Westmoreland said that his former chief of intelligence, then Maj. Gen.
Joseph McChristian, had in mid-1967 proposed ''considerably higher'' figures for
the Vietcong ''political cadre.'' General Westmoreland said these figures
represented better intelligence capability to count such personnel and not an
actual increase in their numbers.

The former commander said he had ''demurred'' when General McChristian suggested
that the new figures be ''lumped'' with main force Vietcong combat forces, as
had been done previously.

To do so, General Westmoreland said, would have ''deceived everybody.'' Instead,
General Westmoreland said, ''we eventually revised the bookkeeping system on a
more realistic basis'' by dropping poorlyarmed local militia and political
personnel from the Vietcong ''order of battle.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 027-20-27

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 27, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 867 words


H ERE is how a Washington subway conductor talks bureaucratese to his passengers
as he announces that a train up ahead has broken down: ''We have a problem train
being removed from the revenue portion of the railroad.''

Some in his standing-room-only audience had to savor that phrase and wonder
whether what used to be called a siding was now a nonrevenue portion of the
railroad. Such musings helped keep the delay from taxing -revenue-enhancing? -
the riders' patience.

A FTER a steady period of approval from right and left in Congress, the
remarkably uncontroversial Vietnam Veterans Memorial has encountered criticism
only a month before the scheduled ground breaking in a glade near the Lincoln
Memorial.

''A political statement of shame and dishonor'' is the denunciation being
circulated by Representative Henry Hyde, the conservative Republican of
Illinois, who contends that the antiwar movement of the 60's is somehow carried
forward in the stark, mournful memorial.  His view has been endorsed thus far by
42 other lawmakers, and it has apparently stirred some caution in the
Administration.

Secretary of the Interior James Watt was ''very noncommittal'' in considering
the privately financed project at a recent meeting, according to Jan Scruggs, an
infantryman wounded in Vietnam, who first proposed the memorial when he found
the Government ignoring the subject.

''We're not escalating this battle,'' said Mr. Scruggs, who has raised $7
million in public donations and says that, contrary to some complaints, the
recessed outdoor memorial of black stone will include a tribute to all American
veterans of that war, as well as the names of the dead. ''But you can get
furious to see politicians get involved with two out in the bottom of the ni
nth, with not one red cent from Uncle Sam involved and with thousan ds of
parents waiting and writing and telling how they can't wait t o visit this
rememberance of their dead sons.''

Mr. Scruggs is no slouch in the ways of the Washington trenches, however, for
early in the campaign he enlisted a spectrum of political support, including the
endorsement and a $1 million contribution from the American Legion. After
Secretary Watt served notice recently that he would review the design, Mr.
Scruggs saw to it that the national commander of the American Legion sent a
message to President Reagan reaffirming the memorial as ''a dignified and
eloquent tribute.''

W HEN it comes to book sales, Washington is understandably susceptible to the
memoirs of selfinflated power brokers and to the latest splenetic literary
oeuvres from Nixon-era felons. ''Trivial personalities decomposing in the
eternity of print'' is the unkind way Virginia Woolf once described such
offerings.

Monday night, in a celebration refreshing for its dearth of capital VIP's, the
centennial of Virgina Woolf's birth was observed at Kramer Books, a lively shop
and cafe about a mile north of the White House.  David Tenney, the manager, kept
it simple with a cake, streamers, party hats and a stream-of-consciousness
rendition of ''Happy Birthday'' from devotees gathered around two tables of
Woolf books that, Mr. Tenney rejoices, are steady sellers.

''Bless her soul,'' said the manager, happy to be amid some of the city's
well-read nobodies, with no Administration or embassy official to be overheard
and quoted for decomposition in the eternity of print.

T HE Year of the Dog should prove extra spicy for Washington. So says Dr. C.T.
Wu, head of the Sichuan Pavillion restaurant, an instant success when it opened
little more than a year ago in New York with a c adre of 18 chefs who were
specially chosen for their artistry and sent here with the cooperation of
municipal officials inChina.

Dr. Wu is planning to open a Washington branch, once he finishes real estate
transactions and requisite American immigration paperwork, lengthy as a banquet
menu, so that 10 more chefs can be brought over from Sichuan province.

The enterprise will involve a subtle change of palate, for the New York chefs
are from Chengdu, the ancient cultural center of Sichuan, while the 10 chefs who
will staff Sichuan Pavillion D.C. will be from Chongqin, the modern industrial
capital of the province known for a newer, ''slightly spicier'' cuisine,
according to Dr. Wu. He should know, since he teaches geography at Hunter
College in New York and was born in Chongqin and raised on Sichuan home cooking.
Francis X. Clines Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 27, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CAREY OFFERS A PROGRAM TO FIGHT UNEMPLOYMENT

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Jan. 26


Governor Carey today proposed a wide range of measures to combat unemployment.
They included a ''work sharing'' program to permit employees whose workweeks are
cut back to collect unemployment benefits, state insurance for loans to small
businesses and a cutback in state regulations on a variety of industries.

In addition, Mr. Carey proposed state financing of a center for industrial
innovation to promote research in high-technology industries, the use of public
pension funds f or investment in New York State industry and moving state
offices from the World Trade Center to New York City's outer boroughs.

The Governor's proposals came in his annual economic message, which was
presented hours before President Reagan's State of the Union message.

Mr. Carey said that some of his proposals were designed to make up for Federal
cutbacks and that others were made in response to a sluggish national economy.
And the Democratic Governor continued his barrage against Mr. Reagan's policies.

''Our difficulties,'' Mr. Carey said, ''are further aggravated by our national
leaders' clear conviction that an increase in economic inequality is an
essential prerequisite to economic growth.''

New Economic Perspective Urged

Mr. Carey and his Commerce Commissioner, George G. Dempster, said the state must
''modernize'' its perspective on its economy, taking account of the fact that
services, not manufacturing, provide the state's economic base. Mr. Dempster
described this situation as ''a flip on the way the economy of the state was
looked at in 1960.''

Some of Mr. Carey's proposals were either dusted-off versions of older
proposals, or substantially revised programs.  Last year, for example, he
proposed to replace the state's Job Incentive Program, which provides tax breaks
for a wide range of employers, with a more limited plan to permit such tax
benefits only in ''distressed areas.''

That plan came under attack from suburban legislators, who saw it as a way of
concentrating tax benefits in distressed urban areas.  This year, Mr. Carey
proposed limiting the program's benefits to companies that hired and trained
''specific target groups - lowincome youth, welfare recipients, Vietnam veterans
and others.''

Roger Vaughan, a top economic aide to the Governor, said the new proposal -
which Mr. Carey is to detail later this year - would allow the benefits to ''go
to any part of the state.''
'Work Sharing' in California

The Governor's ''work sharing'' proposal - similar to one that failed in the
Legislature last year - would require a change in the unemployment insurance
law. It is designed to permit employers to put groups of workers on shorter
workweeks rather than laying off some of them.

For example, Mr. Vaughan said, an employer faced with laying off one person in a
group of five might put each of them on four-day weeks, saving the same amount
of money but preserving all five jobs.  The Governor's proposal would allow the
five affected workers each to collect one day of unemployment benefits.

Audrey Gardner, supervisor of a similar program in California, said that the
state sent out some 9,565 payments under the plan last month and that 2,133
companies participated.

The plan has been opposed by the New York State A.F.L.-C.I.O. in the past.
''This is not any long-term solution, but it could become a long-term
solution,'' said Jay Butler, a spokesman for the group, who said it feared that
shorter workweeks would become a way of cutting wages.

Aid for Small Exporters

Mr. Carey said his proposal for insuring loans to small businesses was designed
to make up for cuts in the Federal Small Business Administration and the Farmers
Home Administration. The insurance, he said, would be financed by banks and
borrowers. Mr. Carey also said he was studying a proposal to establish a program
to finance state export businesses that are too small to get help from the
Federal Export-Import Bank.

The Governor, who has called for the rapid sale of the World Trade Center, said
he would seek to relocate state offices now housed there to such distressed
areas as downtown Brooklyn, Harlem, the Fordham Road area of the Bronx and
Jamaica, Queens.

He also called for the development of ''back office parks in marginal
neighborhoods.'' Mr. Dempster said New York City could face the loss of
financial institutions' back offices - where basic accounting and paperwork are
done -unless it took action to retain them.

The Governor also urged that easing restrictions on the investment of public
employee pension funds so their managers could give preference to New York
companies. Mr. Carey said this would reduce ''the flow of New York capital to
Houston, Miami, Los Angeles and other areas.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 27, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS OF HOLLYWOOD;
M-G-M TO FINISH NATALIE WOOD FILM

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 846 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Jan. 26


Lloyds of London has prevailed upon Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to finish principal
photography on ''Brainstorm,'' the 12.5 million science-fiction thriller that
was left unfinished when its star, Natalie Wood, drowned last Nov. 29.  The
insurance company, one of two that had insured the production for a total of
nearly $15 million, will give M-G-M approximately $3 million to complete the
filming.

Lloyd's and Pacific Indemnity, the other company that had supplied ''cast
insurance'' on ''Brainstorm,'' had balked at handing over the $15 million M-G-M
sought when it stopped production on the movie. If ''Brainstorm'' can be
adequately finished and released, Lloyds and Pacific Indemnity will save $12
million.

''When Natalie died, we looked at the script and made an evaluation of what she
had left to do,'' said Frank E. Rosenfelt, chairman of M-G-M. ''We concluded
that the film was fatally flawed, that it was not reasonable and practical to
finish. The insurance company said we shouldn't have made that decision without
looking at the footage that was already shot. We said we didn't want to be
placed in a position where we could be accused of not liking what we saw and
then dumping on the insurance company. Lloyds then said, 'We at our expense are
willing to finish the principal photography if you will then look at it without
prejudice.' We said yes.''

Weeks of Negotiations

This compromise came last Saturday after several weeks of negotiations.

When Miss Wood fell from her yacht into the ocean off Catalina Island, she had
five or six scenes left to shoot. According to David Chasman, M-G-M's vice
president of production, ''Two of those scenes were crucial and set up the
entire third act of the movie.''

But Douglas Trumbull, the director of ''Brainstorm,'' said that as far as he was
concerned, ''Natalie's performance is essentially complete.'' ''We won't use any
voice doubles, any fake Natalies in floppy hats,'' he added. ''When Natalie was
cast, the role was built up because we knew she was a star. I am absolutely
delighted that I now have a chance to finish the movie and I think I can do it
without Natalie.''

''Brainstorm,'' which centers on a research scientist who has invented a device
that allows thoughts and emotions to be transmitted from one person to another,
starred Christopher Walken as the scientist, Miss Wood as his wife, and Cliff
Robertson. The movie goes back into production Feb. 8.

$50,000 Guns Stolen

Guns believed to be worth $50,000 were stolen last weekend from a locked
five-ton truck on the location of ''First Blood,'' Sylvester Stallone's new 5
million movie, in Vancouver, British Columbia.

Among the guns stolen were 14 M-16, 20-shot, fully automatic rifles, three
11-gauge Remington shotguns, two 44-caliber Smith and Wesson Magnum revolvers,
and 11 Colt semi-automatic AR-15 rifles. The weapons, which were being used in
chase sequences of the actionadventure movie, had been altered to shoot only
blanks.

According to Superintendent Roy Byrne of the North Vancouver division of the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police which is investigating the theft, ''a relatively
minor operation would make most of them fully operative again.'' Although the
official number of guns listed as stolen is 47, someone close to the production
insists that nearly 100 guns were taken.

The theft was discovered on Saturday when the movie's property supervisors went
to check on the guns that were kept inside a locked wooden case in the truck
that held most of the props for the Carolco production movie. Some 50 dummy
guns, metal replicas of M-16 rifles, were not touched. The truck had two
padlocks on the side doors and a combination lock on the rear door. According to
the Mounted Police report, there were no signs of forced entry.

The location was also being guarded by members of the Canadian Army who were
acting as extras in the film. ''There were supposedly four armed guards at all
times,'' said Burt Elias, unit public-relations worker on the movie.

''First Blood,'' in which Mr. Stallone stars as a returning Vietnam veteran who
runs afoul of the law, has been plagued with bad luck since it started shooting
last November. First, Mr. Stallone was injured doing a stunt. Then bad weather
forced the delay of a number of complicate d stunts that had been scheduled for
the first few weeks.

Kirk Douglas, who was to have played an important cameo role as Mr. Stallone's
Army trainer, left after his small but flashy cameo was drastically cut. His
replacement, Richard Crenna, had a contract that increased his price
dramatically after a certain number of weeks of work. Since the production was
behind schedule as that day neared, several of Mr. Crenna's scenes were still
unshot. His scenes were telescoped, and he was released.

''First Blood'' marks the debut as a production company of Carolco, a
well-established international distributor of movies. ''First Blood,'' which is
directed by Ted Kotcheff, a Canadian best known for ''The Apprenticeship of
Duddy Kravitz,'' has no American distributor as yet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Natalie Wood

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 28, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN EXPECTED TO BACK MORE AID FOR SALVADOR JUNTA

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 27


Despite reports of a large-scale massacre of civilians by Government troops in
El Salvador, President Reagan is still expected to certify that the Salvadoran
security forces are making a ''concerted and significant effort'' to respect
human rights.

Spokesmen for the State Department and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
said they expected the legal certification document to be sent to Congress on
Thursday, paving the way for continued United States assistance to El Salvador.

Military and intelligence officials, meanwhile, said that the flow of small arms
from Nicaragua to anti-Government forces in El Salvador continued at a steady
rate in recent months.

The certification on human rights is required by the Foreign Assistance Act,
approved last month. The President must submit documentation within 30 days of
the date that the law was enacted, and at six-month intervals for two years, in
order for $25 million in military aid and $40 million in econom ic assistance to
be sent to the military- civilian junta in El Salvador. But the act does not
give Congress the right to challenge the accuracy and validity of thefindings in
t he President's certification.

The Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a liberal-oriented Washingtonbased
organization interested in human rights, said it would try to block the aid to
El Salvador in a Federal district court if Mr. Reagan did make the
certification.

Major Massacre Reported

Meanwhile, a State Department spokesman, Alan Romberg, said ''we would obviously
deplore such an incident'' if reports contained in articles published today by
The New York Times and The Washington Post about a massacre of major proportions
in Morazan Province proved to be true.

Mr. Romberg made it clear, however, that the official United States position was
that it was virtually impossible to obtain firm confirmation of reports of
atrocities carried out by the Government.  He said:

''We will continue to seek actively corroboration of such reports, but I think
we have to realize the continuing difficulty in El Salvador of tabulating
civilian deaths, let alone the difficult if not impossible task of attributing
responsibililty, exists. And stories detailing such deaths frequently have a
politically motivated overtone.''

The Foreign Assistance Act also contained the certification procedure, enacted
over Administration object ions.

Political and Economic Changes

While the procedure probably could not be used to block continued assistance to
the Salvadoran Government, an aid program that the Reagan Administration values
highly, it could pose some diplomatic and public relations problems for the
White House.

In addition to the requirement of certification by the Administration of
''concerted and significant efforts,'' by the junta to respect human rights and
of its ''substantial control'' over the security forces, the act also says the
President should inform Congress that the Salvadoran Government is making
''continuing progress'' in carrying out a series of promised political and
economic changes, including a major land redistribution program.

An organization representing more than 100,000 Salvadoran peasants has made a
report, requested by the Salvadoran President, Jose Napoleon Duarte, saying that
Government and right-wing forces were evicting peasants from land to which the
redistribution program had entitled them, and that a lethargic bureaucracy had
failed to give legal title to the land to most potential beneficiaries.

The State Department said earlier this week that its position was that
generally, but not always, the Government forces were trying to help carry out,
rather than frustrate, the land redistribution program.

U.S. Weapons From Vietnam

The military and intelligence officials who commented on the flow of arms to El
Salvador said that M-16 rifles had been identified by their serial numbers as
having been captured from or left behind by American forces in Vietnam. Still
others, they said, were a variety of hand-held arms, including antiank weapons,
that were made in the Soviet bloc.

''We have photographs of trucks full of small weapons near El Salvador's border
with Honduras,'' one official said. Another official said that weapons had been
flown into El Salvador from Nicaragua and that others had been flown in from
Guatemala.

When one official was asked to comment on reports from El Salvador that
guerrillas had not been seen carrying weapons supplied by the Soviet Union
through Cuba and Nicaragua, he replied, ''Do you expect them to roll out their
Soviet weapons when American reporters are visiting?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 28, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

STRUGGLE LOOMS OVER MINERS' LEADERSHIP

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 711 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, W.Va., Jan. 27


Another potentially bruising battle for the presidency of the United Mine
Workers of America began taking shape today on the ashes of the union career of
Jack Perry, for nine years the regional president of the union's D istrict 17.

In a by-election Tuesday, Mr. Perry, formerly a close associate of Sam M. Church
Jr., the union's president, was defeated for reelection by a perennial
candidate, Raymond Thompson.

In a three-way race last year, Mr. Thompson suffered his second loss to Mr.
Perry and few here believed he could win a rerun ordered by the Labor
Department. The new election was ordered after minor irregularities were found
in the mailing of ballot notifications to the locals.

It was Mr. Thompson's history as a repeated loser of District 17 elections that
suggested to many here today that Mr. Perry's defeat demonstrated that, as a
co-negotiator with Mr. Church of an unpopular 1981 contract, he was simply
unelectable.

72-Day Strike Recalled

As those in the Appalachian coal fields who were out of work for 72 days last
year while on strike well remember, Mr. Church's and Mr.  Perry's first
agreement with the Bituminous Coal Operators Association was bitterly rejected
by the rank and file.

The rejection last March prolonged by nine weeks what would have been a six-day
strike. Although there has been relative calm in the coal industry under the
second agreement, which was ratified last June, Mr. Church and Mr. Perry remain
linked to the first pact.

Mr. Perry could not overcome that burden in the Tuesday's vote, and the result
might be a bad omen for Mr. Church, who is up for reelection on Nov. 9.

But Mr. Church's supporters are saying the result is not so clearcut. They noted
that Mr. Perry had deserted Mr. Church and had become a supporter of the
insurgent for president next November, Rich Trumka, a young lawyer and miner.

Church Denies Election Role

Although Mr. Church denied having a hand in the District 17 election, there was
little doubt that he had sought Mr. Perry's defeat. In an interview this week,
Mr. Church conceded that he had held a secret pre-election meeting with Mr.
Thompson.

District 17 is the U.M.W.'s largest, with 35,000 of the union's 170,000 members.
And Mr. Church seemed to have benefited a bit from Tuesday's election. Mr. Perry
was defeated despite the support of the district vice president, Cecil Roberts,
a 35-year-old, collegeeducated Vietnam War veteran who is Mr. Trumka's running
mate next fall for vice president of the union.

Unopposed Tuesday, Mr. Roberts kept his regional vice presidency.  But Mr.
Perry's loss raised a question about whether Mr. Roberts could deliver the
district for Mr. Trumka.

Mr. Trumka, 32, of Nemacolin, Pa., is from a family of coal miners. But little
else about him fits the miners' union mold.  In 1971 he was elected to Phi Beta
Kappa, the scholastic honor society, at Pennsylvania State University, where he
majored in accounting and economics. He earned a law degree, specializing in
labor, at Villanova. He has worked both in the mines and in the legal department
at union headquarters in Washington.

Member of Executive Board

Last fall, in his own western Pennsylvania district, he was overwhelmingly
elected a member of the union's executive board, giving him a platform for his
presidential campaign.

In the rough-and-tumble tradition of coal union politics, Mr.  Church has placed
Mr. Trumka in what Mr. Trumka calls ''the deep freeze'' of a distant
''commission,'' a union board indefinitely dispatched to Fort Smith, Ark., far
from coalfield campaign territory, to win back a company that went nonunion in
last year's strike.

Reached by telephone in Arkansas, Mr. Trumka said he foresaw ''a rough
campaign.'' He asserted that Mr. Church's partisans had begun ''red-baiting me
as a radical and saying, 'If he's such a good lawyer, why is he in the mines?'
''

''There are a few of us left who care more about miners than the almighty
dollar,'' Mr. Trumka said in an attack on Mr. Church's ''failure of leadership
in mine safety.''

The third member of Mr. Trumka's November slate, the candidate for
secretary-treasurer, is John Banovic, 52, president of District 12 in southern
Illinois, another large and militant region.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 29, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture caption yesterday incorrectly inentified John L. Lewis's role in the
United Mine Workers. He was president of that union and later helped found the
Congress of Industrial Organizations.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rick Trumka and Cecil Roberts photo of Sam M.
Church Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ITALIAN POLICEMEN FREE U.S. GENERAL, WHO IS UNHARMED

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1394 words

DATELINE: ROME, Jan. 28


Antiterrorist forces stormed an apartment in Padua and freed Brig. Gen. James L.
Dozier today, 42 days after he was abducted by the Red Brigades.

The American general was unhurt and said he was in ''excellent health,''
according to the United States Ambassador in Rome, Maxwell M. Rabb. The general,
the highest-ranking American officer serving with NATO in Italy, was taken to an
American military hospital in Vicenza, 20 miles from Padua, for an indefinite
period of medical observation.

One of his captors was aiming a pistol at the general's head when the squad of
10 special antiterrorist policemen broke into the second-floor apartment at
11:35 A.M. (5:35 A.M. Thursday, New York time), the Italian news agency ANSA
quoted the Padua police as having said.

One Terrorist Is Wounded

Seized in the raid were five persons, including one or two women, who were
described by the police as being members of the leftist Red Brigades. No shots
were reported fired, but one of those seized was taken to a Padua hospital with
a head wound said to have been caused by a blow with a rifle butt.

According to the Padua police, General Dozier had been kept in a pup tent
pitched in the apartment. His rescuers found the 50-year-old general bound,
dressed in a blue track suit and barefoot. He was wearing a beard and was
noticeably underweight.

The police said they had acted on a tip from an undisclosed source and
surrounded the apartment house at the edge of Padua last night.  They waited
until the morning, they said, so that normal street life, enhanced by crowds
around a nearby supermarket, would cover their move on the hideout.

Then heavily armed policemen sealed off the area and started a bulldozer nearby
to cover the noise of the raid. Ten policemen stormed the apartment; they were
wearing bullet-proof vests and masks so they could not be identified for
reprisal by terrorists.

Tip From Turncoat Reported

A search of the apartment was said to have yielded 5 machinepistols, 7 hand
grenades, 6 packages of plastic explosive, various kinds of ammunition, about
$20,000 in lire, false identity documents and detailed files on regional
political leaders and other prominent figures, ANSA reported.

A well-informed source reported that the police had acted on information
received two days ago from a Red Brigades turncoat who was motivated by
expectation of financial reward. Unconfirmed reports circulated in Italy two
weeks after the abduction that unidentified friends of the general had put up
$1.7 million for information leading to his liberation, but nothing further has
been heard about the reported reward.

The general was being closely interrogated by the Italian police on his
experiences with the terrorists, an American source reported tonight.

After his release, the general went to Padua police headquarters, where he spoke
by telephone with his wife, Judith, and with Ambassador Rabb. Later Mrs. Dozier
and the couple's daughter Cheryl were reunited with the general in his hospital
suite, military sources repor ted. (Page A8.)

In Washington, President Reagan hailed the General's ''courage and resolve'' and
expressed gratitude to Italy for his rescue. He said that he had spoken to
General Dozier by telephone and that the general had described himself as being
in ''fine shape.''

The Ambassador, too, stated that General Dozier said he was feeling well, ''but
I didn't feel that good just the moment before I was rescued. A gun was pointed
at me, and I didn't know if that was my last moment.''

''Marvelous, O.K., police,'' were the first words General Dozier said, partly in
Italian and partly in English, to his liberators, according to ANSA. ''I have
witnessed a stupend ous operation.''

A Padua police spokesman said the general appeared to be in a state of shock
when he was helped out of the pup tent.  ''He was speaking half in English and
half in Italian,'' the spokesman said. ''He asked what day it was, and when he
was told the 28th, he kept saying, 'giovedi, giovedi.' '' (''Thursday,
Thursday.'')

First Non-Italian Seized

General Dozier was the first non-Italian kidnapped by the Red Brigades since the
group was founded 11 years ago. He was the second captive of the group to have
been freed by force; in 1975 the police stormed a farmhouse near Turin, killed a
Red Brigades member and rescued Vallarino Gancia, an industrialist.

The general, a West Point graduate and Vietnam War veteran, was deputy chief of
staff for logistics and administration at the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization's headquarters for southern Europe in Verona, 50 miles from the
city where he was held in what the Red Brigades called a ''people's prison.''

Four terrorists disguised as plumbers overpowered the general in his apartment
in Verona on Dec. 17, beat him into submission, bound and gagged his wife and
carried him off in a trunklike container. A rented panel truck was found nearby
and is believed to have served as the getaway vehicle. Presumably the kidnappers
transferred their captive to another vehicle and took him to the apartment in
Padua.

Interior Minister Virginio Rognoni told reporters in Padua that the identities
of the five captured terrorists were known, but he refused to disclose them.

ANSA said three suspects had been identified with certainty: Antonio Savasta,
Emilia Libera and Cesare Leonardo. It said the two others were a man and a
woman.

The state television service described Mr. Savasta as a leader of the ''Rome
column'' of the Red Brigades. By coincidence, a court in Cagliari, Sardinia,
today sentenced Mr. Savasta and Miss Libera in absentia to 30 years'
imprisonment for attempted homicide in a shootout with the police in 1980.

President Sandro Pertini exclaimed, ''Bravi! Bravissimi!'' when Mr. Rognoni
telephoned him immediately after the general's rescue.  Later the 85-year-old
President received a call from President Reagan, who thanked him for General
Dozier's liberation.
Premier Interrupts Speech

Prime Minister Giovanni Spadolini interrupted a speech he was delivering to a
national association of municipal officials in Palermo, Sicily, to announce: ''I
bring you good news. The fight against terrorism has recorded a new success. The
soldier of a friendly nation has been returned to his loved ones, to his
family.''

When news of the rescue was announced at a session of the Chamber of Deputies,
the legislators burst into prolonged applause.  The leader of the Communist
Party, Enrico Berlinguer, sent congratulations to the Interior Minister and
asked him to express the good wishes of the Italian Communists to the police.

Pope John Paul II was immediately informed and through his spokesman expressed
his ''considerable satisfaction.''

More Than 5,000 in Search

The widespread rejoicing in Rome marked the culmination of what has been
described as Italy's largest police operation ever, involving more than 5,000
personnel. It surpassed in scope even the long and unsuccessful search for
former Prime Minister Aldo Moro, who was killed by the Red Brigades after 54
days of imprisonment in 1978.

The Red Brigades issued five ''communiques'' on General Dozier's capture and
''trial'' by a ''people's court.'' Two of the statements included photographs of
him holding propaganda statements and sitting under a Red Brigades banner. One
of the communiques consisted of an apparently verbatim transcript of an
interrogation of the general concentrating on his service in Vietnam.

The vast police search resulte d in the capture of a number of persons suspe
cted of being members of the Red Brigades, including a former univer sity
professor of penology, Giovanni Senzani, who is said to be on e of the
organization's leading theorists. Arsenals of weapons and e xplosives were also
seized.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Italy, showing Padua, Verona and Vicenza photo of
Brig. Gen. James L. Dozier photo of Judith Dozier and her daughter Cheryl

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

News Analysis

BYLINE: By HENRY TANNER, Special as Rome bureau chief for The New York Times,
The author of the following article recently completed an assignment as Rome
bureau chief for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 28


The Red Brigades, Italy's most feared terrorist organization, may have suffered
the most stunning blow in its 11-year history when policemen burst into a Padua
apartment today and liberated Brig. Gen. James L. Dozier unharmed despite the
presence of five armed terrorists. The kidnapping of General Dozier 42 days ago
was the most ambitious operation the Red Brigades have carried out since they
abducted former Prime Minister Aldo Moro in March 1978 and killed him 54 days
later.

Recently there have been signs that discipline and fighting spirit in the
leftist terrorist organization have been waning and infighting between factions
increasing. The presumed purpose of the Dozier kidnapping was to demonstrate to
the Italian public - and perhaps to the organization's own members - that the
Red Brigades still had the power to carry out large-scale operations, which
required coordination with terrorist forces in other parts of the country.

No Longer Fighting It Out

The way that General Dozier was freed pointed up two major recent weaknesses of
the Red Brigades: Its members are no longer fighting it out with their weapons
when they are cornered by the police, and the security forces now have a store
of information about the organization, which they had been unable to infiltrate
in the past.

All the signs indicate that the police were led to the terrorists' hiding place
by information from captured or defecting members of the Red Brigades.

Since General Dozier's abduction Dec. 17, more than 20 people accused of
belonging either to the Red Brigades or to Front Line, a related, smaller
terrorist group, have been arrested. Many of them were willing to give
information to the authorities and give it quickly, according to Italian police
sources.

It was through such information that Giovanni Senzani, described as a leading
member of the Red Brigades, was surprised and captured without a fight in a
students' small apartment in a suburb of Rome on Jan. 9. The former university
professor, though armed, did not resist.

Poised to Strike in Rome

The police were led to his hideout by testimony from two terrorist suspects
arrested only a day earlier in the center of Rome near the Spanish Steps,
according to Rome officials. Mr. Senzani was captured at a time when his
organization was poised to strike in a major operation in Rome, possibly in an
effort to draw the police away from their search for General Dozier in northern
Italy.

The two men arrested near the Spanish Steps were heavily armed and were sitting
in a car in front of the home of Cesare Romiti, a leading figure in the Italian
Association of Industrialists, and the police believe they were planning to kill
him. Two other suspected terrorists who were waiting there escaped.

Mr. Senzani was a respected professor of criminology at the University of
Florence until he went underground early last year. His identity as a member of
the Red Brigades was established only then.  He had had access to prisons and
had attended high-level international conferences on justice and criminality.
Three Italian magistrates who had attended a concert with him in Madrid were
later shot by terrorists.

Tactics Have Changed

The tactics of the Red Brigades have gone through several phases over the years.
The kidnapping and killing of Mr. Moro was an outright bid for power. The te
rrorists failed to gain their objective, which was to break down national
political institutions and touch off a ''civil war.'' They also failed in their
attempt to set up an ''armed party,'' a political movement with a popular
following.

Through much of their operations since then, the Red Brigades were able to get
lengthy statements into the Italian press. But a year ago, when they made
newspaper publication of certain statements a condition for the release of
Giovanni D'Urso, a magistrate th ey had kidnapped, the overwhelming majority of
Itali an newspapers refused.

Press Coverage Declines

Press coverage of the terrorists and especially of the Red Brigades has been far
more limited since then, depriving the terrorists of one of their best
propaganda tools.

Also a year ago the Red Brigades began a campaign to politicize the inmates of
the nation's prisons, where by then many of their members or suspected members
were being held. That led to several attempted jail breaks but nothing more.

With the kidnapping of General Dozier, the Red Brigades chose a non-Italian
victim for the first time. They accused the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
with which the general served, of being an imperialist tool for the oppression
of people everywhere.  They called the general an imperialist ''pig'' and
''executioner'' for his role in Vietnam. They also made appeals for the
cooperation of Basque separatist terrorists and of the Irish Republican Army.

This was the first time they had tried to give their operations an international
dimension.

Desperate Acts Seen

The ventures into the prisons and into the international arena are seen by most
Italian specialists as desperate acts of an organization that had to stage a
spectacular action because it had lost the operational ability it had at the
time of the Moro killing.

At that time, the Red Brigades were believed to consist of 400 to 500 full-time
members, who received regular salaries of about $400 a month. This was the hard
core of underground terrorists and fighters.

In a second group above ground, 1,000 or more members of the organization were
said to live seemingly normal lives while going underground periodically to help
the terrorist organization.

A third group consisted of several thousand occasional helpers, people who would
carry a message or rent an apartment for the terrorists and who maintained
relatively normal lives in the open.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of undercover italian police officers

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
A BATTLE-HARDENED GENERAL

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


Brig. Gen. James L. Dozier, who won a Silver Star and a Bronze Star with two Oak
Leaf Clusters for heroism in combat during the war in Vietnam, may never have
been closer to death than he was yesterday when

Italian policemen rescued him as he was being held at gunpoint by Red Brigade
terrorists in an apartment in Padua.  With his release, the 50-year-old general,
the first foreigner to have been taken hostage by the terrorist organization,
became only the second captive of the Red Brigades to have been rescued by the
Italian authorities. The first was Vallarino Gancia, an Italian industrialist,
in 1975.

At the time of his kidnapping in December, General Dozier was serving in a NATO
administrative post as deputy chief of staff of logistics and administration for
allied land forces in southern Europe.

It was not an unusual progression for an officer who has been described as a
soldier's soldier from his earlier years as a troop commander, tactician and
much decorated veteran of the Vietnam War.

'One of the Best Officers'

Col. James Leach, his immediate superior when they served together in the 11th
Armored Cavalry Regiment in Vietnam in 1968-69, characterized the general
recently as ''one of the best army officers we ever had.'' General Dozier, then
a major, was the regiment's operations officer.

Under the supervision of Colonel Leach, now retired, Major Dozier planned a
30-day offensive during which the regiment covered 1,000 miles in the southern
part of South Vietnam searching for North Vietnamese and Vietcong strongholds in
the area of the Iron Triangle, Kuan Loc, Tay Ninh and Loc Ninh. The drive was in
part an experiment in using tanks in the jungle.

Col. Glenn Finkbiner, who also served with Major Dozier in Vietnam, said
whenever there was a firefight, ''Dozier had no hesitation in going into the
hottest part of the battle.''

Such qualities of leadership won him the Legion of Merit in addition to his four
awards for heroism. He was also awarded a Purple Heart for a shrapnel wound in
an arm,

Two Degrees in Engineering

James Lee Dozier was born April 10, 1931, in Arcadia, Fla., where he has
maintained a home thoughout the travels of his military career.

He received a Bachelor of Science degree in engineering along with his
commission as a second lieutenant on graduation from West Point in 1956, and
later earned a Master o f Science degree in aerospace engineering f rom the
University of Arizona.

General Dozier is married to the former Judith Stimpson. They have a daughter,
Cheryl, who is a second lieutenant in the Air Force at the Rhein-Main Air Force
Base near Frankfurt, West Germany, and a son, Scott, a college student who has
served in the Coast Guard.

Before his service in Vietnam, the general went to the Armored School at Fort
Knox, Ky., for basic and advanced training in armored warfare.

On his return from Vietnam, General Dozier, then a lieutenant colonel, was
assigned to the Pentagon, where he served from 1969 to 1971 as a staff officer
on the Southeast Asia team at the Army operations center.
Another Tour at Pentagon

Between 1971 and 1974, General Dozier saw service in Europe for the first time
as a brigade executive officer and commander of an armored cavalry squadron and
then attended the Army Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth,
Kan., and the Army War College at Carlisle Barracks, Pa.

Another tour of duty at the Pentagon as a staff officer for research and
development and as a military assistant to a senior civilian official was
followed, in 1976, by assignment to Fort Hood, Tex. There he rose from commander
of the Second Brigade, Second Armored Division, to chief of staff of the
division and then to chief of staff of the III Corps, of which the division was
a part.

From Fort Hood, General Dozier went to the Defense Language Institute in
Monterey, Calif., to study Italian before going to Verona, Italy, in 1980 and
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization assignment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of undercover police officers

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLES DESCRIBE 9 AS AGENTS OF C.I.A.

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 979 words

DATELINE: WARSAW, Jan 28


The Polish Government accused the United States today of espionage in Poland and
said the Central Intelligence Agency had played a significant role in creating
anti-Government opposition.

At a news conference, three colonels presented what they said was evidence of
spying. They showed film clips of three diplomats once posted here and named six
others stationed outside Poland who they said were C.I.A. agents.

The film was part of a five-part series being shown on television.  Titled ''Who
is Who,'' it uses Interior Ministry film purporting to show spies at work.

Poles said the series was more anti-American than anything they had seen since
the cold war. It was viewed as a retort to the United States
Government-sponsored television program, ''Let Poland Be Poland,'' to be aired
on Sunday.

The accusations also appeared intended to cast a further chill on contacts
between Poles and Westerners, especially diplomats, and to undercut the
Solidarity trade union and dissident groups by suggesting that they were linked
with foreign subversion.

One of the officers at the news conference, Col. Zbigniew Wislocki of the
Interior Ministry's counterintelligence unit, said that actions of Solidarity
''aimed at the breaking of the state were to a significant extent the result of
activities by the U.S. secret services.''

United States diplomats here derided the accusations in private and said public
comment on specific charges must come from the State Department.

Others at t he news conference, which was held at the Government press center,
were Col. Hipolit Starszak, head of the Interior Ministry's in vestigation
bureau, and Col. Boleslaw Klis, who is with the Military Prosecutor's Office.
Espionage Devices Under Glass

To one side were two glass-enclosed booths containing what was labeled as
American spy devices, including transistor radios, cameras, code paper that was
said to vanish on contact with water, and pellets of disappearing ink hidden in
the handle of a shaving brush. Reporters examined the objects before the
conference opened, as a song sung by Tom Jones was piped into the room.

The first film was about Leslie Sternb erg, identified as a third secretary in
the consular division of the Uni ted States Embassy here from 1979 to 1981. The
film, evidently taken from a moving van, showsa Fiat car being stopped ''for a
routine road check,'' on March 13, 1981. Inside the trunk, according to the narr
ation, were found printing ink, brochures and leaflets from the Confederation
for an Independent Poland, a dissident group. Miss S ternberg is shown standing
grim-faced beside the car and later at a police station.

''It was learned that she speaks Polish, but not well enough to answer certain
questions,'' the narration says, adding that her embassy job was a cover for
collecting information, such as the home addresses of police officials.

The second episode concerned Peter Burke, described as a second secretary in the
embassy's political section in 1979 and ''an important spy.'' The film shows his
identity papers, his local residence and then a park where a stone had been
placed under a lamppost. A car is seen stopping nearby, a man picking up the
stone.  Then Mr. Burke is brought to police headquarters where, according to the
narration, ''he keeps repeating 'I am an Amercian diplomat.' ''

Inside the stone, which is opened on camera, was said to be information on
Poland's air defense system.  ''This is the man who worked for the C.I.A. and
slipped on a stone in Poland,'' the narrator says.  A third segment was about an
unidentified Pole, the man who was said to have left the stone. He describes on
film how he was recruited by the Americans while a member of the Polish Control
Commission in South Vietnam.

The fourth concerned Alicja Wesolowska, a Polish citizen who worked for the
United Nations and was arrested while on a visit here in August 1979, was
charged with espionage and is now serving a sevenyear sentence.

The film was apparently made during her interrogation. Over a scratchy
soundtrack, she is seen saying that she had provided ''bits and pieces'' of
information on diplomats at the United Nations, including Russians. The details
are provided by a voice-over narration.

The last episode focused on two men called ''X'' and ''Y.'' They are seen inside
an apartment. ''X'' turns out to be a longtime dissident, Zbigniew Romas@zewski,
and ''Y'' Michael Anderson, a second secretary in the embassy's political
section from 1979 to 1981. Mr. Romaszewski tried to pass along ''documents to
prove that human rights are not being observed,'' the narrator says.

Colonel Wislocki said the Government did not want to create a ''spy mania.''
''We are not planning to limit contacts of Poles with Western embassies,'' he
said, ''but frequently official contacts later change into something else.''

He acknowledged that Soviet-bloc nations might also be using spies in the West,
but said: ''Poland is not threatening anyone. We must defend ourselves as a
small European country.''

The colonel gave the names and positions of six people he said were C.I.A.
agents attached to United States embassies in other foreign capitals. Many of
them, he said, tried to recruit Poles abroad to work for the C.I.A.

----

'Ridiculous,' U.S. Says

WASHINGTON, Jan. 28 (AP) - A State Department spokesman said today that the
Polish charges were ridiculous.  ''The persons named appear to have been
selected at random from among members of the U.S. Foreign Service serving in
posts all around the world, and in at least one case, a post that does not even
exist,'' spokesman Rush Taylor said. ''Nonetheless, it is the policy of the U.S.
Government not to respond to this kind of ridiculous allegation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

In the Nation;
AN UNNEEDED HORROR

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 898 words


President Reagan apparently is ready to notify Congress that he has ordered a
multibillion dollar program to produce binary nerve gas for chemical warfare -
the worst possible answer to the Soviet Union's unconscionable ''yellow rain.''

Ours, after all, is an open society and the Soviet Union's is not.  So we will
openly proclaim - in the budget and elsewhere - that we are rebuilding a
chemical warfare capacity that we will use if necessary. But the Russians,
despite solid evidence that they have developed and used toxic substances for
lethal purposes (''yellow rain'') in Asia, do not and probably never will admit
having done so.

Many will believe them, out of hope and naivete, and the propaganda advantage
will be with the Russians from the beginning. In this case, that's no small
matter. Binary nerve gas, like yellow rain, is a horror weapon, effective
primarily against civilians. It's lethal within minutes to anyone who breathes
it, and capable of poisoning the atmosphere of huge areas for days at a time.

Americans, in fact, will be double propaganda losers in that we will have
forfeited the advantage we now should have in the evidence that the Russians are
using yellow rain. That evidence should be emphasized by the United States in
every way and in every forum possible; so should Moscow's willingness to violate
the 1925 Geneva Protocol by which it renounced the use of chemical weapo ns.
Instead, if it develops binary nerve gas itself, the U nited States will
dissipate a sound moral and political positio n.

In 1969, President Nixon renounced first use of chemical agents and ordered an
end to their production. President Ford formally signed the Geneva Protocol -
prohibiting use but not possession of chemical weapons -and proposed a world
treaty to outlaw chemical warfare.

If Mr. Nixon's order is now reversed, the United States will not literally have
violated either the Protocol or his pledge against first use. But with Moscow
steadfastly denying any involvement in chemical warfare, many will be only too
eager to ask why a nation that dropped the first atomic bomb and spread lethal
herbicides in Vietnam and Laos is developing binary nerve gas if it doesn't
intend to use it.

The answer, Pentagon officials say, is that if the Russians have chemical
weapons we must have them, too, to deter them from their use. But the United
States already has ample stocks of older chemical weapons; and this answer
raises the military ques-tions whether effective deterrence requires that we
match the Russians weapon-forweapon in every category, or whether the overall
deterrent effect of all our military forces is sufficient.

Put it another way: can the Russians' use of chemical warfare be deterred only
by the threat of chemical warfare turned back against them? Need we sacrifice
moral and propaganda advantage, add a new dimension to the superpower arms race
and expand the world's inventory of genocidal weapons, all in order to deter the
use of yellow rain? Particularly when we already have stockpiles of gas
artillery shells?

Richard Halloran of The New York Times reports that the Pentagon regards Europe
as the likeliest chemical war battlefield, and plans to stockpile its new gas
shells there, perhaps in Britain. But shouldn't we have learned something from
the anti-nuclear demonstrations in European cities and from the anti-nuclear
attitudes of Governments like those of Belgium and Holland, and of the British
Labor Party?

At the root of this rising tide of opinion is the fear - however ill founded
-that Europe will be devastated in a superpower nuclear war that would leave the
United States and the Soviet Union untouched. Are we now to add to this
nightmare the idea that a superpower chemical war might also be fought in
Europe?

If so, European paranoia about American as well as Soviet intentions will be
surely heightened, and the stresses that are already wracking the NATO alliance
will be increased -also in the name of deterrence.

More than $2 billion is being projected for producing binary nerve gas in 1983
and 1984, and more will be required later. That money would be far better spent,
and achieve more real Western security, if it were de voted instead to research
and development of defensive equipment and techniques against yellow rain and
other chemical weapons, and if the fruits of that effort were made available to
any and all natio ns feeling themselves threatened by chemical warfare.

That would make it clear who really poses the threat, and who wants to help the
world avoid it. So would a determined attempt to negotiate with the Russians and
all nations a total renunciation of the use or possession of chemical weapons.
But producing those weapons ourselves will divert the world's opprobrium from
its proper target in Moscow, while adding one more horror to those that already
haunt the future.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Flora Lewis is on vacation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Broadway;
Grosbard to direct and produce new Beth Henley play.

BYLINE: By Carol Lawson

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1248 words


FOR his work on ''True Confessions,'' starring Robert Duvall and Robert De Niro,
Ulu Grosbard is being hailed as a leading film director. But his theater fans
shouldn't worry. Mr. Grosbard has plans for new productions both on and Off
Broadway.

Mr. Grosbard will direct, and also produce, Beth Henley's latest play, ''The
Wake of Jamey Foster,'' on Broadway in the fall. The play is trying out at the
Hartford Stage Company, with Susan Kingsley and Amanda Plummer in the leading
roles. Mr. Grosbard says that Miss Kingsley, who plays Jamey Foster's widow, is
set for the Broadway production, but Miss Plummer's participation is
questionable because she is to open on Broadway on March 21 in another new play,
''Agnes of God.'' Santo Loquasto, who designed the set at Hartford, will do the
scenery on Broadway, too.

Like Miss Henley's current Broadway play, the Pulitzer Prizewinning ''Crimes of
the Heart,'' ''The Wake of Jamey Foster'' is set in her native Mississippi. It
takes place immediately after the death of one Jamey Foster, who had abandoned
his wife for another woman.

''The play is 24 hours in the life of his widow,'' Mr. Grosbard says. ''It's
about her coming to terms with her loss and going on with her life.''

''It is a comedy-drama,'' he adds.  That is exactly what Mr. Grosbard calls
another play on his agenda, David Blomquist's ''Weekends Like Other People.''
This two-character work, starring Kenneth McMillan and Rose Gregorio as a
blue-collar couple, will open March 11 Off Broadway at the Phoenix Theater. Both
Mr. McMillan and Miss Gregorio, who is Mrs. Grosbard, were in ''True
Confessions.''

''Alex Cohen had this play at one point and asked me to direct it,'' Mr.
Grosbard reports. ''He decided not to do it, so I took an option on it myself
and approached the Phoenix.''

''Master Harold ... and the Boys,'' a new play by Athol Fugard, South Africa's
foremost dramatist, will open March 9 at the Yale Repertory Theater. Once again,
Mr. Fugard will direct his own work.

''I've never before done a play of mine for the first time outside South
Africa,'' Mr. Fugard said by phone from St. Louis, where he is looking in on a
production of his ''A Lesson From Aloes'' at the Repertory Theater of St. Louis.
''A Lesson From Aloes'' was first staged in this country at Yale before moving
to Broadway last season.

Mr. Fugard described ''Master Harold'' a s ' 'a very personal statement.'' It
concerns the relationship bet ween a white teen-ager and a black man in South
Africa. ''The point being,'' he said, ''thatthe young white boy is in need of a
father. I t is based on my own experience.''

There are no plans yet for bringing the play to New York, but producers will
inevitably scramble to see it at Yale. ''This play will survive if people have a
good time,'' Mr. Fugard remarked. ''I have to get an audience smiling or
laughing.''

''Master Harold'' has no cast yet, but Mr. Fugard is talking to his friend Zakes
Mokae, the South African actor, who is starring in ''A Lesson From Aloes'' in
St. Louis. Mr. Mokae has appeared in several plays by Mr. Fugard, including the
1970 Off Broadway production of ''Boesman and Lena,'' with James Earl Jones and
Ruby Dee.

''Zakes and I have been together 21 years,'' Mr. Fugard noted. ''We just raised
two glasses of wine to that.''

When Patrick Cassidy was graduated from Beverly Hills High School - with grades
that were ''good for a football player'' - a future was presented to him on a
silver platter. ''I was offered two recording contracts,'' he says. ''But I knew
the reason they were asking me. It was because of who my brothers are.''

His brothers are the teen-age singing idols David and Shaun. He once followed in
their footsteps, performing with his own rock band in high school. But he turned
down the recording offers because, although he had nothing against becoming a
teen-age idol himself, he was more interested in acting.

''I wanted to do my own thing, and not be thought of as the brotherof these two
superstars,'' says the 20-year-old performer, who made his Broadway debut this
month. He replaced Robby Benson as Frederick,the lovelorn pirate apprentice, in
''The Pirates of Penzance'' at theMinskoff.

''My father was a big Broadway theater person,'' he adds. ''I inherited those
genes.'' Mr. Cassidy's father was the late Jack Cassidy, a leading actor in
Broadway musicals. His mother is Shirley Jones, also a show-business veteran,
who won an Academy Award as best supporting actress in the 1960 film ''Elmer
Gantry.'' ''My parents tried to steer us away from this business,'' notes the
tall, blue-eyed actor, whose handsome face is framed by a mop of light-brown
curls. ''It is very tough. It's a business of waiting for your next job. Like my
mother says, an actor is the last person on the totem pole.''

''The Pirates of Penzance'' has been part of his life for some time. He
auditioned to replace Rex Smith, the original Frederick, but lost the job to Mr.
Benson. ''He is a little bigger draw than I am at this point,'' Mr. Cassidy says
matter-of-factly. As a consolation, he was asked to go to San Francisco to
replace Andy Gibb for three months in the road company.

''When I got that phone call for San Francisco, I went crazy! I ran into my
mother's room. I was still living at home. I've never lived by myself before I
came to New York.

''It was terrific doing 'Pirates' in San Francisco. It was like a training
ground. Broadway is more difficult. The audiences here are harder to please. But
they are also more sincere when they applaud or laugh at a line. I'm really
happy that I got the opportunity to do this show.''

Offers for other roles are coming in. ''I was recently offered a movie, but I
don't know if I'll do it,'' Mr. Cassidy says. He pauses with a sheepish smile
and explains: ''It's not such a great role for my first movie. It's a rock
star.''

The Circle Repertory Company, which is bursting at the seams of its 160-seat
theater at Sheridan Square, has rented the Entermedia on Second Avenue, where
''Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat'' played before moving to
Broadway this week. Beginning March 10, two new Circle Rep productions will play
there in repertory for four weeks - ''Richard II,'' starring William Hurt and
Lindsay Crouse, and John Bishop's ''The Great Grandson of Jedediah Kohler,''
with Trish Hawkins. Mr. Hurt has a minor role in ''Jedediah Kohler.'' Marshall
Mason will direct both productions.

The new musical ''Is There Life After High School?'' - which will be the second
Broadway production directed by Melvin Bernhardt this season -has been booked
into the Barrymore Theater. It will open April 15. Mr. Bernhardt also directed
''Crimes of the Heart.'' ...  Mike Kellin has joined the cast of ''The World of
Sholom Aleichem,'' which opens Thursday at the Rialto Theater. ... Bob Gunton
and Don Scardino will open Feb. 17 in Amlin Gray's ''How I Got That Story'' at
the Westside Arts Theater, 407 West 43d Street. Mr. Gunton, who plays 20
different roles in this work about Vietnam, won a Derwent Award last season when
the play ran at the Second Stage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Hirshfeld drawing of Patrick Cassidy

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 30, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THE CENTENNIAL VIEW OF ROOSEVELT

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2185 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Jan. 29


When Franklin Delano Roosevelt was President, he was a figure of fierce
controversy, loved and hated by many Americans.

But now, 100 years after his birth on Jan. 30, 1882, historians for the most
part have come to agree that, despite flaws, he was on balance the greatest
President of the 20th century. In hindsight, they say Roosevelt's faults have
receded as his strengths have loomed larger.

''If anything, time seems to have confirmed the view of his greatness,''
commented Joseph P. Lash, author of the book ''Eleanor and Franklin.''

''I am reminded of the remark Sam Rayburn made of him at a memorial service not
long after Roosevelt died,'' Mr. Lash added, referring to the Texan who was
Speaker of the House. ''Rayburn said, 'He saved the country twice: in the
Depression and then again in World War II.' ''

'Towering Figure of the Century'

William E. Leuchtenburg, a professor of history at Columbia University and
author of a 1963 study, ''Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal,'' said, ''I
take a more positive view of Roosevelt now than I used to.''

''This comes from watching other Presidents and the fact that we are approaching
the end of the century,'' he went on. ''I see F.D.R.  as the towering figure of
the century and the New Deal as its great divide.

''I don't know when in our history there has ever been such an imaginative
response to such a crisis as by Roosevelt in the 1930's.''

At the time Roosevelt was elected in 1932, national income had shrunk to less
than half what it had been when Herbert Hoover became President, dropping to
$41.7 billion from $87.4 billion. Nearly 13 million people, or a quarter of the
labor force, were out of work.  Hundreds of banks had failed. Large parts of the
rich farmland of the Middle West had turned into a dust bowl.

Treatment of the Jews Is Questioned

The Roosevelt legacy is not entirely positive. His decisions to limit the
immigration of Jews trying to escape Hitler's Europe, to intern
Japanese-Americans in World War II and to try to pack the Supreme Court with
political supporters continue to be criticized today, even by Roosevelt
admirers.

Moreover, Professor Leuchtenburg conceded that some of Roosevelt's reform
initiatives had failed and that others, like the National Recovery
Administration and the Works Progress Administration, had been dismantled or had
faded away.

But he cited other New Deal ideas that became a permanent part of American life:
social regulation and farm price supports.  President Reagan has embarked on an
ambitious effort to reduce the nation's social programs, abolishing some,
cutting others and turning some over to the states. But he has left intact the
basic New Deal programs.

Republican Role in Centennial

In fact, in accepting the 1980 Republican Presidential nomination, Mr. Reagan
quoted Roosevelt. The President and conservative members of his Administration
are taking part in centennial activities as if Roosevelt were one of their own.

''What make s Roosevelt so great, like other Presidents we remember as great, is
that he stood for something,'' said Prof. James MacGregor Bur ns of Williams
College, author of a two-volume biographyof Roosevelt.

''He could be a fox who was deceptive and he could be breezy and superficial,''
continued Professor Burns. ''But he really stuck with his principles under
adversity.''

On the whole, Roosevelt has been fortunate in his biographers. Men like
Professor Burns, Arthur Schlesinger Jr. of the City University of New York,
author of the three-volume ''Age of Roosevelt,'' and Frank B. Freidel, a
professor at the University of Washington, author of ''Franklin D. Roosevelt,''
of which four of eight volumes have been published. Like many historians, they
are liberal and Democratic in their political persuasion.

Roosevelt Re-evaluated

But in the late 1960's and early 1970's, in the course of a leftward swing of
intellectuals induced by th e Vietnam War and Watergate, there was a wave of
revisionist wr iting that accused Roosevelt of being too conservative, or even
counterrevolutionary.  Roosevelt had talked of helping ''the forgott en man,''
but to revisionist critics had neglected the poor, b lacks and women.

In later years, however, younger historians have re-examined these issues and
given Roosevelt higher marks.  Susan Ware, a visiting professor at Harvard who
is the author of ''Beyond Suffrage,'' has concluded that ''Roosevelt was a
pioneer in opening opportunities for women in Government.''

Indeed, said Prof. Ware, ''it wasn't until the 1960's that as many women were
active in Government again.'' There were limits to the power Roosevelt offered
women. His inner circle included no women, Professor Ware cautioned. But in
Labor Secretary Frances Perkins he appointed the first woman to a Cabinet post.
She was one of only two Cabinet members to serve in all four of Roosevelt's
terms. Another woman, Molly Dewson, became an active Democratic Party organizer.


A Contribution by Eleanor

In part, Professor Ware feels, Roosevelt's ease in dealing with women can be
credited to his wife, Eleanor, an intelligent, dedicated woman who became the
conscience of the Administration. ''Roosevelt respected her,'' she said.

Also, in combating the Depression, Roosevelt recognized he needed trained social
workers. Social work was one of the few professions that had been available to
women.

In his book ''A New Deal for Blacks,'' Harvard Sitkoff has challenged a
long-held assumption that Roosevelt did little or nothing to help blacks.

It is true, said Professor Sitkoff, of the University of New Hampshire, that
Roosevelt ''was not a civil rights crusader.'' On two major issues of the 1930's
affecting blacks, a proposed Federal antilynching law and abolition of the poll
tax, ''Roosevelt always took the position that first things come first.'' He
wanted to concentrate on overcoming the Depression and then on World War II, and
needed the support of Southerners leading key committees in Congress.

Opening a Door to Civil Rights

But, at the same time, Professor Sitkoff said, Roosevelt ''encouraged a great
deal of hope for blacks,'' and helped blacks start organizing for civil rights.
''It's one of the forgotten aspects of the New Deal.''

Roosevelt used his wife as his envoy to blacks, ''creating the impression among
blacks that they had access to the White House,'' Professor Sitkoff recalled.

On foreign policy, Roosevelt has been criticized for being naive and for giving
away Eastern Europe to Stalin at the 1945 Yalta Conference, shortly before his
death.

But Robert Dallek, a professor at the University of California at Los Angeles,
contends in his book ''Franklin D. Roosevelt and American Foreign Policy,
1932-1945,'' that ''Roosevelt was more realistic than he is usually given credit
for.''

Some Wanted Secret Told

''Roosevelt did not give Stalin the secret of the atom bomb,'' Professor Dallek
said, ''even though he was urged to do so by some scientists and he knew from
intelligence reports that the Russians had found out the United States was
developing an atom bomb.''

Most Americans, in arguing about Yalta, tend to forget that the Soviet Army
controlled Poland then, and that the United States would have had to fight to
oust it, Professor Dallek added.

When Roosevelt came back from Yalta and proclaimed that the conference had ended
the world's division into spheres of influence, he knew better, Professor Dallek
asserted. It was Roosevelt's way of trying to keep Americans interested in
international affairs instead of slipping back into prewar isolationism.

If Roosevelt had lived, Professor Dallek said, ''The Cold War would have begun
sooner than it did under Truman. Roosevelt had the confidence of the people. He
could have gone to them and said, you know how hard I tried to accommodate
Stalin.'' He said Truman had to be more cautious.

Growth in Welfare Came Later

Alan Brinkley, an assistant professor of history at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, believes that criticism of Roosevelt for starting the welfare
state is unfair. The cornerstone of welfarism, he said, is the Aid to Families
with Dependent Children program.

But in the New Deal, such support began only as a small part of the larger
Social Security program. It was only intended ''to give Government support to
those few children whose circumstances were terribly poor.''

Congress later expanded the New Deal measures into the welfare program of today,
with the addition of Medicaid, or medical insurance, and the free school lunch
program.

''Roosevelt was a fiscal conservative, at least until World War II led to large
Government deficits, and I'm sure he would have been horified by the welfare
state just like Reagan,'' Professor Brinkley said.

How would Roosevelt have grappled with the economic crisis of 1982? Professor
Leuchtenburg said that he would have argued against the Reagan dictum that
Government itself is the culprit: ''Roosevelt felt the problem was to make
Government more imaginative, creative and humane. Government was meant to deal
with problems like high black unemployment. Roosevelt would have tried to solve
it.''

1882 Born Jan. 30 in Hyde Park, N.Y.  1903 Graduated from Harvard June 24.  1905
Married Eleanor Roosevelt March 17.  1907 Admitted to New York Bar.  1910
Elected to New York State Senate.  1912 Re-elected to the Senate.  1913
Appointed Assistant Secretary of the Navy.  1914 Defeated in Democratic primary
for the U.S. Senate.  1920 Nominated for Vice President at the Democratic
National Convention, but defeated in the election.  1921 Suffered attack of
polio in August at Campobello, New Brunswick, which left him crippled for life.
Despite speculation that his political career was finished, he returned to
campaign more seriously than ever.  1928 Elected Governor of New York.  1930
Re-elected Governor.  1932 Elected President Nov. 8.  1933 Attempted
assassination Feb. 15 in Miami; Mayor of Chicago was shot and later died of
injuries. Signed Emergency Banking Relief Act March 9. Signed Tennessee Valley
Authority Act May 18. Signed National Industrial Recovery Act June 16. The
Recovery Act, which was eventually declared unconstitutional by the Supreme
Court, was established to help businesses recover from the Depression and to
provide safeguards for labor, such as minimum wages and the right for unions to
organize.  1934 Signed Federal Securities Exchange Act June 6.  1935 Issued
executive order establishing Rural Electrification Administration May 11. Signed
Labor Relations Act July 5, which established the National Labor Relations Board
to oversee collective bargaining. Signed Social Security Act Aug. 14.  1936
Re-elected President.  1937 Signed Neutrality Act of 1937 on May 1, which
prohibited the export of arms and ammunition to belligerent nations.  1938
Signed Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act June 24. Signed Fair Labor Standards Act June
25.  1939 Signed Hatch Act Aug. 2, which bars partisan political activities by
Federal employees. After declaration of war in Europe, issued proclamation of
neutrality Sept. 5. Signed Neutrality Act of 1939 on Nov. 4, which repealed the
Neutrality Act of 1937 and allowed for shipments of arms and ammunition to
belligerents.  1940 After Nazis moved in western Europe, asked Congress for
$1.182 billion in additional appropriations for military May 16. Outlined Four
Freedoms at news conference July 5. Asked Congress for $4.848 billion in
additional appropriations for military July 10. Informed Congress of acquisition
of naval and air bases from Britain in exchange for 50 destroyers Sept. 3.
Signed Selective Training and Service Act Sept. 16, which established the draft.
Re-elected to unprecedented third term as President.  1941 Issued executive
order establishing Lend-Lease Administration Oct. 28. 7. Addressed joint session
of Congress as king for a declaration of war against Japan after the attack on
Pearl Harbor Dec. 7. Conferred with Winston Churchill at the White House Dec.
2223.  1942 Signed Emergency Price Control Act of 1942 on Jan. 30. Conferred
with Churchill in U.S. June 2025. Signed act lowering the draft age to 18 on
Nov. 13.  1943 Conferred in a succession of meetings with world leaders on
military strategy and international order after the war. Conferred with
Churchill at Casablanca and reviewed U.S. troops in North Africa Jan. 1421.
Issued executive order Feb. 9 establishing minimum work week of 48 hours in war
plants. Conferred with Churchill at White House May 12-25 and in Quebec Aug.
17-24. Conferred with Churchill and Chiang Kai-shek in Cairo Nov. 22-26, and
with Churchill and Stalin in Teheran Nov. 28 Dec. 1., 1944 Participated in
Dumbarton Oaks Conference Aug. 21 on a post-war international organization;
proposals served as a basis for the United Nation s. Won fourth term as
President.  1945 Attended Yalta Conference with Churchill and Stalin Feb. 31 1,
todiscuss the fate of Eastern Europe after the war; died at Warm Springs, Ga.,
of cerebral hemorrhage April 12.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A chart in some editions on Saturday incorrectly described the circum- stances
of Franklin D. Roosevelt's election as Governor of New York in 1928. He won a
two-year term in a regularly scheduled election.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Roosevelt as estate in Hyde Park in 1928 photo
of Roosevelt,16 months, with his father, James (page 9) photo of Roosevelt as
Asst. Secretary of Navy in World War I (page 9) photo of Roosevelt with his wife
and family (page 9) photo of Roosevelt taking oath as Governor (page 9) photo of
Roosevelt asking Congress to declare war on Japan (page 9)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 30, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TIP BY INFORMER SET ITALY'S POLICE ON DOZIER TRAIL

BYLINE: By HENRY TANNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words

DATELINE: ROME, Jan. 29


A captured terrorist suspect's sudden decision to give information to
interrogators four days ago provided the crucial break that enabled the Italian
police to find and free Brig. Gen. James L. Dozier, according to Italian
officials.

The informer, who was arrested in northern Italy Monday, did not know where the
general was being held, but he gave the addresses of several apartments and
other locations that terrorists had been using. The police checked all the
places, and the clues found in some of them led them to further hideouts and
eventually to the secondfloor apartment above a grocery in Padua where the
general was held, the officials said.

Precision of Operation Praised

In Vicenza, General Dozier praised the speed and precision of the operation by
the Italian antiterrorist squad that rescued him, but he declined to disclose
any details of his ordeal until after he has been questioned by Italian
authorities and American officials. (Page 6.)

Italian officials would not identify the terrorist suspect who gave the crucial
information and did not specify where he was captured.  By Wednesday afternoon
the presence of the general and five captors in the apartment had been
established.  The American Ambassador, Maxwell M. Rabb, met Wednesday with
President Sandro Pertini and Prime Minister Giovanni Spadolini. Interior
Minister Virginio Rognoni implied in an interview in the Rome newspaper La
Repubblica today that in those meetings the Italian leaders pointed out to Mr.
Rabb that the terrorists in the hideout were armed and that a police raid on the
apartment would involve serious risks for General Dozier and therefore required
American concurrence. The American Embassy declined to give details of the
meetings.

On Thursday morning, special antiterrorist policemen burst into the apartment.
No shots were fired in the capture of the three male and two female terrorists,
the official Italian announcement said, and General Dozier was unhurt.

Up to the moment when the newly arrested terrorist suspect decided to give
information, the police said, they were ''totally in the dark'' about the
whereabouts of the ''people's prison'' where the general had been held since his
kidnapping Dec. 17.

''We were lucky,'' an official of the Interior Ministry said, alluding to the
break provided by the informer. But he added that there was much more than luck
involved, since the knowledge and the experience accumulated by the
antiterrorist squads during years of systematic work had enabled them to exploit
the break and to follow the vague initial clues to the end.

''The Italians have conducted literally thousands of separate police operations
since Dozier was captured,'' an American diplomat said.

The search for the general is believed to have been on a greater scale than the
futile search in 1978 for former Prime Minister Aldo Moro, who was held for 54
days by the Red Brigades before his body was found.

During the 42 days that General Dozier was held, at least 34 people were
arrested on charges of being members of the Re d Brigades.

At least eight people belonging to Front Line, a smaller terrorist group linked
to the Red Brigades, were also arrested. The figures do not include m any
unannounced arrests.

Long on Wanted List

Most of those arrested had been on the wanted list as terrorists for some time.
Not all of the arrests during the six weeks were connected with the kidnapping.
Informed officials said today that the 15 or more arrests made in Rome in the
last two weeks had produced no clues to the general's wherabouts.

Giovanni Senzani, a former professor of criminology, who has been a key figure
in the Red Brigades, was among those arrested. He has been in disagreement with
some of the organization's military leaders in the north and did not take part
in the action against the American general.

A police expert said there were indications that the terrorists in the north had
at one point sent a message to Mr. Senzani asking for his help in interrogating
General Dozier. But the messenger, a woman, was intercepted by the police and
arrested.
Terrorist Archives Seized

''These people keep a lot of archives,'' an official connected with the
investigation said of the Red Brigades. He added that this had helped the police
pinpoint where General Dozier was held after they searched other premises that
had been used by terrorists.

Italian investigators are studying the captured documents for any evidence that
non-Italian terrorists may have taken part in the kidnapping. So far no such
evidence has been found, according to authoritative sources.

''So far the general's account of his captivity does not substantiate the idea
of a foreign connection,'' a source close to the investigation said.

Six American specialists in antiterrorist operations have been in Italy since
soon after General Dozier was abducted. Their identity has never been disclosed,
but they are believed to be officials of the Department of Defense. American and
Italian officials said that the role of the six has been strictly advisory and
that the actual rescue operations were conducted entirely by the Italians.

General 'Salted' Statements

VICENZA, Italy, Jan. 29 (AP) -American officials said here today that a study of
a ''communique'' released by the Red Brigades on Jan. 6 had led them to believe
that General Dozier was not cooperating with his captors.

In the document, the general supposedly talked about his education, the 1962
Cuban missile crisis and his experience in Vietnam. The officials who studied
the communique said the general had ''salted'' his interrogation by rearranging
or falsifying some of the dates of his career that were not mentioned in
documents stolen from his home. When the officials saw the false information,
they assumed he was not cooperating with his captors.

The statements attributed to General Dozier in the communique, which purported
to be a transcript of his ''people's trial,'' exceeded his knowledge of Italian,
which is rudimentary.

Assuming the interrogation was conducted in Italian, the officials said, parts
must have been invented or expanded -another indication that the general was not
cooperating.

''The real message was 'no cooperation','' an American official said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Brig. Gen. Dozier and his wife, Judith (page 6)
photo of Gen. Dozier speaking in Vicenza yesterday

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 30, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Briefing

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 780 words


I T'S those tiny symbols of prestige that make all the difference.  Take the
Lapel Pin Crisis at the White House, for example. Within recent days, blue lapel
pins and red ones have been quietly distributed to employees, blue pins for
senior staff, red pins for middle-level staff, and, in some cases, no pins for,
well, the lowest-rung of the ladder.

Since the pins denote access to the President and key offices, and since access
means power and prestige, staff members are nervously gazing at each other's
lapels as the three-tier caste system takes hold.

''The question you keep hearing now at the White House is, 'Got your pin yet?'
'' said one White House official.  ''Then if the answer is, 'Yes,' the next
question is usually asked in a shaky voice: 'What color is it?' ''If the answer
is, 'Blue,' it's followed with the comment, 'I don't care.' And then the guy
with the blue pin usually says, 'Hey, did you hear about so-and-so. He didn't
even get a pin.' ''

I N Washington, ideology obviously counts in finding a job. But loyalty seems
the key. Just ask William R. van Cleave. Mr. van Cleave headed the
Administration's Defense Department transition team, and is well-known in
conservative circles as a military hard-liner. Last fall, however, he strongly
criticized President Reagan's decision not to deploy MX missiles in mobile
underground shelters. Now Mr. van Cleave's scheduled appointment to head the
prestigious General Advisory Committee on Disarmament has been held up
indefinitely, according to Congressional sources.

Reached at his office at the University of Southern California, in Los Angeles,
where he is director of the school's Defense and Strategic Studies Center, Mr.
van Cleave said, ''As far as I know the appointment is still pending. Obviously
there's a holdup.''

Mr. van Cleave noted that, sometime last summer, Eugene Rostow, head of the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency, had said publicly he would get the job, but then
the White House apparently decided to delay the appointment. He said it was
''hearsay'' to assume that the delay was a result of his MX criticisms, but
observed, ''It could well be a consequential relationship. I don't know. I
haven't heard it directly.''

A T the Pentagon yesterday afternoon memories of Vietnam grew sharp and
lingered. Col. Floyd J. Thompson of the Army was presented with the
Distinguished Service Medal for his ''truly magnificent po wers offaith, physic
al endurance and trust in the nation during years of almost unfath omable
deprivation and hardship.'' The 48-year-old officer, who retired last month, was
in a North Vietnamese prison nine years, 1 964 to 1973, making him, according to
his citation, ''the longest held prisoner during the Vietnam era.''

C ONGRESSIONAL sources now report that Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
has selected a conservative defense analyst, William Schneider, to be the
department's No. 4 official and senior economic expert, thus raising the
possibility that the saga of Myer Rashish is about to reach its finale.

Mr. Rashish is leaving the job in question over differences with Mr. Haig,
although he has said he is not certain why the Secretary has been unhappy with
him. Although Mr. Haig has declined to comment, officials have speculated that
there was poor ''personal chemistry'' between the men.

Initially, Mr. Haig favored Robert D. Hormats, Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs, for the Rashish job, but the White House viewed that with
disfavor. One reason given was Mr. Hormats's close ties to former Secretary of
State Henry A. Kissinger, and the feeling that Mr. Haig was depending on too
many Kissingerians.

Mr. Schneider, who is now a ranking staff member of the Office of Management and
Budget, worked as an aide to Under Secretary of State James L. Buckley, when he
was a New York Senator, as well as for Representative Jack F. Kemp, Republican
of upstate New York. He is also a founding member of the Madison Group, an
influential team of conservative Congressional aides.

Behind the selection, said one Congressional aide, was a desire by Mr. Haig to
placate conservatives who have been upset about some of his recent appointments.

T HERE was Budget Director David A. Stockman at a dinner one night aft er the
State of the Union Message, saying that last year the inco ming Reagan
Administration ''put all these changes togeth er'' rapidly and with relative
ease. But this year, he indicated, t he Reagan program had been far more
difficult to shape. ''We had to do the whole thing ourselves,'' he said in an
oblique reference to the internal economicdebate of recent weeks.  Francis X.
Clines Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IS SAID TO PLAN $100 MILLION RISE IN SALVADORAN AID

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1759 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 30


The White House will ask Congress to increase military and economic aid to El
Salvador by about $100 million this fiscal year and will seek further increases
in the next fiscal year, according to Administration officials.

Military ai d for the current fiscal year stands at $25 million and all forms of
economic aid total about $110 million. The economic and military aid request for
the next fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1, will be in th e President's budget
presentation next month and is expected to b e about $300 million.

The officials also said that an additional $25 million would be needed to
replace aircraft and helicopters lost in a guerrilla attack this week that
destroyed about half of El Salvador's air power. Officials said this money would
come from funds now earmarked for other countries.

Existing Policy Affirmed

The attack prompted a State Department announcement that the Administration
would ask for more aid but the amount was not mentioned.

Administration officials said the moves were an affirmation of existing policy,
which is to support the Government of President Jose Napoleon Duarte, to urge
political and economic changes on his Government, to resist guerrilla demands
for direct negotiations and to build toward general elections in March to
strengthen the political center.

Above all, they reiterated, Administration policy was to stem the expansion of
Soviet, Cuban and Nicaraguan influence in Central America.

Admission of Ignorance

Behind this reaffirmation lie considerable differences in the Administration
over whether the situation in El Salvador is stable and perhaps even improving
or whether it is deteriorating, perhaps sharply. Almost all officials
interviewed acknowledged that they did not know which side was winning.

There is also questioning among some officials about Administration policy.
Military officers in particular are questioning whether the current approach can
deal with a deteriorating situation. While not challenging Administrationgoals
directly, these officials ask if President Reagan and his advisers have asked
themselves how far they are prepared to go and how far they might have to go to
prevent a guerrilla victory.

Key officials in the State Department and the Pentagon say this kind of thinking
is based on misplaced fears of ''another Vietnam.'' President Reagan, they
insisted, will never send United States troops to fight in El Salvador.

Even without American troops, they maintained, the situation will be manageable
as long as aid is increased, the Salvadoran Government's program of
liberalization continues and public opinion is not turned against the effort by
what some officials called inaccurate and overblown news accounts of the war.

Administration Opposes Coal ition

Yet a third train of thought, centered mainly among liberals and moderates in
Congress, is that there should be negotiations between the rebels and the Duarte
Government, apparently with a view to establishing a coalition government. This
is also the starting point of the rebel position, and it has no support inside
the Administration. To Administration officials, a coalition government would
only fall into the hands of the guerrillas eventually.

All of these policy tangles lay just beneath the surface this week when
President Reagan, as required by law, moved to free military aid to El Salvador
by certifying that the Duarte Government was trying to end abuses of civil
rights and making progress on political and economic changes.

This finding is expected to be challenged in Congressional hearings next week.
Inside the Administration, according to many officials, no one objected to the
certification. As one State Department official put it, ''We don't disagree that
Duarte is doing what the law asks; the disagreement is over how much difference
his efforts have made in the war, and that, only time will tell.''

The President's certification also came in the face of further troubles in El
Salvador. There were reports in The New York Times and The Washington Post this
week of the massacre of hundreds of men, women and children, and Government
troops apparently were responsible for the killing. One accounting said 733 died
in the massacre last month; another said 926. Officials said they could not
corroborate the accounts.

Part of a Larger Package

Administration officials said the big increase in aid planned for El Salvador
would be part of a larger military and economic aid package for Central America,
and that this new package would be 50 to 60 percent larger than in this fiscal
year.

This year, regional totals are about $230 million in economic aid and $105
million in military aid to El Salvador, Costa Rica, Honduras, Guatemala and P
anama.

Increasing aid to foster political changes and economic stability now seems to
be at the center of Administration policy toward the area, but for some time the
policy was not clear at all.

Last February, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. spoke as if Central
America had become the new arena of East-West conflict. He maintained that the
Administration would draw the line in El Salvador and that, if necessary, the
United States would ''go to the source'' of aggression in the region, meaning to
Cuba or even to the Soviet Union.

This was quickly followed by the publication of a White Paper that purported to
prove that Salvadoran guerrillas were receiving substantial equipment and
direction from Moscow and Cuba through the Sandinist-led Government of
Nicaragua.
Haig's View Is Disavowed

Subsequent admissions by the Administration cast serious doubt on whether the
evidence in the paper was valid, but the Adminstration did not back away from
its judgment about substantial Cuban involvement.

Shortly thereafter, White House officials let it be known to Congress and news
organizations that they thought Mr. Haig had made too much of the matter, but
American military advisers were sent to El Salvador and aid was increased.

By late fall, the American military had come to the view that the situation in
El Salvador was deteriorating, and Mr. Haig publicly used the word
''stalemate.''

He asked the Joint Chiefs of Staff for an analysis of various military moves
that could be used in El Salvador and against Nicaragua and Cuba. The chiefs
were highly skeptical about every alternative. Nonetheless, after an account of
this was published, Mr. Haig acknowledged that he was looking for stronger
action. The White House again disowned his remarks.

By December, however, Edwin Meese 3d, the White House counselor, was warning
publicly that the President had not ruled out a blockade or other military
action to halt the flow of arms to Salvadoran guerrillas. Later, Mr. Reagan
himself made similar statements.  Administration officials interpreted them,
however, as largely tough talk to make Cuba think twice about its aid.

All Administration officials interviewed said they believed that even without
Cuban and Nicaraguan instigation there would be a serious civil conflict in El
Salvador. And they all, regardless of their views on American policy, said Cuban
arms were playing a significant role in the war and that Cuba had significant
influence over the guerrillas. Above all, they all said that without Cuban aid,
the containment of the guerrillas would be far easier.

Issue of Publication Asked if they would publish their proof of Cuba's
involvement with the rebels, they said probably not. The evide nce comes from
sensitiveintelligence sources that would be jeopardize d by publication, they
said.

Asked if they thought publication of the evidence would be likely to convince
skeptics that Cuba was helping the rebels, almost all said it would not. But all
said the evidence was sufficient to convince every intelligence agency of the
executive branch.

Nor is there any disagreement in the Administration that the economic situation
in El Salvador is very bad and getting worse.  Officials said the gross domestic
product, exclusive of trade, had declined almost 25 percent in the last three
years. They also agreed that it would take a long time and much outside
financial support to turn this tide.

The differences of opinion among officials were almost entirely over the
political and military situation. Key State Department officials below the
Secretary and a few high civilian officials in the Pentagon were the only ones
who said there was political or military stability or even signs of improvement.
The Central Intelligence Agency and military officers were to varying degrees
more pessimistic.

The doubters said they thought the situation was deteriorating and did not know
what the Administration could do about it. Military action to halt supplies to
the guerrillas, they pointed out, had been judged by the Joint Chiefs to be
either too risky or unworkable.
Pressing for Change

More aid, they contended, would not help much unless the Administration applied
great pressure on the Duarte Government and the military for political and
economic changes. But, in their view, the Administration had shown its
unwillingness to use all the leverage it could.

They said the law requiring Presidential certification of progress on human
rights could have been used to put more pressure on the Salvadorans. To these
officials, anything less than all-out Administration pressure for changes will
serve only to keep the Duarte Govern ment afloat and the situation drifting.
They did not expect either side to give much away in negotiations, and if
compromises w ere made, they doubted the deals would be kept.

They said they wanted to avoid having to choose, if things became very bad in El
Salvador, between abandoning the country and becoming involved more deeply than
the public would support. They said Administration policy was designed to do
little more than hold on.

Other officials in the Administration said that they had not heard these views
expressed in meetings. They saw the elections in March as a real opportunity to
broaden the base of Mr. Duarte's support in El Salvador and to give legitimacy
to his Government in world opinion.  They saw increasing cooperation among the
region's nonleftist nations, pointing to the coalition ''for protection of
democracy'' announced by El Salvador, Costa Rica and Hondorus and the idea of
collective security that they said was behind the pact.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COMMUNIST PAPERS: U.S. SHIFTS POLICY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 426 words


The Treasury Department, facing a lawsuit by the American Civil Liberties Union
and other groups, has withdrawn regulations that required American subscribers
to journals from four Communist countries to have a Government license.

Under the new policy, made public last week, Americans can order single
subscriptions to journals from Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea and Cambodia.

Last spring the Government began seizing Cuban journals, including Granma, the
newspaper of the Cuban Communist Party, citing the Trading With the Enemy Act of
1917, which bars trade with certain countries in a national emergency. Goods
that are exempt from the embargo cannot enter the country unless the importer
has a license issued by the Treasury Department's Foreign Assets Control Office.
The director, Dennis M. O'Connell, said last summer that the office was mainly
concerned with financial transactions.

He said the Cuban journals had been impounded because officials suspected they
had been sent unsolicited. The licensing procedure, he said, was to insure that
payments for the Cuban journals went into blocked accounts and not directly to
Havana.

100,000 Copies Are Released

On Tuesday, 100,000 copies of the Cuban journals that had accumulated in Boston
since last spring were released to more than a thousand subscribers.

Robert Don Levine, a Treasury spokesman, said the Treasury Department changed
its policy ''as a result of protests'' by representatives from five civil rights
groups. Besides the American Civil Liberties Union, they were the Center for
Constitutional Rights, the National Lawyers Guild, the National Conference of
Black Lawyers and the Emergency Civil Liberties Committee.

Lawyers for the groups filed suit in Federal District Court in November,
charging that the restrictions on Cuban journals violated First Amendment
rights.

''We took the legal position that the licensing scheme was to see if money was
being sent to Cuba,'' Michael Ratner, a lawyer for the Center for Constitutional
Righ ts, said. ''We said that the money was nothing compared to the American
tourist mone y going to Cuba. It was a strong argument.''

''I think it's a major victory,'' Mr. Ratner said. ''I'm sorry it took a lawsuit
to gain it.'' Mr. Ratner said the suit was brought after negotiations with the
Government broke down.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MALCOLM MOOS, 65; HEADED U. OF MINNESOTA

BYLINE: By GLENN FOWLER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 763 words


Malcolm C. Moos, a political scientist who wrote speeches for Pr esident
Eisenhower and later headed the University of Minnesota forse ven years, was
found dead Thursday in his lakeside cabin in Ha ckensack, Minn. He was 65 years
old.

Dr. Moos ha d lived since last year in the cabin on Ten Mile Lake, 200 miles nor
th of Minneapolis, where he wrote and did research in academic affa irs.

He apparently died in his sleep Tuesday night or Wednesday morning, family
members said.  Known to friends and associates as Mac, Dr. Moos was long active
in politics. He described himself as an adherent of ''left-wing Republicanism.''
In 1978 he ran unsuccessfully for his party's nomination to the United States
Senate to succeed Muriel Humphrey, who was named to the seat when her husband,
Hubert, died.
Taught at Johns Hopkins

Dr. Moos joined the Eisenhower staff in 1957 after teaching political science at
Johns Hopkins University for 15 years. He returned to academic life when the
Eisenhower Administration ended and in 1967 was named president of the
University of Minnesota.

He was a critic of the Vietnam War, and told the House Foreign Affairs Committee
in May 1972 that Congressional action to end the war was becoming of critical
importance in restoring the faith of students in the American system of
government.

Later he served one-year terms as president of the Fund for the Republic and of
the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions.  Malcolm Charles Moos was
born into a political family in St. Paul.  His father, Charles, a follower of
Theodore Roosevelt, managed several successful Republican campaigns in Minnesota
and was rewarded by being named postmaster of St. Paul in the long Republican
reign in Washington between the end of the first World War and Franklin D.
Roosevelt's Administration.

After taking bachelor's and master's degrees from the University of Minnesota,
the son went to the University of California for his doctorate. He taught at the
Universities of Alabama and of Wyoming before going to Johns Hopkins as an
assistant professor. He was a full professor there when he was tapped for the
White House job by Sherman Adams, President Eisenhower's chief of staff.

Departure Regretted by Official

Dr. Moos's departure was reportedly not well-received by the President's
brother, Milton, who was president of Johns Hopkins and did not want to lose an
outstanding faculty member.

Dr. Moos had been an early political supporter of General Eisenhower, as he had
previously been of Wendell Willkie and Thomas E. Dewey and was later to become
of Nelson A. Rockefeller. In 1951, when the movement to draft the former World
War II commander in chief got under way, he joined the research team that
prepared position papers for the coming campaign.

Although he was a lifelong Republican with unimpeachable party credentials, he
was not held in high favor by the party's conservative wing, some of whose
members considered him, as one of them put it, ''no better than a Democrat - and
a New Deal Democrat at that.''

Dr. Moos was widely recognized as a thorough scholar, but his writings never had
a pedantic character. He had an abiding interest in two phases of American
politics: the powers of the President and the shifting tides of political
sentiment.

Served on Study Groups

Over the years he served on several study commissions in education and politics.
He wrote numerous articles for newspapers and scholarly journals and at one time
served as associate editor of The Baltimore Sun.

Shortly before his death, he completed work on a Carnegie Foundation study
charting avenues for development of the University of Maryland.

He was the author or co-author of several books, including ''A Grammar of
American Politics'' (1952), ''The Republicans: A History of the Party'' (1956)
and ''The Campus and the State'' (1959).

Besides his sister, Gretchen Schampel, Dr. Moos is survived by his wife, the
former Margaret Tracy Gager, whom he married in 1945; two sons, Malcolm Jr., of
Minneapolis, and Grant, of Wheaton, Minn.; three daughters, Katherine and
Margaret, of St. Paul, and Ann, of Minneapolis, and a grandchild.

A funeral mass will be offered at 11 A.M. tomorrow at the St. Paul Cathedral.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Malcolm C. Moos

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Mary Clonan Is Bride Of William J. Pearson

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 53, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 194 words


Mary Genevieve Clonan, daughter of Merritt Pierce Clonan of Wilton, Conn., and
the late Genevieve Mary Clonan, was married yesterday to William Jackson
Pearson, son of Mr. and Mrs. William Maddox Pearson of Atlanta. The Rev. Stanley
Slingerland, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Central
Presbyterian Church in New York.

Mrs. Pearson, until recently an account executive at Young & Rubicam in New
York, was graduated from the Elizabeth-von-Thadden Schule in Wieblingen, West
Germany, and Middlebury College. Her father is retired director of facilities
with Perkin-Elmer Corporation in Wilton. Her mother was vice president of the
Eutectic-Castolin Corporation, a Flushing, Queens, manufacturer and distributor
of industrial metals.

The bridegroom, until recently vice president in the investment group of Lehman
Brothers Kuhn Loeb Inc. in New York, was graduated from the University of
Kentucky and from the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration. He
served in the Navy as a lieutenant in Vietnam and Spain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The World in Summary;
General Dozier Freed in Major Brigades Defeat

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim and Barbara Slavin

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 285 words


Italy's Red Brigades gambled big when they kidnapped an American general Dec. 17
and they lost even bigger. Not only did police last week free Brig. Gen. James
L. Dozier, but the 42-day hunt for him turned up scores of terrorist suspects
and documents that led to more arrests.

General Dozier was only the second Brigades captive saved by the authorities
since the group began its campaign of armed robbery, kidnapping and killing a
decade ago. For the Italian police, long the butt of jokes for supposed
ineptitude, the rescue was especially sweet. Information provided by a captured
terrorist put them on a trail that led to the Padua hideout where the general
was being kept. After sealing off the area, they started a bulldozer working to
cover the noise of the raid. The terrorists' surprise was so complete that one
man holding a gun to the head of General Dozier was quickly overcome. Not a shot
was fired.

Among the five people arrested were two suspects in the Brigades' most
spectacular and heinous act -the kidnap-murder of former Prime Minister Aldo
Moro in 1978. During the search for General Dozier, police arrested another
long-sought fugitive, Giovanni Senzani, a former crimonology professor allegedly
turned Red Brigades theorist.

General Dozier, senior United States officer at NATO headquarters in Verona, was
the Bragades' first American target. A much-decorated Vietnam veteran, he
emerged from his kidnap ordeal bearded and a few pounds lighter, but in good
health..
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Milt Freudenheim and Barbara Slavin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Nation in Summary;
Opening the Book On Agent Orange

BYLINE: By Michael Wright, Caroline Rand Herron and William C. Rhoden

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 218 words


The herbicides that the Air Force let fly during the Vietnam war are still
spreading consternation. The New York Times reported last week that Vietnam
veterans had obtained most of an unpublished Air Force history of Agent Orange
and other chemicals, used to destroy vegetation shielding Vietcong forces and
later blamed by American veterans for a variety of physical and genetic ills.

The State Department sought to block release of the document, but a Federal
District Court released all but 20 pages of the 500-page typescript to the
National Veterans Task Force on Agent Orange, which had sought the material in a
Freedom of Information lawsuit.

The history states that the United States secretly sprayed herbicides -which it
then believed ''would not be harmful to either livestock or humans'' - in
southern Laos in 1966. They were used openly in South Vietnam. The history adds
that Gen. William C.  Westmoreland, the American commander, wanted the Laotian
jungles sprayed, although the United States Ambassador to Laos, William C.
Sullivan voiced ''strong objections.'' General Westmoreland and others cited now
say they do not remember their wartime positions in the debate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Topics;
HARD CHEESE, FREE SPEECH;
Liberty Unlicensed

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 174 words


The Treasury Department has quietly lifted a Customs embargo on Cuban
publications addressed to American subs cribers. So ends, one hopes, a
misbegotten effort to protect Americ ans from free speech. The pretext was that
importing Cuban publicat ions offends regulationsagainst trading with enemies.
Havana might de rive economic benefit from subscriptions. Even those getting
Cuban journals free had to file a demeaning statement with Treasury.

But when challenged by the American Civil Liberties Union, the Administration
wisely beat retreat. The State Department reversed itself for an interesting
reason: it could not reconcile jamming the mails from Cuba with protests against
the jamming of Western broadcasts to Poland.

Under new orders, there will be no restrictions on single-issue subscriptions to
Cuban journals, or to other embargoed publications from Vietnam, Cambodia and
North Korea. So the whole controversy is, in the Justice Department's terse but
welcome term, moot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE RIGHT MEDICINE

BYLINE: By JACK GEIGER,
Jack Geiger is a Logan Professor of Community Medicine, School of Biomedical
Education, City College of New York

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1561 words


A THEORY OF MEDICAL ETHICS By Robert M. Veatch.  387 pp. New York: Basic Books.
$20.95.

IN the spri ng of 1972, with American campuses still feeling the aftershocks o f
demonstrations against the atrocities in Vietnam, another, smaller protest went
almost unremarked. A substantial numberof the graduating class of Harvard
Medical School refused to take the Oath of Hippocrates, that ancient
affirmation, full of apparentlynoble commitments, which is at once the
physician's promise to be good and the traditional, solemn and ultimate rite of
passage into the professio nal fold. (''You do solemnly swear, each man by
whatever he holds most sacred, that you will be loyal to the profession of
medicine and just and generous to its members....'')

The new doctors explained their action in various ways. The oath, they said, was
arrogant and elitist. Nowhere did it mention the rights of patients. Nowhere did
it acknowledge responsibilities to society. Nowhere did it deal with issues of
justice, equity, liberty or autonomy.

It happened that the commencement speaker that year was the wise and
distinguished psychoanalyst Erik Erikson, who responded warmly to the dissenting
students. An oath, he said, might testify to a fine old tradition and still be
inadequate to helping doctors deal with the social and ethical tasks they daily
face: the squalor of poverty, the corrupting influences of wealth and power, the
senselessness of accident, the tyranny of pain, the rage of disability and the
finite impersonality of death. An oath might impose a discipline of ethics, he
added, but ''to be ethical means to know why one affirms a set of values.''

A decade later, Robert M. Veatch returns to some of these issues in ''A Theory
of Medical Ethics.'' Whose ethics are they, anyway? Who shall decide what
choices are right or wrong in the sphere of medicine? How can a single system of
medical ethics be applied to the broadest range of problems - not just abortion,
euthanasia, transplants or psychosurgery, but also the allocation of scarce
medical resources, the distribution of medical care or the risks and benefits of
new technologies? Above all, what should be the philosophical and social roots
of medical ethics? And why should we affirm a particular set of values in
medical matters?

It's not that we haven't all thought and talked about these problems in the past
10 years. During that time the unresolved conflicts of bioethics have entered
the awareness of doctors, professional societies, the courts, the legislatures,
the churches - and the public at every level. (''Tot Pleads: Don't Turn Off My
Mommy's Life Machine!'' the tabloid's front-page headline reads.) Almost every
medical school offers a course in bioethics. Almost every teaching hospital has
regular ''bioethics rounds'' on which interns and residents can discuss current
problems and cases. New journals, casebooks, commissions, conferences and court
decisions abound. Dr. Veatch himself - first at ColumbiaUniversity, then at the
Hastings Center and now at the Kennedy Institute of Ethics at Georgetown
University - has been a major contributor to this growth.

But in all that effort, he now believes, we spent too much time struggling to
apply the existing professional ethical codes (and not just the Hippocratic
Oath) to specific issues, and not enough time developing one coherent
philosophy, a systematic set of principles that could serve as a basis for
ethical codes in medical matters.

From the start of the book, Dr. Veatch makes clear, at great length and in great
detail, that it is larger medical matters that comprise his subject and not just
the practice of medicine by doctors. He disposes of the Hippocratic Oath, the
American Medical Association's Principles of Medical Ethics, the World Medical
Association's Geneva Declaration and all similar doctor-generated,
doctor-centered codes.  They are, he argues, not philosophies but series of
unsystematic, unreflective traditions, ''folk ethics'' that tell us only what a
particular group of physicians at a particular time and place in history
believed was ethical.

What's worse, they don't work. Hopelessly culture-bound, full of unrecognized
internal contradictions, narrow and at their very roots alien to the ethical
traditions and political beliefs that are central to our society, these codes
largely ignore patients' rights, autonomy and dignity, and societal
responsibilities. (As Dr. Veatch points out, if a doctor should really do only
what he or she thinks will benefit an individual patient - the core of the
Hippocratic Oath - then all medical research on healthy subjects, even with
their informed consent, is categorically immoral, regardless of the potential
benefit to millions of others.)

But worst of all, most of the existing medical codes are professionally
ethnocentric, doctor-focused, when the vast majority of medical decisions, in
fact, have always been made and continue to be made by ordinary people, like the
patients who decide whether ornot to seek treatment, what medical risks to take
in their lives and in their treatment, whether or not to comply with a
physician's regimen. According to Dr. Veatch, other decision makers include the
mothers and fathers of infants, the sons and daughters of the afflicted elderly,
to say nothing of the hospital administrators, government health planners,
nurses and physician assistants. And though he believes that the overwhelming
majority of physicians are eminently trustworthy, he also believes that turning
physicians loose on society to do what they think may benefit their patients can
lead to programs that are morally outrageous.''

But who should define ''benefit''? Certainly not doctors alone.  One has only to
remember, at the extreme, the crude lobotomies on prisoners and mental patients,
the Tuskegee syphilis studies, the doctors in Chilean prisons who checked their
patients to see if they could ''safely'' withstand more torture. Dr. Veatch
concludes: ''The only solution is to abandon the idea that an ethic for medicine
can be based on a professionally articulated code. Medical ethics can no longer
be seen as a set of principles or commitments generated from within a profession
and transmitted to new members during their socialization into it.''

So far, so good (although some physicians, long conditioned to believe that
their own moral sincerity is all that counts, will not think so). In place of
the professional codes, Dr. Veatch wants to generate a ''covenant'' theory of
medical ethics - a ''complex set of understandings'' among professionals,
patients and society in general derived from the social contract that binds us
all and built upon ''layers of mutual loyalty, fidelity, respect and support.''
He wants a negotiation among equals, in which the first step is a prolonged
orderly, thoughtful and open discussion of the basic philosophical principles on
which agreem ent m ust be reached before any ''medical ethics'' can be
established.

Bravely, at the end, Dr. Veatch offers a first draft of such a covenant. But in
the process, he must cope with the burden of most serious writing in bioethics,
which has one foot planted firmly in real cases and the other just as firmly
mired in formal philosophical systems. The cases Dr. Veatch presents are real,
vivid, compelling. A young mother, doomed by cancer, entirely alone, the only
resource for her pitiably deformed daughter, wants to kill her child. A
physician has devastating - but confidential - information about one of his
patients, whom another of his patients, blissfully ignorant, plans to marry. A
young man with an almost certainly fatal leukemia must decide whether to risk an
experimental and toxic treatment that might save him or kill him, slowly and
miserably.

The philosophy, in contrast, is more than most general readers may want to
tackle. Stumbling from epistemology to consequentialism, crawling past the
double-effect principle in Catholic moral theology, limping through the lexical
ordering of basic principles will stop many readers, though it's worth a try - a
long, hard try.

In fairness to Dr. Veatch, I am willing to concede that this kind of difficult
philosophical language precisely reflects the nature of bioethical discussion
going on in hospital wards and appropriations committee conferences. Sometimes
the very problem or conflict itself is hard to recognize. And it is even harder
to question one's own principles and embark on a long painful process of
reasoning that will, as often as not, end in confusion, with the critical
decision still to be made and the patient's time running out.

The road to ethical coherence may be mined with paradox and paved with
polysyllables, but that is not the real difficulty. It is, as Dr. Veatch
asserts, that for too long physicians have walked that road in isolation, blind
to the arrogance of their implicit assumption that they are the only relevant
travelers. Medical ethical problems will inevitably multiply; technology alone
will see to that. If we the public are truly to participate in the working out
of a new medical social contract, then perhaps we will need another book, in
which the cases, the choices, the underlying principles and the systems of
reasoning are all made equally clear - a book, I suspect, that will take another
decade to write.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR SOME, A WAR NEVER ENDS

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 10, Column 4; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1616 words


JERSEY CITY ALTHOUGH almost 10 years have passed since American military forces
left Vietnam, ex-G.I.'s at the Vet Center here are still fighting a stereotype
that pictures them as poorly educated psychotics, hooked on drugs, prone to
violence and unable to obtain or hold jobs.

The centers were established by Congress and the Veterans Administration in
October 1979 to help those who had fought in Vietnam to readjust. Originally
intended as a two-year emergency measure, the project was found so helpful that
its life has been extended to 1984. There are now 91 centers throughout the
country.

The veterans felt a sense of double injustice: At having been the ones to fight
a war that few at home wanted, and at having been welcomed back with
indifference or hostility.

As they cam e to terms with their anger, they began reaching beyond the centers
f or understanding, reasoning that their therapy was the nation's ther apy and
that others besides themselves needed the lesson of the ir experience.

However, recollections of the devastated villages and mutilated bodies that
appeared on television and in print tended to arouse old prejudices. Those who
had opposed the war renewed their hostility toward those who fought it; those
who had supported it did not want to be reminded of its atrocities.

Gradually, a stereotype emerged in which the Vietnam War veteran was seen as a
misfit riddled with problems that society did not want to know about.

With the help of the centers, many veterans overcame their problems, but the
stereotype still pursues them. Although they consider themselves healed, they
are suspected by others - particularly potential employers - of still being
sick.

''Veterans who once despaired are now living useful and productive lives,'' said
Peter Farese, director of the center here. ''The therapy is working, but now we
are stuck with this stereotype, and the veterans have to fight it wherever they
go.''

Like other Vet Center directors and counselors, Mr. Farese and the four
counselors in the office at 262 Newark Avenue - two are volunteers - are Vietnam
veterans.

''We can't make anyone forget Vietnam,'' said Bill Hil, one of the two staff
counselors, ''and we can't make their nightmares go away.  We can't even help
everyone who comes to us. But we've helped a lot of guys who have gone on to get
their lives together.''

Jim Crosson is one ex-G.I. who has done so. In an interview two years ago, he
spit out his rage as he recalled atrocities seen and committed, a chilly
reception at home and personal difficulties with the Veterans Administration. He
has an artificial leg and 20 pieces of shrapnel in his body.

The 20 pieces of shrapnel remain, but Mr. C rosson is now a volunteer counselor
at the Vet Center here, s erving as liaison between new ''clients'' and the
V.A., which h e once condemned. In place of the rage is a sense of compassion an
d a determination to continue his education and become a psychiatr ic nurse.

''At first, I remembered only the bad things,'' Mr. Crosson said, ''but now I'm
beginning to remember the good things, too.  ''I used to remember women and
babies being killed. Now I remember soldiers holding babies and caring for them.
I remember soldiers protecting women and villages and bringing in medical
supplies.

''You don't hear about those things, but they happened, too.'' Bill Gribbon, the
other volunteer counselor at the center, came to it a year ago from the Veterans
Administration Hospital in Lyons, where he was treated for drug and alcohol
abuse.

''I became addicted during the war,'' he said, ''and I needed help when I came
back. Jim Crosson was the first person I spoke to when I walked in here, and now
I'm trying to do for others what he did for me.''

Both Mr. Gribbon and Mr. Crosson describe the Vietnam veteran as a ''proud''
person who wants to be independent, develop skills and use his experience to
help others.

''Once you work through the horror of the war,'' said Joseph Soto, the other
staff counselor, ''the sickness falls away and you can have a healthy person.''

Mr. Farese had a Master of Social Work degree and three years of community
health work behind him when he started at the center. He and his staff work with
vocational counselors, such as James Gaston, also a Vietnam veteran, who said
that the center's ''clients'' obtained and held jobs once they had been
stabilized emotionally and in spite of the prejudice against them.

John Carney, 34 years old, and his wife, Debby (not their real names), come to
the center from Union County with two young children in tow.

Mr. Carney, who led a platoon in Vietnam when he was only 19, was one of the
hunger strikers who pitched a tent in front of the White House last summer,
demanding recognition of the plight of the Vietnam veteran and extension of the
life of the centers.

A mild-looking man, he stares at the floor with eyes that, when he looks up,
reflect both shock and kindness. His wife blinks back tears.

Like so many of his peers, Mr. Carney has a problem with rage.  ''I can't
control it,'' he said, ''and I don't know where it comes from. I just feel it
taking possession of me, and I know there is no escaping from it until it runs
its course. When I come out of it, I feel such remorse that I want to kill
myself.''

''It's hard to believe what happens to him sometimes,'' his wife said, ''becau
se he's such a wonderful person when he's himself. He becomes a dif ferent
person, and it took me many years to learn that he can't cont rol this.

''The rages control him. He often doesn't remember them later, and he feels
awful when I tell him.'' Asked to describe the rages, ''Mrs. Carney'' sent the
children from the room.  ''His skin turns white and his eyes become steely as he
rushes me,'' she said. ''I have been struck. I have been told that I'm a
prisoner of war and that he's been taught to kill.''

Mrs. Carney has been told to take the children and leave the house when she sees
one of the rages coming on. She does so, knowing that, for some reason, her
husband will attack only those who are closest to him.

Steve Shuey, 33, who served as a helicopter metalsmith in Vietnam, directs his
anger at what he calls ''war profiteers.'' ''At first, I really wanted to win
that war,'' he said. ''But after I got over there and started looking around, I
began to wonder what it was all about.

''One day, I was riding in a truck and I saw a green mound. When I got close, I
saw that the mound was a pile of dead bodies and that someone was hosing them
down, like a family car.

''Then I saw businesses everywhere, and I realized that a lot of people were
making money on those bodies. It was when I saw the war as big business that my
trust was destroyed.''

When he got home, Mr. Shuey wanted to tell everyone that the war was big
business, but no one would listen, he recalled. He started losing his temper.

''For eight years,'' he said, ''I went from job to job, trying to warn people
about war so that it wouldn't happen again. But no one would listen. I decided
to go back to college, and I went to college for two years before I blew that,
too. Again, I wanted to warn the other students about war, but they wouldn't
listen.

''I couldn't tolerate what I had learned ab out how the world works.'' ''They'll
(Mr. Carney and Mr. Shuey) both b e all right after a while,'' said Mr. Farese,
''just like Jim Cro sson and Bill Gribbon are all right. People will have to
give us ti me because what we're doing here is working.''

Muhammad Abdur-Rahim, director of the Vet Center in Newark, agreed that the
state's 56,000 combat veterans from Vietnam were being helped.

''I can think of one brother - and all Vietnam veterans are brothers, whether
they're black or white - who came close to killing himself when he got back,''
he said. ''No one had debriefed him when he left the service or helped him to
readjust. He felt that the system had betrayed him.

''One day, he was ready to throw himself in front of a car when something inside
him said that that wasn't the answer. He sat down on the roadside and cried.
Later, he saw a newspaper story about the Vet Center and he came over.''

Wives go to the centers, too, and their sessions, like those for the veterans,
operate on the theory that peer therapy works best.  As Dr. William McCrary of
the Trenton Center, who was disabled in combat, put it: ''We haven't scratched
the surface of the problem. Yes, we help the veterans who came to us, but there
are lots more out there. We'll have to find some way to bring them in here.''

Mr. Hil of the Jersey City center summed up the Vietnam War veteran this way:
''We are the speakers of our time because we have learned to love peace. To hate
war is not the way to peace. The only way to peace is to love peace. If you turn
your frustration over war inside out, all that is left is peace.'' Ruth Mari

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOOD;
NEW YEAR FEAST, VIETNAMESE STYLE

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 14, Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1936 words


PATCHOGUE ''IN Vietnam we would have celebrated the new year for three days, but
working here makes that pretty difficult,'' said Dr. Luong Phan of Patchogue.
But Dr. Phan, who works at the Brookhaven National Laboratory, did ask for a
holiday last Monday, the first day of the Lunar New Year traditionally observed
in Viet nam.

The Vietnamese New Year, called Tet, follows the same chronology as the Chinese
New Year, with each year of the 12-year cycle identified by a different creature
(this year it's the dog). Both cultures mark the holiday by setting off
firecrackers, exchanging bits of money and dining on a number of traditional
foods.

Although the foods share certain similarities, the special preparations for the
New Year reflect the rather marked differences that exist in general between the
cuisine of Vietnam and that of China.

''Vietnamese food is lighter and fresher, with less oil and no heavy sauces or
cornstarch,'' said Le Nguyen, who, with her husband, Tuan, owns the Hee Hing
Restaurant in Patchogue, where several Vietnamese families shared New Year's
dishes. Hee Hing is the only Vietnamese restaurant on the Island, and one of
very few in the New York-New Jersey-Connecticut area.

In Vietnamese cuisine, raw vegetables are served extensively, whereas in Chinese
they are relatively unimportant. There is an enormous variety of spring
roll-type preparations, which call for meat, poultry, seafood or vegetables to
be wrapped in dough or lettuce leaves and often are not fried. Thin but fiery
and pungent dipping sauces season a great many dishes, as do lemon grass,
shallots and mint. Instead of soy sauce, the staple flavoring is nuoc mam, a
fish sauce fermented from anchovies and salt.

The New Year's dishes presented at Hee Hing were displayed on a table decorated
with branches of blossoms hung with firecrackers and greeting cards. Fruits,
some stuck with red squares for luck, and special sweets including watermelon
seeds, tamarind, ginger and coconut were arranged on the table. The red flesh of
the watermelon is said to bring good fortune for the New Year.

There were spring rolls, pork rolls wrapped in rice paper but not fried,
stir-fried shrimp and jellyfish, slices of pork pates (one of which was seasoned
with cinnamon), a savory soup of pork and duck eggs and several salads. A
traditional New Year ''cake'' of glutinous rice and meat wrapped in banana
leaves tied like a parcel and eaten with soup was contributed by Dr. Phan.

Most of the food was prepared in the kitchen of the restaurant by several of the
guests along with Mrs. Nguyen, who regularly does the cooking at Hee Hing. ''We
had a Chinese chef here in the beginning, but now it's just me with two
Vietnamese in the kitchen,'' she said.  ''We serve mainly Vietnamese food.
That's what our customers prefer.''

A page of Chinese-American dishes is relegated to the back of the menu for those
who want it, but the restaurant's stock in trade is a specialty such as the
''Saigon pancake,'' a crepe filled with shrimp, chicken or pork.

''It has taken us a while to understand what our customers are willing to try,''
Mrs. Nguyen said. ''They are not so adventurous.'' The Nguyens have owned a
restaurant for about four years. They fled Vietnam, where Mrs. Nguyen had been
studying law, when the Communists overran the South, making their way with two
children first to Malaysia and then to California before coming to New York.

For those interested in discovering their cuisine, Hee Hing, at 68 Main Street i
n Patchogue (telephone 654-8877), serves dinner every day except Mo nday from 4
P.M. to 11 P.M. On Friday and Saturday nights, the r estaurant remains open
until midnight. A la carte entrees range from $5.50 to $9.50.
pu lst & last add Vietnam
(1st & last add Vietnam)

And to prepare Vietnamese food at home, the most up-to-date authoritative guide
is ''The Classic Cuisine of Vietnam'' by Bach Ngo and Gloria Zimmerman (Barrons,
1979, $17.95). The recipes and ingredients are carefully explained, advice on
menu planning is given, and anecdotal details provide background information.
This recipe for spring rolls is from ''The Classic Cuisine of Vietnam.''
Spring Rolls (Cha Gio)

2 ounces cellophane noodles, soaked in warm water for 20 minutes, then drained
and cut into one-inch lengths 1 pound ground pork 1 large onion, finely chopped
2 tablespoons tree ears, soaked in warm water for 30 minutes, then drained and
finely chopped 3 cloves garlic, finely chopped 3 shallots or the white part of 3
scallions, finely chopped A

7-ounce can crabmeat, cartilage removed and meat flaked with fingers 1/2
teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 20 sheets dried rice papers (see note) 4
eggs, well beaten 2 cups peanut oil
Carrot salad (recipe follows)
Nuoc cham (recipe follows)
Basic vegetable platter (recipe follows)

1. Combine soaked cellophane noodles, pork, onion, tree ears, garlic, shallots,
crabmeat and pepper in a bowl and set aside.  2. Cut round rice-paper sheets
into quarters. Place the cut rice paper on a flat surface. With a pastry brush,
paint beaten egg over the entire surface of each of the pieces. Before filling,
wait for the egg mixture to take effect, softening the wrappers. This takes
about two minutes.

3. When the wrapper looks soft and transparent, place about one teaspoon of the
filling near the curved side in the shape of a small rectangle. Fold the curved
side of the wrapper over the filling, and then fold the two corners over to
enclose the filling and roll it up to form a neat cylinder. Repeat until the
wrappers and filling are used.

4. After filling the wrappers (this may be done several hours in advance and the
filled but uncooked spring rolls kept refrigerated until ready to fry and
serve), pour oil into a large frying pan, put the spring rolls into the cold
oil, turn the heat to moderate and fry for 20 to 30 minutes, until they are
golden brown. Drain on absorbent paper. (If one pan will not hold all the rolls,
divide the oil among more than one pan.)

5. To serve, mix one tablespoon of the carrot salad into the nuoc cham. Set the
rest of the carrot salad and the vegetable platter on the table. Each person has
a bowl in which he places some of the vegetables along with one or two spring
rolls. The spring rolls are sprinkled with some nuoc cham and eaten with the
vegetables.  Additional carrot salad may be added to taste. Sometimes the spring
rolls are placed in lettuce leaves with the vegetables, carrot salad and nuoc
cham and the lettuce is wrapped around all these ingredients to form a package,
which is eaten with the fingers. For Western style hors d'oeuvres, the spring
rolls may be served plain, sprinkled with nuoc cham.

Yield: 80 spring rolls.  Note: There is no substitute for genuine Vietnamese
rice-paper wrappers in this recipe. They are sold in New York's Chinatown at the
Tin Duc market, 91 East Broadway (telephone 212-962-5570), and they may be
obtained by mail from Vietnam House, 191 Farmington Avenue, Hartford, Conn.
06105 (203-524-0010) or from Mekong Center, 3107 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington,
Va. 22201 (703-527-2779).

Carrot Salad

1 carrot 1/2 cup water 1 teaspoon vine gar
Pinch of salt 1 teaspoon su gar

1. Peel the carrot and cut into very thin julienne, either with a knife or in a
food processor.  2. Combine remaining ingredients, add the carrot and marinate
at least 15 minutes. Drain and use the carrot as a relish.  Yield: One-third
cup.

Nuoc Cham
1 clove garlic 1 /2 fresh hot red chili pepper or two dried chili peppers 2
heaping teaspoons granulated sugar 1 /2 fresh lime 2 tablespoons fish sauce
(nuoc mam) - see note 2 1/2 tablespoons water, or more, if necessary

1. Peel the garlic. Split the chili pepper down the middle and remove seeds and
membrane. Dice and put into a mortar with the garlic and sugar. Pound to a
paste.

2. S queeze the lime juice into the paste an d with a small knife dice in as
much of the lime flesh as possible . Mash and add the fish sauce and water.

Note: Bottled nuoc mam, or fish sauce, may be obtained from the same sources as
the rice-paper wrappers (see spring roll recipe), but it is sometimes sold in
Oriental groceries on the Island. Be sure to buy either Vietnamese or Thai fish
sauce, not the Chinese or Philippine variety.

Basic Vegetable Platter

2 cups Boston or leaf lettuce, not iceberg 1 cup fresh mint leaves 1 cup fresh
coriander (cilantro) 1 cup thin cucumber slices, halved

1. Arrange a mound of the lettuce on a platter.  2. Surround the lettuce with
alternating mounds of mint and coriander leaves and make a border of cucumber
slices around the edge. Yield: Eight servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Vietnamese family at Hee Hing restaurant Photo
of foods for the traditional Tet, or Lunar New Year

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Armed Veteran Takes Nurse Hostage in Protest

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 202 words

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS, Jan. 31


A Vietnam-era veteran protesting the treatment of his comrades at Veterans
Administration hospitals stormed into an emergency room with a shotgun and held
a nurse hostage for more than two hours today.

After two and a half hours of talks, the man freed the nurse, George Sharman,
and surrendered to a police negotiator. The authorities said the suspect, Gary
John Crosby, 31 years old, was charged with assault, kidnapping and crime on a
Government reservation.

A spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation said a man with a 12-gauge,
double-barrel shotgun entered the Veterans Administration hospital about 9:30
A.M. and confronted a number of employees and patients.

''His gripe was a general monologue which concerned itself with the treatment
Vietnam veterans were getting in V.A. hospitals,'' an F.B.I. spokesman said.
''There was nothing really specific.''

It was the second hostage situation involving an angry veteran at the hospital
in three months. In November, a war veteran upset over cutbacks in b enefits
held the director hostage for five hours.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN IT'S A MATTER OF INTERPRETATION

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 31


They are the cream of the linguists, the State Department's corps of 22
diplomatic interpreters, traveling the world at the side of Presidents,
ambassadors and special envoys, listening to words that make history, then
delivering them instantly in another language with all the subtleties intact.

''We are the lubricant that makes the gears of different cultures mesh more
smoothly,'' says Cyril Muromcew, a specialist in Polish and Russian who has
traveled from the Arctic Circle to Anarctica on translating missions for the
department.

The diplomatic interpreter is an intrinsic part of the high-wire act of
internatio nal diplomacy, bringing to t he job skills that go far beyond a
simple translation of words. Int erpreters must deal under great pressure with
egos as large as th ose of Lyndon B. Johnsonand Fidel Castro and with issues as
momentous as disarmament and hostages in Iran. They must know the latest t
echnological and economic terms, must somehow convey puns, mus t communicate
emotion, gestures and diplomatic politeness.

Above all, interpreters must not intrude on the diplomacy at hand.  They must
always be the anonymous figure, notebook in hand, perched on the little gilt
chair just behind two world figures, the bane of waiters and photographers. For
their efforts, senior level interpreters can make more than $50,000; all must be
proficient in two major languages in addition to English.

'A Three-Ring Circus'

William Krimer, the department's senior Russian interpreter, compares his work
to ''running a three-ring circus.'' He recalled recently that he frequently had
been forced to create and improvise terminology during complex arms
negotiations.

''We began to talk about MIRV's at the very first session,'' he said of a round
of discussions in Geneva that dealt with missiles called multiple independently
targetable re-entry vehicles. ''The Soviets had no such concept, so we had to
invent a term that you will now find in their military dictionary. And re-entry
vehicle doesn't come across in Russian at all. So we use the Russian word,
'golovnaya chast,' meaning 'head part' when we refer to re-entry vehicle.''

Alec Toumayan, a State Department expert in French, says that keeping up with
changing vocabularies is a ''full-time'' job. ''Just how do you say 'supply
side' in French?'' he mused.

Travel is a lmost as much a part of an interpreter's life as language. For
instance, Mr. Krimer, a mustached man of sober mien who leans to pin-striped
suits, left Washington the other day for still another round of arms
negotiations in Geneva. ''Good God,'' he said just bef ore departure, ''I figure
I've spent an entire year of my life at th e Intercontinental Hotel in Vienna,
and another four or five years in Geneva.''

Where the Pressure Is

He was in Helsinki on Nov. 17, l969, the day of the first talks on limitation of
strategic arms, and he was there 10 years later at the last meeting on June 7,
1979. He was with President Johnson at Glassboro, N.J., with Cyrus R. Vance and
Dean Rusk in Moscow and with Jimmy Carter and Richard Nixon at summit meetings.

In comparing diplomatic interpreting to running a three-ring circus, Mr. Krimer
says: ''You have to listen to your principal, and you never know how long he is
going to speak, and then you give back what he is saying in another language.
You have to monitor the other fellow. And since you are the only person privy to
a private conversation, you have to write a memorandum of conversation
reconstructing it as verbatim as possible. That's where the pressure comes.''

Interpreters rarely use conventional shorthand as they make notes on
conversations. Instead, each uses an ingenious personal code of symbols that
represent concepts, for their task requires that they communicate ideas, not
just slavishly reproduce words.

''We are concerned about catching the mood and the nuance,'' said Sophia Porson,
a specialist in French and Portuguese who interpreted during the Vietnam peace
talks and has worked with every President since John F. Kennedy. ''It's a mental
challenge with intellectual gymnastics,'' she added.

The intepreters dread jokes and one-liners. Humor, they say, does not translate
well. Live news conferences with cameras whirling are likened to ''working
without a net,'' by the department's chief linguist, Donald F. Barnes, a Spanish
specialist for a quarter of a century.

Interpreters offer corrections only when there is an obvious slip of the tongue.
They take no liberties in softening a verbal assault.  And they censor no
obscenities.

''You are an extension of your principal's personality, but you keep it one
octave below,'' said Mr. Muromcew, the Polish and Russian expert. ''If he is
getting hot under the collar, you don't convey it in detached tones, but you
must beware of making a caricature of it.''

Added Mrs. Porson: ''In diplomacy, clarity is not always what is sought. So the
interpreter can't afford to be clearer than the person she is interpreting for.
You don't want to dot the i's and cross the t's.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing of symbols used by Alec Toumayan

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEEDED: A LEADER FOR THE JOINT CHIEFS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 31


The subtle, intricate maneuvering in what a senior military officer calls ''the
most sensitive of all ballgames in this town'' has the rumor circuits
overheating here.

The prize: Appointment as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the top milit
ary officer in the nation. The incumbent, Gen. David C. Jones of the Air Force,
must retire in June when he will have served two terms of two years. Under the
law, he cannot succeed himself.

Officers wearing stars around the Pentagon have more than passing interest in
who, ultimately, President Reagan will pick as their new boss. But none
professes to have a glimmer of the choice. Said an Air Force general: ''For
three cents, you can get any kind of rumor you want.''

Nor have there been any power plays, at least not visibly. ''The worse thing you
can do,'' said a politically attuned admiral, ''is to tout your guy. That's the
kiss of death.''

'A Low Profile'

''And if you're a candidate,'' he contended privately, ''and you run for it, you
won't get it. You have to keep a low profile and not do anything different.''

Much may depend on the signal that President Reagan wants to send to the armed
forces, the nation, its allies and the Soviet Union. A new chairman considered a
globalist would underscore the Administration's strategy of preparing for a
protracted, worldwide conventional war. An officer considered a Europeanist
would emphasize the American commitment to the North Atlantic alliance.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, who will make a key recommendation, has
so far kept his thoughts to himself. Mr.  Weinberger's choice, according to a
knowledgeable Congressional official, may well be the most important decision he
makes this year since it will determine the role of the Joint Chiefs in military
strategy for the next four years. General Jones, who undoubtedly will be asked
for his recommendation, has also kept his own counsel.

In this particular Administration, several officers suggested, there will be a
player in the selection who would not ordinarily be there. That is Secretary of
State Alexander M. Haig Jr., formerly a four-star general himself.

Haig May Decide

''I'll bet that in these times, with all of the international stuff the chairman
gets into, Al Haig will enter the equation,'' said an Air Force general. An Army
general thinks that Mr. Haig, whose influence on military matters has been
rising, might even be the deciding factor.

The Senate will be in the act as it must give its advice and consent. Senator
John Tower, Republican of Texas, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, will
undoubtedly have something to say beforehand. So may Senator Jesse Helms, the
conservative Republican from North Carolina who tried to force General Jones to
resign after Mr. Reagan came to office.

While no one professes to have a clue as to who will be named, most officers see
it as a contest between the Navy and the Army.  That line of reasoning goes like
this: General Lew Allen Jr. of the Air Force is not a likely candidate because
that would mean having three Air Force generals as chairman one after the other
- Gen.  George S. Brown, General Jones and General Allen. That would only miff
the other services. The Army had three in a row during the early 1960's, but
that was unusual. President Kennedy called Gen. Maxwell D. T aylor back from
retirement to serve betwe en Gen. Lyman L.  Lemnitzer and Gen. Earle G. Wheeler.


Marine Point of View

Several officers say that General Robert H. Barrow, Commandant of the Marine
Corps, might be the first of his service to be named. But others discount that
because he comes from the smallest service and is seen as perhaps too strong an
advocate of the Marine Corps point of view. Moreover, General Barrow, the only
veteran of World War II currently serving as a service chief, has told friends
that he wants to complete his task of improving the Marine Corps and then retire
to his family farm in Louisiana when his term ends in 1983.

The Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Edward C. Meyer, has suggested that he doesn't
want to be chairman. He has indicated that he wants his place in history to be
the Chief of Staff who brought the Army out of the demoralized doldrums into
which it dropped after Vietnam. He has begun a series of reforms and evidently
wants to see them through until the end of his term in 1983.

That leaves Adm. Thomas B. Hayward as the leading candidate, at least in some
books. He is the senior of the serving chiefs, is seen as a globalist, is
clearly a supporter of the Reagan Administration's strategy of building up the
nation's seapower, and, at 56 years of age, is young enough to serve without
bumping up against retirement age.

Other Candidates

But the Army has other candidates, even if General Meyer doesn't want the job.
Most frequently men tioned is Gen. Bernard W. Rogers, a former chief of staff
and currently commander of American forces in Europe. Army officers have also
suggested that the choice might be someone who h as not been a member of the
Joint Chiefs, although that has no preced ent. Tops on those lists are Gen. Donn
A. Starry, leaderof the Readin ess Command that includes Army and Tactical Air
Force combat units in the United States, and Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., commander
of United States forces in South Korea, another joint command.

The Navy, however, has its alternate candidates, should Admiral Hayward not be
chosen. Naval officers point to Adm. Harry D. Train 2d, commander of American
forces in the Atlantic, and Adm. Robert J.L. Long, commander of American forces
in the Pacific.

For the moment, this is scuttlebutt. Said a general: ''All things are possible
and they can come up with all kinds of surprises. I would not bet a penny on any
one of those options.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 4 photos of joint chiefs

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COAST GUARD ACADEMY FACING CUTS

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1392 words

DATELINE: NEW LONDON, Conn.


By sixth grade, Andrew J. Connolly knew he wanted to attend the United States
Coast Guard Academy here. He grew up imagining the Coast Guard band performing,
the cutters sliding down the Thames River on training maneuvers and the cadets
marching in procession.

Mr. Connolly made good on his dream, having been selected the first member of
the academy's class of 1986. But when he is sworn in June 28 he will find that
the band has been halved and moved to Washington, two training cutters have been
decommissioned and the processions will be smaller by about 250 cadets.

Some military instructors may be returned to sea, maintenance of the scenic
hilltop campus will be reduced, 100 cadets will be ''disenrolled'' and the
freshman class will be cut by about 150.

Federal budget cuts have come to the Coast Guard Academy, evoking a mixture of
apprehension, anger, pride and determination. While most students, faculty
members and administrators acknowledge the need for reduced Federal spendin g,
they dispute th e particulars: a $43 million reduction for the Coast Guard, of
whi ch $500,000 is from the academy. Some view the cuts as self-defeating in an
already lean service; others in this intense, competitive school welcome more
intensity and competition.

''Everyone wants to believe their job is important,'' said Cadet 4th Class
Timothy M. Close, the regimental commander, who is 21 years old. ''We're the
guys who pull in your dingy little boat, who stop the drug traffic, who clean
the oil spills. Hey, America, you cut us, you hurt yourself.''

'A Positive Thing'

But Lieut. Bruce A. Russell, 29, a physics instructor, asserted that
''tightening our belt is a positive thing academically,'' and suggested that a
bit more ''cutthroat'' competition might be desirable.

''We won't carry marginal cadets as long as we had,'' he said.  ''There's a lot
of brotherhood and maybe too much riding the curve.'' Shifting fortunes are
nothing new in the Coast Guard. Rear Adm.  Charles E. Larkin, superin tendent of
the academy, recalled that budget cuts c ame after World War II and the Vietnam
War and after thescuttling in 1970 of a program to anchor vessels in midocean to
collect weath er data and provide navigation aid. But each time something new
-fisheries management, pursuit of drug runners - came along to brin g in more
money, he said.

Today's cadets, though, are too young to remember. Many complain that the Army,
Navy and Air Force Academies, which fall under the Department of Defense, have
suffered no cuts; the Coast Guard answers to the Department of Transportation, a
more endangered species in the Federal budget battles.

Less Than 2 Percent

But some students point out that the academy is losing less than 2 percent of
its $30.4 million annual budget, compared with reductions of 12 percent in other
agencies. And the retrenchment comes after an $11.8 million budget increase in
the preceding five years and the start of a $4.7 million construction and
rehabilitation project for the engineering building, a former public works
garage.

''Much as we'd like to see someone else's ox gored,'' said Admiral Larkin, ''we
feel the President needs to get this budget deficit in hand and cure inflation.
The Coast Guard can't be immune.''

Cadet 4th Class Kristin J. Wahlner, 21, senses irony. ''The Coast Guard Academy
probably elected Ronald Reagan,'' she said. ''This is a real bastion of
conservatism. I don't think they realized the effect on us. We got carried away
with the idea we're part of the military. But then it comes down to
decommissioning a perfectly good buoy tender or telling someone they can't stay
here.''

Leaving the academy can prove doubly hard. Not only does it mean failure, but it
also means failure for students who have always succeeded.

More than 8,000 applicants compete for places in the freshman class and most of
the chosen were near the top of their high school classes. Many were football
captains or class presidents. Academy life challenged them with strict rules of
conduct, including curfews and dress inspections, and a demanding class schedule
accenting engineering, science and mathematics. Normally, 40 percent of an
entering class leaves, voluntarily or otherwise, before graduation.

Dropping 100 Cadets

But this spring, academy officials must sift out 100 cadets - more than twice
the usual for attrition - either for poor academic performance or for
''unsuitability for service.'' And the Class of 1986 will be held to about 240
''swabs,'' compared with 398 in the current freshman class.

Admiral Larkin has assured the students that ''cadets of good adaptability and
good standing have nothing to worry about.'' And Mr. Connolly, the incoming
freshman, who grew up in Groton, near the academy, shares the ''can do''
attitude of many of his future classmates. ''If only the best can go on, I'll
just have to work harder,'' he said.

But many of the 942 cadets do worry. Cadet 3d Class James A.  Sweet, 20,
recalled a senior who was asked to leave because his grade-point average fell
0.02 below the cutoff mark of 2.0 on a 4-point scale. ''All of a sudden, to be
cut,'' Mr. Sweet said, ''just before you graduate. Three and a half, three and
three-quarters years, then all gone.''

Prof. Robert G. Boggs, a civilian who heads the civil engineering department,
doubts that today's benchmark truly measures tomorrow's officer. ''I've seen
enough weak students,'' he said, ''who by dint of hard work or by being pulled
through screaming and kicking by the faculty went on to become fine officers.''

Gallows Humor

Other cadets just become subjects of gallows humor. At lunch one day recently, a
student announced a fund driv e for a party ''in honorof the cadets who have
executive boards,'' wh ich are the first line of appeal. The mess hall rocked
with laughter and applause. The friends of an ousted cadet usually console hi m,
with varying degrees of truth, by saying that he ''was railroaded, '' and then
treat him toa parting night in a local pub. The send-off, Cadet Close said, is
called a ''funeral.'' And there is no afterli fe. ''You recognize,'' Cadet Close
said, ''that your paths probably will never cross again.''

Anxiety affects even the most successful cadets. In most years, the seniors now
would be selecting their first assignments as commissioned ensigns. This year
the Coast Guard does not even know which vessels will be in service in May.
Lieutenant Russell said two of his most promising cadets last year transferred
to the Colorado School of Mines, a college known for the high salaries its
graduates earn in the petrochemical industry. ''They saw what was coming in the
Coast Guard,'' he said.

But it could be worse - one could play the bassoon. The C oast Guardband, which
i s composed of commissioned personnel but is based at theacademy, will be cut
to 21 musicians from 45 in April, transferred toWashington, a nd limited to
ceremonial appearances -after having given more th an 1,500 concerts since 1976.


Auditioning for Other Bands

Standing ovations, such as the one the band received in Wethersfield, Conn., the
other night, still animate backstage chat but hardly change the future.

Some musicians already are auditioning for other service bands or private
symphonies, said Petty Officer First Class Brian J. Sparks, 33, the lead alto
saxophone player.

''I understand the Coast Guard is in a real bind, that this isn't contrived,''
said Lieut. Lewis J. Buckley, 34, the conductor. ''But I have trouble,
personally, understanding why we are so underfunded.  This band has 10 different
performing units; we play everything from Dixieland to Shostakovich. We don't
have a secretary. We load and unload our own equipment. This isn't cutting fat;
this isn't cutting lean; this is cutting bone.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Coast Guard Band (Page B3) 3 photos of Coast
Guard cadets

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'STRANGE SNOW,' ECHO OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 850 words


STEVE METCALFE'S ''Strange Snow'' at the Man hattan Theater Club begins and en
ds unconvincingly, and raises issues that it is unwilling to resolve, but it has
a middle that bears watching. It also offers c enter stage to Dann Florek, a
very talented young actor,who, as he de monstrated as the spiritualist Edgar
Cayce in ''The Freak,'' can make the oddest people both believable and
sympathetic.

Ostensibly, Mr. Metcalfe's drama is about the aftermath of war, a homecoming
play dealing with two soldiers who, having suffered an ordeal by fire, are
trying to come to terms with their demons.  However, their Vietnam experience
remains merely an offstage echo, a confusing tale that is recounted and not
sufficiently explored.

In the present, we see three people -two Army friends (Mr. Florek and
Christopher Curry) and Mr. Curry's sister (Kaiulani Lee). The siblings are
living together in a civilian equivalent of a demilitarized zone. They inhabit
the same house, but lead totally unconnected lives. Miss Lee is a spinster
schoolmarm, while Mr. Curry divides his time between driving a truck and
drinking himself into oblivion.

Early one morning, Mr. Florek appears at their door to keep an appointment with
his former Army friend to celebrate the opening of the local fishing season.
Roused from her sleep, Miss Lee thinks the visitor is a burgl ar. She threatens
him and r ushes to the phone to call the police. Instead of simply stating hi s
business and getting on with the play, Mr. Florek undertakes a pro longed
diversionary action, trying to cajole Miss Lee into welcom ing him. Both her
fierceresistance and her sudden succumbing stretch credibility. But once the two
leap those preliminary plot hurdles, the play awakens, and wefind ourselves
becoming increasingly interest ed in the unlikely couple, as Miss Lee tries to
reactivate dorma nt emotions and Mr.  Florek warms to his own conquest.

With a little encouragement, he becomes an agile suitor, showering her with
colorful compliments. The two soon sweep each other away on an illusory cloud.
Their courtship, a fanciful variation on ''The Rainmaker,'' has an absurd
appeal. Miss Lee is too self-conscious in her fussings and fidgets, but she
effectively conveys the rapture of a latent romantic. Mr. Florek infuses his
character, an uneducated garage mechanic, with a boyish charm and humor.
Although the author has saddled him with an annoyingly quaint manner of address
(Miss Lee is called ''woman,'' her brother ''guy''), he has also given him his
most vivid dialogue. For example, when Miss Lee complains about the drudgery of
her long nights correcting papers by her schoolchildren, the visitor cuts to the
truth by observing that perhaps she is simply assigning ''too much homework.''
Playing a happy-go-lucky loser, the actor is winning.

The idyll is interrupted by the brother, a high school hero turned wartime
coward. He is so surly that one wonders why anyone, including the playwright,
puts up with him. We are supposed to believe that he has been transformed by
Vietnam, but from the information we are given, it is easy to conclude that he
has always been insensitive, certainly in terms of his attitude toward his
sister.

The two men sidestep each other like unwilling prizefighters, then finally
collide. Together they unload the memories of their shared trauma, and it is
short of a revelation. Given half a chance, Mr.  Curry can convey inner turmoil,
but the role is weighted against him, and his final symbolic act seems like so
much unearned self-pity.

Unwisely, the playwright also ties one final knot in the romance, manipulating
the couple into an unwarranted switch in relationships.  The wallflower of the
opening scene becomes a late-blooming temptress. Although the director, Thomas
Bullard, has led his cast into achieving a well-balanced performance, in his
staging he occasionally overlooks realistic details. ''Strange Snow'' is untidy,
but the playwright has potential, and the actors, especially Mr.  Florek, offer
dramatic sustenance.

After the War
STRANGE SNOW, by Steve Metcalfe; directed by Thomas Bullard; set design, Atkin
Pace; cos- tume designer, Nan Cibula; lighting design, Cheryl Thacker;
production stage manager, Loretta Robertson. Presented by the Manhattan Theater
Club, UpStage, Lynne Meadow, artistic director, and Barry Grove, managing
director.  At 321 East 73d Street Megs
......................................Dann Florek Martha
...................................Kaiulani Lee David
...............................Christopher Curry

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Dan Florek

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Play on Vietnam War To Open at Westside

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 93 words


''How I Got That Story,'' a play by Amlin Gray about a reporter covering the
Vietnam War, will begin previews Feb. 10 and open Feb.  17 at the Westside Arts
Theater, 407 West 43d Street.

Directed by Carole Rothman, the drama co-stars Bob Gunton and Don Scardino. Mr.
Gunton will recreate the 20-character role that won him the 1981 Obie.

The performances will be Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M., Saturdays at 7 and
10 and Sundays at 3 and 7:30. Tickets are $15 and $17. Call 541-8394.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

170 ARRESTED AS NUCLEAR PROTESTERS TRY TO BLOCK LABORATORY ON COAST

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: LIVERMORE, Calif., Feb. 1


Misdemeanor charges were placed today against 170 persons arrested when members
of the Livermore Action Group tried to block the gates at the Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory in protest of the nuclear weapons design work done there.

Most of those arrested - eight were juveniles - were taken into custody by the
police force of the University of California at Berkeley. The university manages
the laboratory for the United States Department of Energy. County and city
police officers made some arrests.

Daniel Ellsberg, an activist who was instrumental a decade ago in releasing the
Pentagon Papers on United States involvement in Vietnam, was one of those
arrested.

About 700 protesters went to t he 640-acre i nstallation at dawn today. Those
who had agreed in advance to be arrested wore white armbands and the others wore
maroon. The nonv iolent protest consistedof sitting or lying in the roadway to
block t he four gates.
'Annihilation of World' Feared

''We're here because we feel we can't remain silent when we see our Government
engaged in activities that might lead to annihilation of the world,'' said David
Hartsough, who said he was a member of the American Friends Service Committee.

The demonstrators sang ''We Shall Overcome'' and carried signs saying such
things as ''You can't hug your children with nuclear arms.''

The Rev. Hiromitsu Kizu, speaking for a group of Buddhist monks from Sado
Island, Japan, who joined the protest, asked that ''violence of government
authority be stopped.'' No monk was arrested.

Disruption of movement in and out of the laboratory was minimal.  Some
laboratory employees had been asked to report to work at 6 A.M.  and others at
10 A.M. instead of the customary 8 A.M. starting time for the shift.

Ron Teunis, a spokesman for the laboratory, said the management ''has been aware
for two months'' that the protest was planned. No additional police officers
were hired, he said, but days off and vacations were canceled.

Trespass and Other Charges

A special booking office was set up. At midday those arrested were taken by bus
to Alameda County's Santa Rita jail. Most were charged with trespassing, but
some also were charged with failure to heed direction by the police and
obstruction of an officer in performance of his duty.

Clancy Dunigan, a spokesman for the protest organizers, said he had been told
that those who were willing to sign a citation form and thereby promise to be
present for trial would be released on their own recognizance. A spokesman for
the sheriff's office said those who refused to sign w ould be held overnight and
arraigned Tuesday.

Mr. Teunis said that about 7,200 people worked at the laboratory.  About 500
more work for contractors on construction jobs. All the laboratory employees are
paid by the University of California from funds passed to it by the United
States Government.

The university manages a similar institution, Los Alamos Laboratory, near Santa
Fe, N.M. The school's involvement began in World War II when members of the
Berkeley physics faculty provided the scientific leadership for the Manhattan
Project that led to building the bombs dropped at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan,
to hasten the end of World War II. All United States nuclear weapons have been
designed in the two laboratories.

Other antiwar and antiarmament groups have planned protests for Feb. 24, Ash
Wednesday, at the Naval Weapons Station at Concord, Calif., and the Lockheed
plant at Sunnyvale, Calif., as well as a return to the Livermore Laboratory, Mr.
Dunigan said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Danile Ellsberg being arrested

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 3, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

China Charges That Vietnam Is Provoking Border Conflict

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 102 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 2


China accused Vietnam today of committing 44 military provocations along their
border during the 10-day lunar New Year period despite Hanoi's call for a
cease-fire over the holiday.

Vietnamese troops crossed into China's Yunnan and Guangxi provinces, planting
mines and directing gunfire that killed one Chinese resident and injured two
others, the New China News Agency said.

Both Vietnam and China have tried to create the impression that the other is
responsible for tension along their border, where the two nations fought a war
in 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 3, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW POISON GAS IS A MUST FOR AMERICA'S ARSENAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 397 words


To the Editor:

The sentiments in your editorial against U. S. production of chemical warfare
agents are understandable, b ut the arguments you useare faulty.

It is simply not true that there is only unimpressive evidence of the use of
biochemical weapons in Southeast Asia and Afghanistan by the Soviet Union and
its allies. It is just as wrong to imply that, even if the reports are true, it
doesn't really matter because only ''remote areas '' have been involved.

In 1980, as a medical volunteer in northern Thailand, I was treating refugees
from remote areas of Laos, and I found the evidence there to be quite
impressive. Men, women and children gave detailed and consistent descriptions of
chemical attacks with Soviet-made equipment and of how their people died as a
result. The survivors I saw in Thailand were seriously ill from the toxins, even
several months after their exposure to them.

Since my return, the State Department has identified mycotoxins in multiple
samples from the affected areas in Laos. Another sample, procured and analyzed
independently of the U.S. Government, showed the same toxins plus a synthetic
chemical, so there could not have been a natural source.

To belittle evidence of this nature is no way to argue against the resumption of
U.S. production of nerve gas. The Hmong population of Laos had been essentially
exterminated, and it may not be long until the resistance in Afghanistan is
broken. Chemical weapons are inexpensive, and they are particularly effective in
these jungle and mountainous areas. Perhaps you must wait until a Western white
population is similarly attacked before recognizing that the Soviets are years
ahead of everyone in chemical warfare technology and psychology.

The U.S. military's use of chemical warfare in defoliation in Vietnam was
finally halted because of public outrage. It does not make sense that public
opinion of Soviet activity be so weak by comparison. After witnessing the
suffering of victims of chemical warfare, I am as opposed as anyone to the
stockpiling of more poison gas. However, I cannot deny the facts, and I would
expect any quality news organization to deal with them accurately, regardless of
personal and political prejudices.
RICHARD C. HARRUFF, M.D., New York, Jan. 26, 1982.

The writer is a resident in the New York University Medical Center's Department
of Pathology.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 3, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AMBIANCE OF EATING: WHAT IS ITS ROLE?

BYLINE: By MOIRA HODGSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 2; Living Desk

LENGTH: 2059 words


THERE seems to be no limit to the number of ways and places in which Americans
take their meals: in bed, at coffee-shop counters, while sandwiched between
other passengers on commuter trains, from brown bags at their desk. They eat
chili to the twang of country and Western music and hamburgers that are served
by waitresses on roller skates. They dine at drive-ins where plastic trays are
fixed to their car windows and in restaurants where the lights are so dim that
flashlights are needed to read the menu. At home, meals often turn into a sort
of relay race, the freezer's treasures being consumed in front of the television
set by one family member at a time.

Considering that diversity of setting, one might ask, just how much does
ambiance affect th e enjoyment of food? D oes the atmosphere of anelegant
restaurant enhance the pleasure of wh at is eaten there? Does it really matter
if we are watching the news, reading a book, having an argument or listening to
classical music w hile we dine?

An inspector for Guide Michelin once said that if the food was good enough he
would give three stars to a restaurant that had Formica tables, neon lighting
and blaring music in the background.  ''But,'' he added, ''in actual fact the
kind of place that goes to the trouble to make that sort of food naturally takes
a great deal of trouble with the ambiance.''

Great chefs and good home cooks understand that eating is both a physiological
and a psychological act. Where one eats can be as important as what is eaten.
The body responds in the most subtle of ways to surroundings - to harsh colors,
bad lighting, noise or tension.

It is no co incidence that some of the highest-rated restaurants arealso among
th e most beautiful. ''Food is very important but many other things come into
account,'' said Charles Masson Jr. of La Grenouille, o ne of the leading French
restaurants in Manhattan.  ''There must be a warm, festive ambiance, a simple
decor that gives the feeling o f freshness, crispness and cleanliness. We want
the dining room t o sparkle.'' Indeed it does at La Grenouille, with soft
lighting, pas tel colors, silk lampshades, velvet banquettes and elaborate spr
inglike flower arrangements.

The perfect ambiance for eating is more than beautiful surroundings, according
to Andre Soltner, chef and owner of Lutece.  ''Everything depends on the first
contact between the restaurant and the customer,'' he said. ''We try to keep the
atmosphere relaxed, not stiff or snobbish. From then on the ambiance carries
from one table to another. A feeling builds, and each evening it is slightly
different.''

Particular foods seem to demand certain contexts, so that the wrong decor is
often unsettling. A dark saloon is not the place for breakfast. Dinner in an
empty restaurant is depressing, no matter how good the food. Pizza does not seem
to go with candelight, nor Chinese food with Puccini. Sawdust on the floor seems
appropriate for a steak dinner but not for nouvelle cuisine. Psychologists who
were interviewed said that the environment in which people dine has a marked
influence on their well-being.

To get the most out of meals, said Paul Chance, a psychologist and former
asssistant managing editor of Psychology Today, they should be eaten only in a
place designed for the consumption of food. Forget dining in the bedroom (a
sleep-inducing environment), on the run, while listening to rock music or, above
all, while watching the evening news.

''The negative effects as the body battles against influences of the environment
may be subtle enough to go unnoticed at the time,'' he explained. ''But there is
constriction of the muscles, adrenalin and increased heartbeat. Nothing could be
less compatible with good digestion. Adrenalin and acids are flowing into the
stomach and there is an increased arousal, a general stress reaction. This can
be followed by headache, stomach cramps - and a crummy mood.'' That could
explain why there seem to be so many advertisements for digestive tablets on
prime time.

Nonetheless, many families watch television over dinner as a matter of course.
''There was a terrible period when families would watch news of the war in
Vietnam,'' said Dr. Robert Sommer, professor of psychology and director of the
Center for Consumer Research at the University of California. ''That they were
able to watch it without flinching is spooky. It reflected how eating was
something that was incidental. You wouldn't watch programs and eat a gourmet
meal.  Eating in front of TV would induce a Pavlovian response. You'd end up
associating TV dinners with violent Westerns or news of disasters just as you
link beer with the Super Bowl.''

''If you habitually eat in bed, in front of TV or at your desk, these
environments will supply you with food cues,'' Dr. Chance said. ''So as soon as
you turn on the television or sit down to study you will feel hungry.''

For many people mealtimes summon up unpleasant associations going back to
childhood, Dr. Chance said, so they eat as quickly as possible. ''If you have
grown up feeling that sooner or later your parents are going to jump on you for
something, you minimize contact,'' he continued. ''You eat as fast as you can
and go out.''

These days, when both parents may be working, some families rarely eat together.
''My daughter told me that her friends in college were amazed to hear that our
family sat down to dinner together,'' said Mildred Hall, a writer on the
behavorial sciences. ''One or the other was always out and the children just
helped themselves. For many families it is very difficult these days with
parents out working.  And as a result nutrition has gone to hell.''

As living space diminishes in apartments and houses, the first room to be
transformed is usually the dining room. Though houses built before World War II
had large kitchens and separate dining rooms, many of those built since then
have no more t han dining alcoves or eat-in kitchens. In apartments, too, the
dini ng room is often the first space to be converted to an extra bedro om. The
result is that even when families do get together, the space to make the most of
the experience is lacking.

For a good many people mealtimes are still a break in the day and an important
means of communication -and eating in an amiable atmosphere should certainly
enhance the experience. Although home dining may be a lost art in many American
families, hostesses who take enormous trouble to create the right ambiance for
entertaining have not vanished.

''I like a warm, glittery atmosphere,'' said Marilyn Evins, the wife of David
Evins, the shoe designer. Mrs. Evins, who frequently gives large dinner parties
in Manhattan, decorates her duplex in seasonal themes, with plants in spring,
log fires scented with cinnamon stic ks in winter and plenty of flowers year
round. ''I neverseat more tha n 10,'' she said. ''Otherwise people lose the
chance to talk across t he table. How you place guests is very important to the
ambiance and so is the lighting. I always have lots of candles because they are
very flattering.''

Americans seem to be dining out more these days. By the end of this century,
according to Waverley Root and Richard de Rochment, authors of ''Eating in
America,'' we will be eating one out of every two meals away from home - many of
them, of course, in fast-food establishments. Last year restaurants took in $75
billion, according to the National Restaurant Association. The number of
American franchise fast-food restaurants has doubled in less than 10 years to
over 60,000 and the number of all restaurants is increasing.  Naturally, such
statistics are not lost on restaurant owners, who realize that ambiance is an
important attraction to customers and spend millions a year to create an
inviting atmosphere.

What is the effect they strive for? ''A restaurant should give a person a
feeling of privacy and yet allow them to be a little exhibitionist at the same
time, to be seen,'' said Joseph Baum, who created the Four Seasons and Windows
on the World. ''The proportions of furniture are very important too. Tables
should be a little bit lower than normal to give a sense of security as you lean
on them with your elbows. They should not be too big and should have soft tops
under the cloth to cushion the elbows. The sound level should be low since you
don't want to have to strain to hear.''

''We had thought the Four Seasons space would be all wrong for a restaurant,''
said Philip Johnson, the architect who designed the Seagram Building on Park
Avenue at 52d Street, where the restaurant is situated. ''It was leftover space
and we could as well have put a Chrysler showroom there. It has no entrance, no
toilets, no crossover from private to public dining rooms. It has no color -
just the color of wood - a very neutral background. We were lucky to get a
kickoff from Picasso with the mural. But what I like about the place is the
height -which is what you don't want in a restaurant because it isn't intimate.
But it works because the tables are so far apart you feel as intimate as you do
in Lutece, where the ceilings are low and the tables closer together. If you
build a good room, then you can eat in it. You could eat very comfortably in
Chartres Cathedral.''

Charles Boxenbaum, designer of the Woods, a restaurant on West 37th Street,
feels that calm is the essential element for restaurant dining. ''Otherwise
you're just in a place to feed,'' he said. ''The source of light is very
important. In a restaurant the table is first and foremost. All the light in the
restaurant should be focused on the table top.''

To make food look its most appetizing, lighting should be as close to daylight
as possible so that all the food colors are sharp. Dr.  George Schwartz, a
physician and owner of One Fifth Avenue, a restaurant decorated with fittings
from the Art Deco-style firstclass dining room of the Cunard liner the Caronia,
once tried softening the lighting with a red filter. ''But the food looked
ghoulish,'' he said. ''The spinach and broccoli turned black.'

Many designers say that harsh colors should be avoided in restaurants; mauve,
peach, soft pink, deep grays and browns are more conducive to relaxed dining,
they contend. White is neutral, a good lunch color because it is light and
suggests daytime. Some psychologists have theorized that colors may affect the
endocrine system, which is connected to the nervous system and thus to mood.
''It's all psychological,'' said Eric Jacobs, associate design director of the
Walker Group, a design concern. ''In a very black and neon restaurant, for
example, people tend to be distracted by the decor and concentrate less on the
food.''

More than lighting or the color of the walls, noise can ruin a meal. Plates
rattled fiercely into piles and banging kitchen doors are bad enough, and not
much better are restaurants where the meal is accompanied by music, whether it
be the Rolling Stones, Muzak or strolling violinists who transfix women with
their eyes and play ''Fascination.'' Classical music is no more appropriate for
dining, yet it seems to be especially popular in vegetarian restaurants, where
owners are under the misapprehension that tofu goes with Beethoven's Ninth
Symphony or tha t bean sprou ts are improved by Ravel's ''Bolero.''

The ambiance in which we eat should be as unobtrusive and relaxed as possible.
Since eating is something most of us do two or three times a day, we might as
well enjoy it. ''Take the phone off the hook.'' Dr. Sommer suggested. ''Turn off
the radio. Food should be the high point of the day.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RIFT ON SALVADOR GROWS IN CONGRESS

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 3


Congress appears to be increasingly divided over the decision to send more aid
to El Salvador, but for the moment the Administration seems to have majority
support for its policy of trying to prevent the overthrow of the Salvadoran
Government.

At a news conference today, Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. said, ''I hear some
rising objections to what Haig is doing from within the Democratic Party and
from my area at home.''

But his fellow Democrat, Representative Jim Wright of Texas, the majority
leader, said in an interview, ''I agree with the Administration position, and I
very actively oppose any effort to withhold assistance to the moderate
Government of Duarte.''

Two Unappealing Choices

Perhaps the most frequent reaction on Capitol Hill, however, was expressed by
Senator J. James Exon, Democrat of Nebraska, who said the United States had two
unappealing choices. ''If we turn down the additional aid,'' he said, ''we could
be helping the Communist guerrilla takeover of the country. But on the other
hand, we'd be aiding a Government we're not happy with. The bottom line is,
which is the lesser of two evils?''

Some members of Congress have long criticized the human rights record of
President Jose Napoleon Duarte, the leader of El Salvador's military-civilian
junta. There have been frequent criticisms, for example, of his Government's
investigation of the murder in December 1980 of four American churchwomen there.
Those murders prompted Congress to require the Administration to certify that El
Salvador was making progress on restoring human rights before it could continue
receiving aid.

The latest protest on Capitol Hill was triggered by the White House decision to
certify that El Salvador was making such progress and could therefore receive
$135 million in aid this fiscal year.  Officials have said this amount was to be
increased and the Administration has said it would send $55 million more from
unrestricted Pentagon funds. In Congressional testimony yesterday, Secretary of
State Alexander M. Haig Jr. vowed that Washington would do ''whatever is
necessary'' to prevent the overthrow of the Salvadoran Government by leftist
guerrillas.

In reply, more than 30 members of Congress introduced a resolution opposing the
President's certification. The resolution appears to have little chance of
passing, and some lawmakers said it would have no legal force even if it did.
But it indicated a significant segment of Congressional opinion.

In another move, more than 50 lawmakers wrote to President Reagan, asking him to
withdraw the certification. An organizer of the effort, Representative Richard
L. Ottinger, Democrat of Westchester, declared:

''We want the President to know that we can not accept a certification based on
facts that were pulled out of a hat. His assessment simply flies in the face of
realit y. There is compelling evidence that the human rights violations in El
Salvador have never been more brutal and widespread.''

Memory of Vietnam

Representative O'Neill said today that many Roman Catholics, including priests
and nuns who have served as missionaries in El Salvador, were expressing their
concern to members of Congress.  Representative Thomas S. Foley of Washington,
the majority whip, said he had heard from many religious officials, not just
Catholics.  ''There's a lot of concern out there,'' he said, ''and I don't think
the Administration is sufficiently aware of it.''

Alluding to Vietnam and a not uncommon concern, Senator Donald W.  Riegle Jr.,
Democrat of Michigan, said: ''In the past the United States has gotten itself
deeply involved in situations by doing it a step at a time. At some point we
cross a line and we find ourselves making a commitment of resour ces and
prestige without doing it carefully.''

Mr. Riegle also worries that in a time of tight budgets the United States cannot
afford a major commitment to El Salvador. ''I'll be very blunt,'' said Mr.
Riegle, whose home state leads the nation in unemployment, ''we need an aid
package for Detroit.''

Others say Secretary Haig has increased concern on Capitol Hill.  ''My reaction
is that he doesn't care about listening to Congress,'' said Mr. Foley, who
added, ''I think we are playing a macho game in El Salvador.''

Few Alternatives Seen

Despite the criticism, many in Congress seem inclined to support the
Administration on a difficult issue. For example, Representative Clement J.
Zablocki, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the Foreign Affairs Committee, said,
''I'm not completely satisfied with the Duarte Government, but what is the
alternative?''

Those who oppose aid to the country, Mr. Zablocki said, ''want to write El
Salvador off to the fate of Cuba or Nicaragua.'' He added: ''I'm not of that
opinion. This Administration would be condemned if it didn't try to keep El
Salvador from becoming Communist.''

''The Administration was criticized last week because it wasn't strong enough in
Poland,'' Representative Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican whip,
complained. ''How can you win?''

While some legislators remembered Vietnam, others remembered Cuba and said the
United States made a mistake in not resisting Fidel Castro's takeover more
actively. ''I can't believe,'' said Representative Wright, ''that the Batista
Government, with all its corruption, was as bad as the bloodbaths that followed
in the wake of Castro.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WEINBERGER SEEKS TO DECLARE POLES IN DEFAULT ON DEBT

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 3


Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger reportedly intends to keep pressing to
have Poland declared in default of its debts to the West and to have Western
European nations halt their natural gas pipeline deal with Moscow.

On the recommendation of the State, Treasury and Agriculture Departments,
President Reagan recently agreed to have the Administration pay American banks
the $71 million owed them by Poland to forestall a declaration of default and a
possible disruption of East-West economic relations.

But, in the continuing debate on the question within the Administration, high
Pentagon officials oppose this action. They insist that the issue of Polish
default has n ot been finally settled.Mr. Weinberger is known to favor the
tougher stance of allowing default and the disruption of Western credit
relations with the East so as to impose an economic penalty on Moscow and Warsaw
for the repression in Poland.

Salvadoran Intervention Opposed

On the issue of El Salvador, however, Mr. Weinberger opposes American combat
involvement and is understood to be wary of military operations in the
Caribbean, such as a blockade of Cuba or Nicaragua, that would require
Congressional approval.

Tuesday, in Congressional testimony, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
seemed to reopen the threat of American intervention in Central America by
asserting that the United States would do ''whatever is necessary'' to prevent
the overthrow the Salvadoran Government by leftist guerillas. Today, Larry
Speakes, a White House spokesman, left Mr. Haig's comments standing but
emphasized that there were no plans ''at the moment'' for American troops to go
into combat in El Salvador or elsewhere.

Mr. Speakes said the Secretary ''was discussing contingencies,'' and added,
''The President has said he has no plans to send troops anywhere and he has no
plans.''

A high Pentagon official, acknowledging domestic poliical opposition to American
military involvement, added that ''one of the lessons of Vietnam is that we
can't engage in a war that is not supported by American public opinion.''

In comments on another, more distant trouble spot, a senior Administration
official revealed rising concern over reports that the Soviet Union was
providing aid to the Communist Tudeh Party in Iran and was ''very likely''
sending arms and military supplies across the Soviet-Iranian border to other
groups fighting the regime of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

On the issue of possible Polish default, Mr. Weinberger was reported to have
been taken by surprise by the Administration's decision to pay off the American
banks, primarily because he had been preoccupied with preparation of the new
Pentagon budget. But since the Defense Secretary did not get a chance to press
his own views on the issue with President Reagan, the Pentagon does not regard
the matter as settled.

Mr. Weinberger is said to feel that the recent decision to bail out the banks
was an ''interim'' action. He is said to believe that the question is still ''a
live issue'' among Administration policy makers and certain to be reconsidered
as future installments of Polish debts come due.

''This is a continuing debate,'' a high Pentagon official said.  ''The default
issue is with us continuously. There are quarterly payments due so it will come
up again. It's a live issue.''

The default question is linked, in Mr. Weinberger's opinion, to the pipeline
deal, which has for months been a major target of Pentagon officials and
American diplomats.

The Defense Department's view, reportedly backed by William J.  Casey, Director
of Central Intelligence, is that the pipeline would not only make Western Europe
dependent on Moscow for vital energy supplies but would also earn the Soviet
Union about $10 billion a year in hard currency that could be spent on Western
technology with military applications.

Mr. Weinberger is understood to believe that a Polish default would not only
impose further economic burdens on the Soviet Union but would delay the
pipeline. The Administration concedes, however, that West European banks and
governments are shying away from this approach.

Secretary of State Haig, in testimony Tuesday before the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, defended the Administration's decision to pay the Polish
debts. He said the President's action ''will require the Soviet Union to make
the money good.'' He added, ''Had we called default, they would have been
relieved of that burden'' because Poland could have been considered bankrupt.

Mr. Weinberger's arguments with the Western Europeans is that the West should
not help the Soviet Union develop its oil and natural gas resources, especially
when Western intelligence estimates anticipate Soviet shortages in the years
ahead.

In the Reagan Adminstration's internal debates over Poland, Mr.  Weinberger and
some of his Pentagon aides have taken the most pessimistic view of developments.
Recently, for example, Mr.  Weinberger commented that he felt ''the Polish
Government is run by a Russian general in a Polish uniform.''

Covert Operations in Poland?

Although he is known to favor most policies that would make it harder for the
Soviet Union to support the military regime in Poland, Mr. Weinberger has not
pushed for covert operations in support of Polish resistance to martial law.

The Administration's announcement Monday th at the Government would pay American
banks rather than allow Poland t o go into formal defaulthas come under fire
from conservative groups.

''Default would require the Soviet Union, rather than the American taxpayer, to
bail out the bankrupt Polish Government,'' Howard Phillips, leader of the
Conservative Caucus, said today.

Mr. Phillips said at a news conference that his organization had launched a
$100,000 letter-writing campaign to urge banks to force Poland into default by
seeking immediate repayment of outstanding Polish loans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM AND CHINA ENGAGING IN RENEWED VERBAL HOSTILITIES

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 979 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 3


A series of border incidents during the Lunar New Year holiday last month has
prompted new recriminations between China and Vietnam, which have been on
hostile terms since their border war three years since their border war th ree
years ago.

Today The People's Daily accused Hanoi of hypocrisy in proposing a cease-fire on
three recent occasions and then instigating 44 ''military provocations'' during
the 10-day holiday that the Chinese call Chunjie and the Vietnamese call Tet.

The article by Ji Ying of the New China News Agency charged that a Chinese
peasant was killed and two others wounded along the rugged border of the
southern provinces of Yunnan and Guanxi between Jan. 18 and 28.

''The Vietn amese authorities ''The Vietn amese authorities never tire of
talking about their desire for pe ace, yet they have failed to show it in their
actions,''the article s aid.

Propaganda Coup by Hanoi

The charges come only a few days after Vietnam scored a propaganda coup by
encouraging the new Secretary General of the United Nations, Javier Perez de
Cuellar, to agree to mediate in the Chinese-Vietnamese border dispute. Mr. Perez
de Cuellar assured Pham Van Dong, the Vietnamese Prime Minister, that he was
ready to help ''contribute to a peaceful solution.''Mr. Perez de Cuellar has
combined with Vietnam's public truce offers to put China on the defensive. The
People's Daily took note of the Vietnamese proposals on Dec. 28, Jan. 14 and
Jan. 30, and charged that Vietnam had circulated them at the United Nations ''in
an attempt to achieve maximum benefit from this propaganda stunt.''

Some Peking-based diplomats have speculated that China must be particularly
annoyed because it helped Mr. Perez de Cuellar obtain the post by its adamant
opposition to another term for Kurt Waldheim.

China told Vietnam last September that there could be no negotiations before
Vietnamese forces pulled out of Cambodia. The Chinese have also contended that a
truce is superfluous because the Vietnamese are to blame for the border
hostilities.

Convenient Point of Pressure

''As long as Vietnam refrains from making any future military provocations or
incursions into Chinese territory,'' The People's Daily said today, ''the
question of fighting back simply will not arise and peace and tranquillity will
prevail in the border area, festival or no festival.''

While it is almost impossible to determine who is at fault from the verbal
exchanges, the Chinese have found the border a convenient point of pressure on
Vietnam at a time when Hanoi is trying to buttress its client regime headed by
Heng Samrin in Phnom Penh.  According to Western intelligence reports last year,
the Chinese were tying down up to two-thirds of the Vietnamese Army, which might
otherwise be available for duty in Cambodia.

Peking also seems aware that any agreement with Hanoi would be interpreted in
Asia as a softening of China's opposition to Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia,
particularly when other Southeast Asian nations are trying to promote a
coalition of resistance movements there. China continues to champion the ousted
regime of Pol Pot.

But some diplomats here feel that Vietnam, realizing that China does not want to
talk, may find it advantageous to press publicly for a truce while embarrassing
the Chinese with border incidents.

Five Violations Cited

The Chinese press has been specific about at least five violations that it said
took place recently. On Jan. 18 the Vietnamese were accused of shelling a
village in the Hekou Autonomous County of Yunnan Province. On Jan. 22 Tan
Jianmao, a commune member in Guanxi Province, was killed while traveling to
visit relatives in a nearby village.

On Jan. 25, the Chinese charge, Vietnamese fired at and broke up a holiday
celebration in the Guanxi town of Congxin, while firing into the Hekou area on
the same day for three hours. The next day, the Chinese assert, two civilians in
Yunnan were wounded by Vietnamese mines.

The Vietnamese had previously said that Chinese troops fired across the border
or intruded into Vietnamese territory on more than a dozen occasions between
Dec. 28 and Jan. 13.
Paracel and Spratley Islands

The quarrel has extended to conflicting claims of sovereignty over the barren
Paracel and Spratley Islands in the South China Sea. These scattered reefs and
atolls have taken on value because of the possibility that oil may be found in
the area.

Last month the Chinese press buttressed Peking's claim with a long historical
study seeking to show that the Chinese had been there first. Vietnam responded
by publishing a ''white paper'' and a long magazine article supporting its claim
to the islands.

So me conflicting reports are mirror images of each other. On Jan.  15 China
announced that it had freed seven Vi etnamese soldiers captured while
''intruding into Chinese terri tory to conduct reconnaisance and sabotage,'' as
well as four grateful Vietnamese fishermen whose boat sank while illegally in
Chinese waters. At the same time, China said, 11 Chinese ''illegally captured
and detained''were returned by Vietnam.

On the same day, Vietnam announced that it had released ''11 Chinese captured
while illegally intruding into Vietnamese territory'' o n spy missions, and that
11 Vietnamese ''kidnapped whileworking on Vi etnamese territory by intruding
Chinese soldiers'' were handed back t o Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

KENNEDY SECRETLY TAPED SESSIONS IN WHITE HOUSE

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 896 words


President Kennedy secretly tape-recorded hundreds of phone conversations and
meetings in the White House from the summer of 1962 until his death in November
1963, including some with such foreign leaders as Andrei Gromyko and Josip Broz
Tito.

The existence of the tapes has been confirmed by the director of the John F.
Kennedy Presidential Library.  The existence of some tapes was mentioned in
1973, the director Dan H. Fenn, said last night, but the extent of the
recordings had not previously been disclosed.

A 29-page log of the conversations has been compiled as an index to the tapes by
the curators of the library, which is in Dorchester, Mass. The log refers to the
tapes of meetings and telephone conversations with senior Administration
officials, two former Presidents, civil rights leaders and several foreign heads
of state.

Among the conversations, as indexed by the logs, are secret National Security
Council discussions about Vietnam, the ''use of polygraphs in tracing Defense
leaks'' with former Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, ''Cuba -dismantling
bases, etc.'' with former Secretary of State Dean Rusk and a ''Cuban exile
raid'' with Mr. Kennedy's brother, Robert, then Attorney General.

The library hopes to begin making transcripts of the some of the conversations
available to the public by this summer, Mr. Fenn said, but the contents will not
be made public until national security questions have been resolved.

Nixon's Problems

It was the disclosure of a secret taping system in the office of former
President Richard M. Nixon that led to the unraveling of a White House coverup
of the burglary of the Democratic National Headquarters in June 1972. The tapes
showed the extent to which senior members of the Nixon Administration attempted
to conceal the role of the White House in ordering the burglary, a coverup that
eventually resulted in the 1974 resignation of President Nixon.

Three weeks ago it was disclosed that Franklin D. Roosevelt had also recorded
some discussions in his office with senior advisers and Administration
officials.

At the height of the Watergate scandal, H.R. Haldeman often insisted that
President Nixon had simply followed the practice of his predecessor, Lyndon B.
Johnson. Immediately after assuming office, Mr. Nixon was said to have ordered
the taping system that had been installed by Mr. Johnson removed from the White
House. Later he had it reinstalled.

Much Still Classified

Much of the material on the tapes is still classified, Mr. Fenn said. That
material must still be reviewed by the National Security Council before it can
be released, he said.

However, even before the unclassified contents of the tapes are opened to public
inspection, they must all be reviewed first by the National Security Council,
Mr. Fenn said.

At the moment the library has a complete log of all the tapes indicating the
participants in each conversation and, in some cases, the subject. The logs are
public, Mr. Fenn said.

The taping mechanism could be activated by Kennedy or, in the case of the
telephone taping device, by his person al White House secretary, Evelyn Lincoln,
Mr. Fenn said.

When the presence of a secret taping system in the Nixon White House became
known in 1973, Mr. Fenn said, the Kennedy Library issued a statement reporting
the existence of tapes made in the Kennedy Administration. But it was not until
1975, when the library actually acquired the tapes themselves, that curators
began inde xing the more than 100 hours of conversations.

In July 1973, the Senate Watergate committee staff called in Alexander P.
Butterfield in the hope that because he managed internal security in the Nixon
White House, he might shed light on the suspicion by a former Nixon counsel,
John Dean, that his private meetings with the President had been recorded.

Mr. Butterfield testified that in 1970, ''for historical purposes,'' Mr. Nixon
ordered the bugging or wiretapping of the Oval Office as well as various other
places in the White House, the executive office building and Camp David.

The logs from the Kennedy tapes show conversations with most senior members of
the Administration as well as Congressional leaders. According to the logs,
among those taped by Mr. Kennedy were: the Director of Central Intelligence,
John A. McCone; the Senate majority leader, Mike Mansfield; Speaker of the House
John W.  McCormack; Secretary of State Rusk; two former Presidents, Dwight D.
Eisenhower and Harry S. Truman, and Mr. Kennedy's brothers, Robert F. and Edward
M.

The tapes, which begin in the summer of 1962, include many of the discussions in
the Cuban missile crisis the following October. They also include conversations
with civil rights leaders about the desegregation efforts in the South and with
leaders such as Henry A.  Kissinger, Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet Ambassador;
Robert F. Wagner, then Mayor of New York, George Meany, the labor leader; Mr.
Gromyko, the Soviet Foreign Minister, and Tito, the Yugoslav leader.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 918 words


T HOSE hard-working Congressmen: The House of Representatives officially set a
meeting at 3 P.M. yesterday, with the timetable reading: ''Program for
Wednesday. No legislative business is scheduled.''

With no legislative activity set for Thursday or Friday, it was evident to some
Congressional veterans that there was a little more to the agenda than met the
eye. A recent Internal Revenue Service ruling said that Congressmen could take a
tax deduction of $75 a day for every day of th e year, including weekends,
except when Congress was in recess for five days or more. Had Congress adjourned
Wednesday, th e exemption this week would have disappeared.

A House official noted that pro forma sessions were also scheduled for Thursday
and Friday. No legislative business is planned, although the official noted that
a prayer would be recited before each adjournment. Attendance is expected to be
light.

O VER lunch, Charles T. Hagel, deputy director of the Veterans Administration,
examined the pitfalls and problems of a new Administration seeking to stir the
elephantin e V.A., a $25 billion agency often criticized in Congress for waste
fulness. (As a Congressman, Budget Director David A. Stockma n once wrote that
many members of Congress ''openly admit to holding their noses'' when
appropriating money for the V.A.)

Mr. Hagel, a 36-year-old Nebraskan who is a Vietnam combat veteran, said of his
agency: ''The damned thing is so big, it's hard to get your arms around. But
we're trying, we are trying.'' The agency itself has 232,000 employes, more than
any other part of the Government except the Defense Department.

''It's a tough business,'' said Mr. Hagel. ''It takes a while to understand the
people, the process, the pressures. The problem is the first year, you spend a
lot of time learning. The second year you prepare policy, the third year you
implement and the fourth, well, like it or not, it's politics. You don't want to
make risky moves.  The incredible thing, I suppose, is that the Government runs
as well as it does.''

Under its administrator, Robert P. Nimmo, the agency is struggling to balance
the often intense pressures of conflicting veterans' groups, World War II
veterans worried about pensions and Vietnam veterans seeking psychological
counseling, job help and possible compensation for the effects of the herbicide
Agent Orange.

Mr. Hagel heads the agency's policy coordinating committee on Agent Orange, and
expects results on the effects within two years. ''We won't stonewall,'' he
says. ''We're not afraid to find the answer. I want to find the answer myself
because I may have been sprayed with it.''

T HE political outlook of New York's two Senators is a study of contrasts,
according to the traditional liberal group, Americans for Democratic Action. On
the basis of 20 selected votes involving domestic and foreign policy, Daniel
Patrick Moynihan was given a relatively high rating of 75 percent. This is based
on votes cast that are in agreement with the A.D.A. position. Alfonse M.
D'Amato's rating is 10 percent.

O NE of the most emotionally fraught issues facing Congress, abortion, is
scheduled to come up next week, possibly Tuesday, before the Senate Judiciary
Committee. At issue is a bill by Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah,
that would give Congress and the states joint authority to restrict or prohibit
abortion, and would declare that no right to abortion is secured by the
Constitution.  Groups supporting a woman's right to have an abortion are, at
this point, gloomy about the Hatch measure and say that there seem to be enough
votes in the Senate to carry it through. The American Civil Liberties Union said
recently that legalized abortion had only ''a slim chance of survival.''
Ironically, some of the most vocal groups seeking to ban abortion are unhappy
with the Hatch proposal, saying, in effect, the bill fails to go far enough,
quickly enough.

I N Washington, like the tiniest Grand Duchy, titles carry extraordinary weight.
Or, perhaps more significant, without a title, or that little something extra
before one's name, the most trivial moments turn poignant.

The Democratic National Committee's strategy council, for example, is set to
hold an all-day meeting on Saturday to focus on ''Reagonomics,'' and ''Economic
Alternatives.'' The council itself includes some of the nation's leading
Democrats. Announcing the session, the committee listed attendees under separate
headings: Senators, Congressmen, Governors, Lieutenant Governors, Mayors, State
and Local Officials.

One heading, near the bottom of the list, covers but a single name. It says:
''Others: George McGovern.'' Francis X. Clines Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LOG SHOW KENNEDY SECRETLY TAPED 325 TALKS

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1522 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Feb. 4


The John F. Kennedy Library today released a log of White House conversations
taped by President Kennedy showing that the taping was more extensive than
previously indicated.

The library disclosed in 1973, after President Nixon's taping of office
conversations became known in the Watergate scandals, that more than 200
conversations had been taped by Kennedy. The log released today listed about 325
taped conversations and told for the first time who had been taped.

The library is slowly transcribing the tapes for scholarly use and said it would
not begin making the contents public until this summer. No private individuals
have yet been given access to the material.

The summary of the library's log, a roughly typed and scribbled-on list of names
and subjects whose contents were disclosed today by The Washingto n Post, says
that it contains ''approximately 325 conversations , fragments of conversations,
or meetings'' from the last half of the President's three years in the White
House.

The subjects range from the momentous, such as the war growing in Vietnam or
Gov. Ross R. Barnett's attempt to block James A. Meredith from being admitted to
the University of Mississippi, to the personal, as in a notation of a telephone
call recorded in the late summer of 1963: ''JFK/LBJ re LBJ gall bladder.''

Famed People on List

The names of the persons whose conversations now lie on 125 reels of audio tape
and 27 Dictabelts in a vault on the second floor of the Library, roll like
history through the log, just as they are noted: General MacArthur, Adlai
Stevenson, Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, Richard J. Daley, Lester B. Pearson,
President Tito, Robert F.  Kennedy, Dean Rusk, W. Averell Harriman and Arthur
Schlesinger.

''We hope we are going to be able, early this summer, to make available a useful
body of transcripts of unclassified material,'' Dan H. Fenn Jr., director of the
John F. Kennedy Library, said here today, but ''our hunch is that an awful lot
of it will stay closed.''

When the existence of the tapes was reported on the day after the Nixon tapes
were disclosed in the Watergate investigation of 1973, Mr. Schlesinger, the
historian and Kennedy aide, reacted to the idea of conversations secretly
recorded in the Kennedy Administration as ''absolutely inconceivable.''

''It was not the sort of thing Kennedy would have done,'' he said.  And David
Powers, who was President Kennedy's appointments secretary and is now the
curator of the museum at the library here, insisted: ''If it had been done, I
would have known it. I was in the President's office every day.''

The feelings of shock over the existence of secret tapes appear to have softened
in the years since then. ''President Kennedy had a great sense of history,'' Mr.
Powers said today in his office on the sixth floor of the library. ''He was gong
to write the book of the Kennedy years.'' That, he said, was surely the purpose
of the tapes, although he had never talked to the President about them. ''But I
knew him that well,'' he said.
General Is Not Upset

The reaction of Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
under Kennedy and now retired in Washington, was much the same. He had not known
that any of his private meetings or conversations with the President had been
taped, he said today, but he was not upset ''in the slightest.''

''What I said to the President, he is entit led to use,'' General Taylor said.
''My life is an open book. The P resident is entitled to accurate records. I see
nothing sinister abou t this.''

Frederick G. Dutton, Assistant Secretary of State under Kennedy and a top
political adviser, was more disturbed about the taping. ''I am bothered,'' Mr.
Dutton said. ''I think there are questions of ethical sensitivity.'' While the
President should maintain records of important White House conversations, Mr.
Dutton said, ''I don't think Presidents have more rights to invade privacy than
anyone else.''

Robert S. McNamara, Mr. Kennedy's Secretary of Defense, said today that many
Cabinet officers tapped their phones in the Kennedy years.  He said it ''doesn't
bother me one way or another'' if Kennedy did.  ''I never said a thing to him I
wasn't willing to stand by,'' he said.

And Dean Rusk, Secretary of State in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations,
said he was aware that some of the group meetings with Kennedy were being
recorded. ''There were many times when a microphone was on the table,'' Mr. Rusk
said. ''We knew we were being recorded.'' If some of his private conversations
with the President were being taped, he said, he was not told, but it did not
disturb him. If Kennedy wanted to make his own record, ''I had no problem with
it,'' said Mr. Rusk, who is now a professor of international law at the
University of Georgia.
Brother Seeks Transcripts' Release

An aide in the office of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts,
said that the remaining Kennedy brother had been unaware at the time that tape
rcordings were being made. But the Senator, in a statement issued through his
office today, said his family wanted transcripts ''released to the public as
soon as possible.''

''Knowing my brother as I did, I am confident that after transcripts of the
recordings are prepared and released, Americans will continue to be proud of the
Presidency of John Kennedy,'' his statement said.

What plans the 35th President had for the ta pes or why he chose to make them
may never be known. ''The fact is that there isn't anyone with the info
rmation,'' Burke Marshall, who oversees the use of the archives for the Kennedy
family, said today. ''Maybe Robert Kennedy''was told, Mr.  Marshall said, but no
one else was.

In its Friday issue The Washington Post reported that Mr. Fenn had said Robert
Kennedy had used the tapes in writing his book ''Thirteen Days,'' published in
1968, about the Cuban missile crisis. The article said Kennedy used ''detailed,
verbatim quotations from the sensitive meetings'' However, Mr. Fenn said late
tonight that ''I have no knowledge to support any of that.''

''There's nothing in that material that I'm aware of or that archivists have
told me about that supports that,'' he said.  Mr. Fenn did note that Robert
Kennedy was present at many of the discussions that were taped in the crisis.
Asked about The Post's assertions, Mr. Fenn said, ''I must say I can't remember
saying any such things to anybody.'' Mr. Fenn, who announced the existence of
the tapes nine years ago, said earlier today that while perhaps 60 percent of
the meetings taped might end up as unclassified material, only about 10 percent
of the telephone conversations could be unclassified and thus available for
release at the determination of the family.

Highly Sensitive Matters

William Moss, chief archivist at the library, said his staff was taking the
tapes in chronological order, working first on the ones that would seem to
contain unclassified material. From what little can be gleaned from the logs
released by the library, the President recorded conversations ranging from the
mundane to the most riveting national security and domestic problems facing his
administration.

He had numerous conversations both before and after the abortive Bay of Pigs
invasion in Cuba, and appears to have been highly conscious of the light in
which the failed mission cast him.

In March 1963 he held several conversations on the topic with his brother,
Robert, one of which is described in the log as ''Stennis committee review of
Bay of Pigs; current popularity.''

He also recorded conversations on the Skybolt affair, which caused diplomatic
strains between the United States and Great Britain when he decided not to
manufacture a military plane that the British were counting on to strengthen the
Royal Air Force.

In July and August of 1963, a number of conversations dealt with the signing of
the nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviet Union. But many of the entries in
the log suggest that Kennedy saw some importance in taping discussions of
matters that appear more trivial in hindsight. One such conversation, in
September 1962, concerns ''a future appointment to meet'' Tobert Macdonald, Kenn
edy's college roommate at Harvard and later a Congressman.  Another dealt with
the retirement of two White House police officers .

And there are several conversations hinting at the President's interest in his
image in the press. One conversation with Robert Kennedy in March 1963 is about
articles in Time and Newsweek. Another deals with an impending article in the
Washington Post.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EFFECT ON LARGE DEFICITS: A MATTER OF PERSPECTIVE;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1194 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 4


At budget time, the late Senator Everett McKinley Dirksen, a honey-voiced
Republican from Illinois, used to regale his colleagues with the observation,
''A billion here and a billion there, and pretty soon you're talking about real
money.''

If he were around next week when President Reagan sends his 1983 budget to
Congress, Senator Dirksen might observe, facetiously, that ''$98 billion isn't
what it used to be.''

Mr. Reagan is expected to make a similar point about his estimates of a $98
billion deficit for 1982, which ends Sept. 30, and a roughly $90 billion gap for
the fiscal year 1983. The Reagan budget is expected to show that this year's
deficit is smaller when viewed in some perspectives than the previous record
deficit of $66 billion in 1976 under President Gerald R. Ford. The Congressional
Budget Office will tell Congress Friday that the 1982 deficit could be as much
as $110 billion.

Deficits are sensitive politically because they represent the difference between
spending and tax revenues, an amount that is financed by borrowing. A
traditionally American view is that deficits represent living beyond one's
means, and so politicians prefer to portray themselves as against deficits and
for frugality.

Former Reagan Posture

That was Mr. Reagan's posture in the 1980 campaign and until last month, when he
had to decide between deficits on the one hand and tax rises or less military
spending on the other. Rejecting the latter two options, he chose larger
deficits than his advisers recommended.

Officials say the new budget, which goes to Congress on Monday, will offer two
or three perspectives on the deficit. One would show it in relation to the
economy, or gross national product. On that basis, $98 billion this year would
come to 3.2 percent, decidedly less as these things go than the 4 percent ratio
in 1976.

Another way to avoid the ''money illusion'' caused by inflation is to express
deficits in constant, or inflation-adjusted, dollars. Put that way, a 1982
deficit of $98 billion in current dollars would come to $61.5 billion in
constant 1976 dollars, according to Wharton Econometrics, and a 1983 deficit of
$90 billion would amount to $52.4 billion.

Philip Cagan of Columbia University suggests that the deficit should be reduced
by the amount that inflation has eroded the value of Government securities held
by the public.

Deficits to Total Financing

Still anoth er perspective, one the Administration emphasized in Congressional
testimony last autumn, is less favorable from the President's v iewpoint and may
be omitted next week. It relates deficits to t otal financing in capital
markets. The 1976 deficit absorbed 25.8 percent of all financing. An unofficial
estimate for the fiscal ye ar 1982 is 26.3 percent.

It is unlikely that these perspectives will dispell the new unease about Federal
budget deficits. Washington has not been so deficitconscious since the
Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower in the 1950's. Since Mr. Eisenhower brought
in a balanced budget in 1960, there has been only one budget not in the red.
With the help of a temporary, Vietnam War income surtax, the 1969 budget
produced a $3.2 billion surplus.

Unease about the budget outcome permeates Congress, the Federal Reserve Board,
Wall Street and even the ranks of liberals, who used to champion deficit
spending as the way to combat recession and bring the economy to full
employment. The jump this year to $98 billion, up from $58 billion in the fiscal
year 1981, is accepted as the inevitable result of recession, which cuts into
revenues and drives up spending for unemployment benefits.

More worrisome is the possibility that the deficits might increase during a
post-recession recovery. ''That's enough to scare even a liberal,'' says Charles
L. Schultze, chief economic adviser to President Jimmy Carter.

Twenty years ago, President John F. Kennedy made a speech deriding what he
regarded as unwarranted myths about deficits. The liberals applauded. Deficit
financing and Keynesian economics were ascendant.

Liberals Fear Deficits

Now, the liberals fear deficits - or at least any trend toward larger deficits -
because they see them as binding the Federal Reserve to its present tight-money
policy, which they regard as the largest single obstacle to a reduction of
unemployment.

What has changed since Mr. Kennedy's speech is inflation. Then, it was
negligible. Now, although less than it wa s in 1979-81, it is still high, 8
percent or so. For that reason, Mr. Schultze says, PaulA. Volcker, chairman of
the Federal Reserve B oard, ''is hanging in there tough; you force a deficit,
and he's no t going to monetize it.'' That is, just as the Reagan White House
has recommended, the central bank will not float the Treasury's ex tra bonds on
a tide of new money. They must be financed out of exist ing savings, and that
tends to push up interest rates.

Alice M. Rivlin, director of the Congressional Budget Office, told Congress
today that any trend toward larger deficits could ''retard economic growth'' by
driving interest rates up.

Economists speak of ''an expectations effect.'' Herbert Stein, a conservative
economist, explained it this way: ''The prospect of future deficits may cause
people to expect high interest rates in the future, and this may keep long-term
interest rates from falling today as much as would be needed to promote recovery
today.''

The Monetarist View

The Treasury argues a monetarist view, that high interest rates will come down
as expectations of inflation come down. But the prospect of large - and possibly
rising - deficits keeps expectations of inflation high, or at least uncertain.
Although the Reagan Administration argues that deficits are not necessarily
inflationary, decades of teaching to the contrary by conservatives and even
Democrats like Jimmy Carter have made their mark on public attitudes.

The skepticism Mr. Reagan faces in winning credibility for his projected decline
in deficits after 1982 as well as a turn toward lower interest rates is rooted
in criticism of his policies. The President insists on not moderating the rapid
rise in military spending, on not raising excise taxes, and on not postponing or
diluting the 1982 and 1983 tax cuts.

In addition, there is doubt that the Congress, in an election year, will make
the deep cuts in individual benefits and other nonmilitary programs that the
President will recommend in the budget.

Mr. Stein, who was chief economist to President Richard M. Nixon, put the issue
into a larger framework in recent remarks. He said: ''The thing that bothers me
about the present state of budget policy is not that we're going to have a $100
billion or $150 billion deficit but that we seem to have no policy, rules or
principles about how big the budget deficit should be.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


Around the World 4
African ministers discuss West- ern Sahara at Kenya talks 5
Kenyan President accuses Asian traders of ruining economy 6
Pope sets great hope on renewed ties with Britain 7
Brazilian businessmen seeking restoration of trade with Cuba 9
Rival Spanish Communist groups plan new parties 10
Salvador investigating whether air force soldiers aided rebels 14
Canadian federal conference on economy breaks down 15
Study cites U.S. mistakes on Viet- nam War 17
Turkey curbs foreign contacts for domestic organizations 18
Turkey's rulers prepare to legal- ize abortion and sterilization 19
Riyadh's markets reflect its past and future 21

Government/Politics
Governor Brown faring poorly in California polls 23
Budget process will take up a year at least 27
Proposed changes in social spend- ing sound basic Reagan themes 27
Military budget to stress buildup of global power 28
Republicans and Democrats alike assail Reagan's proposal 28
Budget originally scheduled for release in Tuesday papers 28
Proposed budget would add $124 billion to gross Federal debt 30
Slowing of military and U.S. pen- sion increases sought 32
Puerto Rico fears squeeze under ''new federalism'' 33
Democrats, mood optimistic, plan election moves 34
Koch urges Democrats to extend their constituency 34
Pennsylvania legislators dead- locked on reapportionment 35
Sierra Club to take active role in electoral politics 36

General
Around the Nation 24
Arizona town seeks National Football League team 24
Tribeca fighting to keep Parole Board out 44
Missing Harvard student's suit- case is found in Boston 52
Dispute renewed over the use of rock salt on ice 55

Arts/Entertainment
Music debuts in review 64
''Vatzlav,'' a comedy by Mrozek at the Quaigh 64
''Dividsdunderlertanze'' per- formed by City Ballet 64
''Tony Brown's Journal'' is open- ing new TV season 66
Manila Film Festival goes all out 67

Style
Mrs. Luce goes to Washington 68
Sweaters from kits 68

News Analysis
Steven R. Weisman on refusal to retreat from a huge deficit 1
Jonathan Fuerbringer on as- sumptions that form the budget 27

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Peking Rejects Call by Hanoi For Talks on Border Dispute

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 93 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 6


China has rejected a call by Hanoi for a resumption of negotiations on the
China-Vietnam border dispute, a Government spokesman said today.

''The Vietnamese authorities are utterly insincere about negotiating and their
proposal, like the one they made last year, is an old trick for the sole purpose
of propaganda,'' he said.

Last Saturday, the Hanoi radio said that the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry
proposed that the talks should begin in the first six months of this year,
either in Peking or in Hanoi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Roll-Call

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2151 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Feb. 6


Following is the roll-call vote by which the General Assembly Friday night
adopted a resolution condemning Israel's occupation of the Golan Heights:

In Favor (86)
Afghanistan Albania Algeria Angola Bahrain Bangladesh Benin Bhutan Botswana
Bulgaria Burma Burundi Byelorussia Cameroon Cape Verde China Congo Cuba Cyprus
Czechoslo- vakia Djibouti Ethiopia Gambia Germany, East Ghana Greece Grenada
Guinea Guinea- Bissau Guyana Hungary India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ivory Coast
Jordan Kenya Kuwait Laos Lebanon Lesotho Libya Madagas- car Malaysia
Maldives Mali Malta Mauritania Mongolia Morocco Mozam- bique Nepal Nicaragua
Niger Nigeria Oman Pakistan Peru Poland Qatar Rwanda Sao Tome & Principe Saudi
Arabia Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia Soviet Union Sri Lanka Sudan
Suriname Syria Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Ukraine U. Arab Emirates Upper Volta
Vietnam Yemen Yemen, Southern Yugoslavia Zambia Zimbabwe

Against (21)
Australia Belgium Britain Canada Denmark Fiji Finland France Germany, West
Iceland Ireland Israel Italy Japan Luxem- bourg Nether- lands New Zealand Norway
Portugal Sweden United States

Abstentions (34)
Argentina Austria Bahamas Barbados Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica
Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Gabon Guatemala Haiti Honduras
Liberia Malawi Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay St. Lucia St. Vincent & Gren.
Samoa Singapore Spain Swaziland Thailand Trinidad & Tobago Turkey Uruguay
Venezuela Zaire

Absent or Not Voting (16)
Antigua & Barbuda Belize Cambodia Central Af.  Republic Chad Comoros Dominica
Equatorial Guinea Jamaica Mauritius Mexico Philippines Rumania Solomon Islands
South Africa Vanuatu

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM WAR GOAL OF U.S. CRITICIZED

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 960 words


A major United States mistake in the Vietnam War was seeking the destruction of
the Vietcong guerrillas rather than that of the North Vietnamese Army, according
to a new study by a much-decorated former platoon leader in Vietnam.

In the study, Col. Harry G. Summers Jr. contends that political and military
leaders chose the wrong objective because after the Tet offensive of 1968, in
which the Vietcong was virtually destroyed, the war continued unabated.

The study, ''On Strategy: The Vietnam War in Context,'' has aroused great
interest in the American military. Many officers regard it as the most incisive
defense yet written of the role of the Army and, to a lesser degree, the other
services in the war. Colonel Summers is on the staff of the Strategic Studies
Institute of the Army War College at Carlisle, Pa.

The colonel writes that the Army was able to project large forces halfway around
the world, which he describes as ''a logistics and management task of enormous
magnitude.''

'The Army Was Unbeatable'

''On the battlefield itself,'' the study contends, ''the Army was unbeatable. In
engagement after engagement the forces of the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese
Army were thrown back with terrible losses.  Yet, in the end, it was North
Vietnam and not the United States that emerged victorious. How could we have
succeeded so well, yet failed so miserably?''

The military was partly to blame because of its neglect of strategic thinking in
the period of nuclear dominance after World War II. Political scientists studied
why America ought to wage war; systems analysts the means to be used. But the
military, Colonel Summers says, failed to decide how the analysts' means should
be used to achieve the political scientists' ends.

If he has a scapegoat it is President Lyndon B. Johnson, who ''made a conscious
decision not to mobilize the American people - to invoke the national will.'' He
adds, ''Having deliberately never been built, it could hardly be said that the
national will collapsed.''

'Imperceptible to the People'

He points out that in 1964, after the Gulf of Tonkin incident in which American
destroyers were attacked by North Vietnamese patrol boats, neither the President
nor Congress nor the military foresaw a long war, extensive troop deployments or
the growth of oppositi on to the war in th e United States.

President Johnson's ''key strategic error,'' when he understood in the spring of
1965 that a limited military response would not suffice, was to make the
increase in American involvement ''imperceptible to the people,'' the colonel
says, adding that the failure to ask Congress for a declaration of war led to
the failure to call out the reserves.

This, he contends, ''led to the failure of the military leadership to push for
strategic concepts aimed at halti ng North Vietnamese aggression and led instead
to campaigns again st the symptoms of aggression -the insurgency in the south -
rat her than against the aggressor itself.''

One reason for Administration policy was the fear that a declaration of war
would be seen in Peking as a threat to China's security and invite intervention.

This was an acknowledged risk. Historians dealing with the period point out,
however, that China in the mid-1960's was in the first and most violent phase of
the Cultural Revolution and was therefore unlikely to risk intervention.

The decision not to declare war put ''the Army and the Republic'' in a dangerous
position, Colonel Summers says.  It was dangerous for the Army because the
failure to mobilize the national will lost what Count Karl von Clausewitz called
the strength of the passions of the people.

The danger to the Republic arose when the Army became the focus of antiwar
sentiment, the colonel says. In past wars, dissent was directed at the
Government. In Vietnam it was directed at the Army.

'Civilian Control of the Military'

''By attacking the executors of U.S. Vietnam policy,'' the author writes,
''rather than the makers of that policy, the protesters were striking at the
very heart of our democratic system - the civilian control of the military.''

In November 1965 the Army's First Cavalry Division, its officers, including
George Armstrong Custer 4th and George S. Patton 3d, scored a significant
success when it decisively defeated the 32d, 33d and 66th Regiments of the North
Vietnamese Army at Ia Drang.

This was the moment, Colonel Summers says, for the United States to take the
offensive against North Vietnam, but this would not have been in line with
strategic policy, ''which called for the containment rather than the destruction
of Communist power.'' This policy was adopted, he emphasizes, because of the
fear of igniting a nuclear war or provoking Chinese intervention or both.

''The North Vietnamese had launched a strategic offensive to conquer South
Vietnam,'' he contends. The Administration, he says, did not recognize this, and
much of the American military and civilian effort was expended on sideshows such
as the concept of counterinsurgency.

The Army was given new missions that had little to do with fighting the enemy,
such as civil affairs and setting up schools and public health missions. One
consequence, he says, was the overinvolvement in South Vietnamese affairs, ''a
dimension of American arrogance'' that saw the United States not only as the
world's policeman but as the world's nursemaid as well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S MILITARY BUDGET PUTS EMPHASIS ON A BUILDUP OF U.S. GLOBAL POWER

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Specia l to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1383 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


The Reagan Administration will be asking Congress for authority to spend $1,640
billion in the next five years on the armed services, with special emphasis on
building American capability to project power around the globe.

Funds for the European front and for strategic nuclear forces will rise, but the
sharpest increases will go to equipment, supplies, military construction and
airlift and sealift capability for the Rapid Deployment Force. The philosophy
behind this, according to senior Pentagon officials, is that the United States
must not simply be able to respond to an attack by the Soviet Union wherever it
occurs, but also be able to strike back at areas of Soviet weakness.

This represents a growing shift in priorities to seapower and a global maritime
strategy and away from land forces and the European theater.

Specifically, Defense Department officials said that if Soviet forces were to
invade the Persian Gulf region, the United States should have the capability to
hit back there or in Cuba, Libya, Vietnam or the Asian land mass of the Soviet
Union itself.

Congressional Challenge Likely

To support this strategy, the Administration wants to spend $216 billion in the
fiscal year 1983, which starts Oct. 1, up from $183 billion this year. The
Administration will ask Congress for military appropriations totaling $257.5
billion for the next fiscal year, an increase of $43.4 billion over the budget
authority for the current fiscal year.

In presenting the budget today, Deputy Defense Secretary Frank C.  Carlucci said
that it was ''fair to say we will find a challenge'' to the military budget on
Capitol Hill. But he added that the request was ''fully justified when weighed
against the military threat.''

He also said the Administration considered this a ''reform budget,'' with
savings of billions of dollars resulting from new management techniques such as
multiyear contracting.

The gap of more than $40 billion between appropriations, or budget authority, of
$257.5 billion and actual expenditures, or outlays, of $216 billion is the
largest in peacetime. It was exceeded only in the initial years of the Korean
War and the Vietnam War. Its effect is to build up a bow wave of spending
commitments in future years.

Worried Over Future Cutback

Officials in the Reagan Administration have made it clear that their intent is
to get as much money for the military as possible, while support for these
expenditures is high in Congress and in the public.

This is of great significance to Pentagon planners who are worried that economic
pressures might cause the Administration to cut back military spending in future
years, and that the only convenient place to reduce spending will be in what is
called readiness - the capability of American forces to fight now. Readiness
includes such accounts as operations and maintenance, training, spare parts and
ammunition.

Administration officials note that the new military budget places heavy emphasis
on readiness and will increase these accounts by 9 percent after discounting for
inflation. But in years past, Congressional committees invariably slashed first
those items that they considered unglamorous, such as operations and
maintenance, in favor of procuring more ships and planes.

The sizeable increase in military spending proposed by Jimmy Carter last year at
the end of his Presidency went almost entirely to increasing the readiness of
existing forces. By contrast, the Reagan Administration's first military budget
both adds to the capabilities of existing forces and places heavy emphasis on
expanding forces.

Procurement of New Weapons

The new budget proposes an increase in the procurement of new weapons, to $55.1
billion in the fiscal year 1983 from $41.2 billion this year. Compared to other
accounts, it is by far the largest proposed increase in outlays. For example,
operation and maintenance would increase to $67 billion from $60 billion,
manpower outlays would rise to $44 billion from $38 billion and research and
development would reach $22 billion compared to $18 billion this year.

The budget calls for increasing spending on strategic nuclear forces to $23.1
billion from $16.2 billion. The big ticket items here are the new B -1B
long-range bomber, a new submarine-launched ballistic mis sile called the
Trident 2, new cruise missiles, defense against a bom ber attack on the United
States, a vast expansion of communication s and control systems such as radars
and radio links, and the new M X land-based ballistic missile.

This program reflects the decision to cancel the multibilliondollar mobile
basing system for the MX missile. But a good part of the funds saved here would
go to the B-1B bomber and the new strategic air defense programs.

Congressional opponents of the new bomber, an improved version of the B-1, are
certain to ask again about the advisabililty of the program in the face of the
new Stealth bomber program that also is under way. Similarly, questions will be
raised about the wisdom of spending billions of dollars on defense against
Soviet bombers when there is no defense against Soviet missiles that would
strike the United States first.

Relative Imbalance Cited

In the budget document, President Reagan maintained that a review of American
strategic forces ''found that the relative imbalance with the Soviet Union will
be at its worst in the mid-1980's and hence needs to be addressed quickly.''

Spending authority on non-nuclear conventional forces, called general purpose
forces in the budget, is planned to increase by 20 percent, to $106.2 billion
from $88.2 bi llion . The Army will receive more money for the new M-1 tank,
other fighting vehicles and helicopters. The Air Force will be able to buy more
tactical aircraftand additional Awacs radar surveillance planes.

Also scheduled for large increases are cargo ships and planes needed to deploy
and sustain the Rapid Deployment Force. The budget calls for some $4.4 billion
for a new fleet of improved C-5 giant cargo planes and KC-10A tanker and cargo
aircraft, improving the SL-7 logistic ship and chartering additional ships to
place equipment and supplies near potential trouble spots.

But the service that benefits most from the budget is the Navy.  The President
promised in his Budget Message to increase the number of ships from 513 to 600
by the end of the decade. For the next five years, he has proposed a $96 billion
shipbuilding program for 133 ships, including six new Trident missile-firing
submarines and two new nuclear-powered aircraft carriers.

Budget authority for the aircraft carriers is $6.8 billion. It would add to the
present fleet of 13 carriers, only three of which are nuclear powered.

Funds for Cruise Missiles

The sea-launched cruise missile program also receives special attention. Two
refurbished battleships and other vessels would be fitted with these new
missiles, which would carry conventional warheads.

The $258 billion request for budget authority next year, when coupled with a
projected average annual real, or after-inflation, growth in expenditures of 7.4
percent, leads to the five-year 1,640 billion total.

The $258 billion figure is solely for military expenditures made by the
Department of Defense. It does not include $5.5 billion more spent by other
agencies on nuclear research and the manufacture of material for nuclear
warheads, nor does it include more than $1 billion in military aid to foreign
countries.

In stressing the cost-saving programs that the Administration was implementing,
Mr. Carlucci said that through such methods as the multiyear letting of
contracts, the Pentagon would ''save'' $2.4 billion in the fiscal year l983 and
a total of $13.8 billion through the fiscal year 1987.

As an example, he offered the $6.8 billion full funding of the two new aircraft
carriers. By building the two ships ''in tandem'' at the same shipyard so that
work crews and equipment can move from one ship to another, he said, ''we will
be able to save $750 million and get delivery more than two years earlier.''

Mr. Carlucci also said that the new procedures would give Congress a more
accurate picture of military costs. In the past, he said, items were underpriced
and inflation factors were too low.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph and table of expanding military budget by category

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW FILM BY COSTA-GRAVAS EXAMINES THE CHILEAN COUP

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2642 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Fact: A young American freelance writer named Charles Horman was killed during
the 1973 coup that brought the Pinochet regime to power in Chile.

Fact: His father, a New York industrial designer, was told that his son was
missing and went to Chile in what became a desperate search to find Charles.
Edmund C. Horman, the father, gradually became convinced that the American
Embassy in Santiago not only knew about the murder from the start but was intent
on concealing it because it shared responsibility.  He later sued 11 high United
States officials for $4 million, but after a year and a half the case was
dismissed for lack of evidence.

Fact: A lawyer named Thomas Hauser was drawn into the Horman family's crusade
and wrote a book about the incident called "The Execution of Charles Horman: An
American Sacrifice," published in 1979.

Fact: Costa-Gavras, the Paris-based Greek director who made powerful political
films about cases in Greece, Czechoslovakia and Uruguay, accepted an offer from
Universal to make a movie from the Hauser book. It is called "Missing," stars
Jack Lemmon and Sissy Spacek and it opens in New York on Friday at the Beekman
theater.  It is tautly well-made and cinematically convincing.

Fiction: "This film is based on a true story.  The incidents and facts are
documented.  Some of the names have been changed to protect the innocent and
also to protect the film."

This message is shown at the start of the film.  In many cases real names are
used, real events are evoked, real encounters portrayed.  These devices and the
director's art are combined to persuadethe audience that the whole story and its
charge that the United States helped plan the coup in Chile and sanctioned the
murder of Charles Horman are literally true, in general and in detail.

But it isn't a documentary, and in the course of an interview Mr.  Costa-Gavras
didn't pretend that it is.  "Don't ask a film director to be a policial
technician," he said after a showing here.  "Either you give two points of view,
or you say, 'Here's what I think.  I draw my own conclusion.'"

That is the problem.  The film gives only one point of view, essentially Ed
Horman's, but its claim to present a basic historical truth puts it in a
different category from other dramatizations and political thrillers.  It is a
technique which raises serious ethical, moral and political as well as artistic
questions.

Mr. Costa-Gavras says he collaborated closely with the author of the book and
spent a good deal of time with the Horman family "so I could reproduce them."
But he made no effort to speak with the Government officials he portrays nor to
consult the records, particularly of the Senate Intelligence Committee headed by
Senator Frank Church, Democrat of Idaho, which made extensive investigations and
issued a report on "Covert Action in Chile: 1963-1973."

"The director can't do everything," he said.  "Hauser did the research and saw
all those people, and I went through all his notes."

The difficulty is that the role of the United States in Chile remains an
extremely controversial, emotional subject.A good deal has been made public and
it documents some nasty episodes.  When Salvador Allende's regime was overturned
by Gen. Augusto Pinochet in a vast, murderous rampage, many people, particularly
French Socialists, felt it showed the United States would go to any length to
prevent the survival of another leftist government besides Cuba in the Western
Hemisphere. The French left indentified their own aims with Allende.  The coup
became a kind of litmus test for the Paris intelligentsia, a sequel to the
Vietnam war.

Newspaper reports, especially those of Seymour M. Hersh in The New York Times,
and lengthy records of the Ch urch Committee in 1975 and 1976 showed that the
United Stated had in deed been involved in Chilean politics.  The most damaging
evidence related to C.I.A. activity attempting to prevent Allende's election in
1970.  At that time, it was revealed, an infamous operation called "Track II"
linked American agents with violent rightwing groups .

Edward M. Korry, the United States Ambassador to Chile from 1967 to 1971, was
named by Mr. Hersh and others as being involved in White House efforts to
prevent Allende's accession to power by a Chilean military coup.  Last February,
Mr. Hersh published a lengthy article in The Times retracting his charge that
Mr. Korry knew of the "Track II" operation, and admitting that after long
conversations with Mr.  Korry in 1975, he had wrongly concluded the "account was
too self-serving to be credible."

But the record showed that President Nixon had called the then C.I.A. director
Richard Helms to the White House in 1970 to order plan for a military coup, and
also ordered Mr. Helms to withhold all information of the plans from Ambassador
Korry, the Secretary of State (then William Rogers) and the Secretary of Defense
(then Melvin Laird).  It was an extraordinary meeting.

Nonetheless, Allende was elected.  After that, according to the Church Committee
and statements by Nathaniel Davis, who was Ambassador in Santiago from 1971
until shortly after the 1973 coup, the United States channeled funds to
political parties, press and radio stations in Chile but stayed away from
violent right wingers and military plots.

The thesis, Mr. Davis wrote in the Foreign Service Journal in 1978, was that the
Allende Government was putting such intense pressure on the oppostion's capacity
to survive that it might be unable to contest the next election scheduled for
1976.  The secret subsidies, he said, were to enable opposition parties and
distributors of information to compete with Government-supported parties and
press.

"We still have not, as a society, thought through the practical and ethical
implications of covert action," Mr. Davis said.  He pointed out, and the record
confirms, that he successfully opposed C.I.A.  suggestions to support strikes
and demonstrations to undermine Allende.

However, Richard Helms and Hal Hendrix, an I.T.T. official, were convicted of
perjury for their testimony before a 1973 Senate committee on what happened in
1970.  And there was the extraordinary Nixon order to Helms not to inform
Ambassador Korry and two top cabinet members of that plot.  Credibility became a
serious issue in disentangling the Chile story.

Ambassador Davis's own personality, the meticulous care he took in separating
his own first hand knowledge from hearsay when he finally wrote in his own
defense in 1978, make him believable.  He said recently that he was convinced he
had not been treated like Ambassador Korry and that activity he opposed or did
not know about was not conducted behind his back.

William Colby, the C.I.A. director at the time of the 1973 coup, said in a
telephone interview that Mr. Davis was indeed kept fully informed, and supports
the rest of Mr. Davis's stand.  Mr. Colby acknowledged that the United States
put economic pressure on Allende's regime - documented by accounts of Robert
McNamara as president of the World Bank trying to resist Government insistence
on cutting loans to Chile.  But Mr. Colby said that in May 1973, when the
situation was getting tense and rumors of an impending coup began to multiply,
"we sent a message to our people to stay away from the (Chilean) military and
their activities.

"They followed what was going on, collected intelligence, but they were not
involved in any planning.  They reported on the military trying to get all four
services (Army, Navy, Air Force and National Police) together.  There were
several false alarms, but finally the four joined forces."

Seymour Hersh himself, who made many investigations of the events in Chile and
was the first reporter to publish stories about the C.I.A.'s mili-million dollar
activites in Chile in 1970 to prevent Allende's coming to power, said he
investigated Mr. Horman's diappearance and found no evidence of involvement by
the United States in Horman's fate or in the actual Pinochet coup.

The Hauser book, and the film, suggest that United States officials in Chile
knew about Charles Horman's murder and perhaps even instigated it because "he
knew too much" about involvement by the United States in arranging the coup.
This is the centerpiece of the story.  Not all the charges are made directly,
but the implications are clear and insistent.

The drama is built on the evolution of Ed Horman's convictions.  He arrives in
Santiago to look for his son and seeks the help of the embassy, harshly accusing
his distraught daughter-in-law of holding willfully unfounded suspicions about
the officials.

Played by Jack Lemmon, the father is shown as a successful, confident, warmly
patriotic American who firmly disapproves of what he considers a feckless
younger generation.He is shocked by the slaughter in the streets of Santiago,
shown with buckets of gore, but at first he feels uninvolved and only wants to
find his missing son.

Step by step, he comes to share his daughter-in-law's views.  When he learns
that his son was murdered well before he launched his search, he concludes that
the embassy was engaged in an elaborate cover-up for a crime it had arranged.

"They (the Chileans) wouldn't dare (execute a United States citizen) unless an
American official co-signed a kill order," he tells the Ambassador at the end.

The Ambassador replies: "We 're not involved.  Our position has been completely
neutral.  There are over 3,000 U.S. firms doing business down here and these are
American interests.  You can't have it both ways.  I'm concerned with a way of
life."

"They're not my interests," says the enraged father.

The naval attache, portrayed as a sinister tough who is the villain of the
piece, says: "Your son was a bit of a snoop.  He poked his nose into a lot of
places he didn't belong.  If you keep on playing with fire, you get burned . .
."

Mr. Davis not only denies the specifics, but said, "There wasn't remotely
anything like 3,000 U.S. firms."

The film does have him saying, as he says now, that the embassy was seriously
trying to find Charles Horman and didn't know that he was dead. But all the
Embassy people's denials in the film are presented in a way to make the viewer
share Ed Horman's belief that they were lying.

Mr. Costa-Gavras believes they were lying.  "I would be astonished if they
hadn't found out," he said.  His reasoning is wide-ranging, deductive from a
general sense of American policy and methods, based on sentiment instead of
specifics.

Horman and Frank Teruggi, a friend who was also murdered, "were the first young
Americans killed in a putsch in a western country with which the U.S. army has
close links.  Since then, there's been Salvador. So it's not a custom of the
military to execute Americans.  Is it conceivable that they could do this,
without worrying about the consequences?" he said.

The director cited United Stated intervention in the Dominican Republic which
President Lyndon Johnson said was "to protect American lives," Henry Kissinger
saying the United States can't let a country turn to Communism by the
irresponsibility of its people, the war in Cambodia.

"Everything suggests the U.S. participated in the Chilean coup.  A film reflects
your personality, your own philosophy.  You manipulate the elements and try to
translate as honestly as possible.  I don't say objectively, that doesn't exist.
I'm not trying to stain Ambassador Davis or make him say what he didn't.

"But with a Nixon or a Kissinger, who could destroy Cambodia trying to win the
Vietnam War, they were also capable of helping a putsch in Chile.There's no
contradiction.  Kissinger speaks lightly of Chile in his book, accepting the
thousands of deaths.  The U.S. helps the Pinochet Government now."

He brushes aside the distinction between fact and verisimilitude, proof and
suspicion.  "A film is not a court," Mr. Costa-Gavras said. "I can't go into
secondary details."

"There is a difference between the journalist and the artist.  The journalist
has a distant, cold relation with the reader.  Film, theater, has to have a
different approach."

Far from being bothered that his film's charges are not proven, he says he made
an effort to understand the Ambassador and his aides, to portray them as people
who were just doing their jobs.  He feels he treated them with relative
sympathy, though of course he concedes he used "poetic license," "condensation,"
"synthesizing" of Mr. Hauser's book for dramatic purpose.

A key incident involves a Chilean policeman who, Ambassador Davis says, was
named Gonzalez but is called Perez in the film.  He took refuge in the Italian
Embassy and told Ed Horman that a few days after the coup he saw Charles Horman
in a genera's anteroom at the Ministry of Defense.  In the general's office, he
said, there was an American.

Ambassador Davis, who has gone painstakingly through all details of the case,
says Mr. Gonzalez identified the stranger as an American offical "by his shoes,
he said they were American shoes." The film simply takes Mr. Gonzalez's word at
face value, without questioning how he knew what he alleged, and takes it to
mean that an American official endorsed Mr. Horman's murder.

"Either you accept all Gonzalez said or reject it," Mr.  Costa-Gavras says about
the incident.  Why would he say Horman was there if it wasn't true about the
official too? You have to take all or none."

He saw no reason even to ask for Mr. Davis's version.  He wouldn't have believed
it.

"All these elements produce conviction," he said.  "In Warsaw today, they say
the Poles are in charge.  Who believes it?  There's no proof that the Soviets
gave an order, but I have no doubt of it."

That is the essence of the problem.  Is an artist's conviction a reality?
Literary convention has accepted it as perhaps a higher reality, but not as
documented fact, as Mr. Costa-Gavras asserts.  He does not see any
irresponsibility in his approach.  On the contrary, he is proud of it and well
aware that the claim to fact instead of fiction enormously enhances the suspense
and excitement of the drama.

"I'm trying to go more to the truth, to reality, to understand what happens.  So
long as a film or novel invents a story, it's easy because it challenges no
interest, puts a finger directly on on problem.  Cinema will go more and more in
the direction of touching very close to us, with stories that touch moral and
economic interests, and that approach is more difficult.  Each has his truth."

Mr. Costa-Gavras is anti-Communist but believes that United States pressures
force people in little countries to see their only hope in the East.  "That's
the great political fault of our century.  There's no possibility of a third
way."

He is so sure of hsi suspicions, seems to feel so little need of specific
evidence to support his deductions from his sense of the general iniquity of
power, that one is driven to ask whether his attitudes derive from the fact that
he is Greek.

It is, rather, he said, the fact of his passage from Greece to France.  He is
48, an important fact because he was a happy child living quietly in a village
during World War II, and became aware of the world during the terrible Greek
civil war just afterwards.  Then, in 1954, he came to Paris and it was an
intoxicating revelation for him.

"I found another kind of society, culture, and liberty - liberty to think, act,
read, be."

There seems, in the end, to be the ultimate of the television age in Mr.
Costa-Gavras's outlook.  News is a show.  Performance is the event. The line
between fact and fancy is the line of passion. The image is the reality.  The
definition of truth has always been difficult, but he doesn't concede the
distortion of art.  In that way, he winds up distorting fact without even
noticing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Costa-Gravas photo of Jack Lemmon and Sissy
Spacek

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STRUGGLE IN SALVADOR PINCHES WASHINGTON'S 'VIETNAM NERVE'

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1273 words


WASHINGTON IN the foreign relations committee rooms, there was something
hauntingly familiar about the political crossfire last week.  Mistrustful
wrangling over the casualty count and the reliability of press reports about
faraway massacres of civilians by their government's troops. Members of
Congress, protesting the brutality of an American ally and also alarmed by
stepped-up guerrilla attacks, asking where it all would end. Top State
Department officials contending the local military had made enough progress in
curbing violence against civilians to justify sending more aid lest the regional
dominoes start to fall.

''There is no mistaking that the decisive battle for Central America is under
way in El Salvador,'' Thomas O. Enders, an Assistant Secretary of State, told a
House subcommittee. ''If after Nicaragua, El Salvador is captured by a violent
minority, who in Central Ameri ca would not live in fear? How long would it be
before major strateg ic interests - the Panama Canal, sea lanes, oil supplies,
wer e at risk?''

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. came even closer to touching ''the
Vietnam nerve,'' warning that Washington would do ''whatever is necessary'' to
defeat leftist guerrillas in El Salvador. ''We are considering a whole range of
options - political, economic and security - in response to Cuban intervention
in this hemisphere,'' Mr. Haig told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.  Did
the options include American troops? ''We have not ruled out anything,'' he
replied with calculated ambiguity. Later, the White House assured that ''the
President has said he has no plans to send troops anywhere.''

With only 50 American military training officers assigned to El Salvador, the
risk, many Congressional critics believe, is less one of direct intervention
than of Washington's becoming linked to another weak and violent government
headed for demise. In the case of El Salvador, the collapse of the
civilian-military junta would present the Administration with a regional and
ideological setback as well as a perceived loss of United States prestige.

''Haig & Company really believe that what is happening in El Salvador is the
result of decisions made in Moscow rather than the revolutionary conditions in
El Salvador,'' commented Representative Gerry E. Studds of Massachusetts, an
outspoken Democratic critic.  ''Any policy that is based on that kind of logic
is doomed to failure.''
Debate Over Certification

The immediate focus of controversy was President Reagan's Jan. 28 decision
certifying that the Salvadoran junta had made a sufficiently ''concerted''
effort to curb its soldiers' violence against noncombatants to justify giving it
$25 million in military aid and $40 million in economic aid beyond the $135
million budgeted this year. The Administration has also promised $55 million
from unrestricted Pentagon funds, partly to compensate for the loss of half the
junta's American-supplied air force in a guerrilla raid on an air base outside
San Salvador. The first r eplacement helicopters started arriving this weekend.

''The President has squandered our very substantial leverage on the Salvadoran
military,'' Mr. Studds charged. ''We should have made it crystal clear that
American aid was conditional on their behavior on human rights, on their
willingness to negotiate a political solution to the war and on land reform
progress.''

The Administration contended that the military had promulgated a new code of
conduct, transferred or relieved 1,000 soldiers who abused civilians and was
about to indict six National Guardsmen for slaying three American nuns and a
co-worker 14 months ago.

As in the Vietnam war, the hottest debate swirls around the casualty figures.
The United States Embassy in San Salvador estimates that the level of violence
has declined over the past year from about 600 to 800 civilian deaths a month to
200 to 300 a month.  It says that 6,900 civilians died from September 1980 to
September 1981. Critics dispute the embassy's compilation methods and cite other
figures, for example the estimate of Msgr. Arturo Rivera y Damas, acting head of
the Roman Catholic Church in El Salvador, that 11,723 civilians were killed in
1981. In a typical controversy, the Administration last week cited embassy
figures that no more than 300 people were killed during a Government sweep in
Morazan province in December. American correspondents were told by survivors
that more than 700 civilians died.

''There's something fishy with the embassy's numbers,'' said Representative
Stephen Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn. ''It's like the estimates of enemy
strength in Vietnam. These figures have such an implication for policy that the
officials who compile them can't give an honest estimate.'' (Bodies in a barrio,
page 2.)

Even broader issues are at stake. The Administration hopes to defeat the
guerrillas in El Salvador also to shield Costa Rica, whose durable democracy now
faces severe economic problems, and Honduras's newly elected Government. It also
wants to roll back Cuban influence and to contain the growing military strength
of leftist Nicaragua.
Critics Favor Negotiations

Administration officials contend they have chosen a middle course between direct
intervention, which the public would not support, and noninvolvement, which
officials feel would see El Salvador wind up like Nicaragua. The policy, they
say, is aimed at inducing the junta to continue land reform, reduce military
abuses and conduct elections to a constituent assembly March 28 as the first
step toward political legitimization. In Washington's view, the latest surge of
attacks by guerrilla forces is intended to discredit the elections and cause an
outcry abroad.

The Administration is not unanimous. Some officials profess modest optimism abou
t military trends, but others foresee no better than a stalemate. Th e Pentagon
has shown less taste for American military action than M r. Haig. Ambassador
Deane R. Hinton was recently quoted as saying tha t elections would ''not end
the war'' and there might beno alternativ e to seeking military victory.

Critics in Congress see another option - a negotiated settlement.  In 1980, the
junta considered negotiations, but after the rebels' all-out offensive in
January 1981, it said it would negotiate only if the guerrillas laid down arms
and agreed to participate in elections. Given past animosities, that could be
suicidal for the rebels. Their offer - spurned by the junta and by Washington -
is for negotiations to set up a political coalition, followed by a reshuffling
of security forces and eventually a plebiscite.

The Administration fears another Nicaragua, where rebel leaders intially
promised political pluralism, then began concentrating power in their hands. But
Congressional critics may write legislation to try to force the Administration
to make future aid conditional on negotiations. Mr. Solarz argued, ''We have an
interest in a negotiated settlement because in a prolonged military conflict,
the junta is more likely to crack than the guerrillas.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of guerrillas guarding burning truck in Usulutan
photo of soldier signaling to suspected guerrilla positions map of El Salvador

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHECKING THE METER ON THE FLOW OF DATA

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 972 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Since its enactment in 1966, the Freedom of Information Act has become a
well-established part of the Washington landscape. Documents and other data
obtained under provisions of the law have resulted in dramatic disclosures,
including accounts of how the Federal Bureau of Investigation once kept Martin
Luther King Jr.  under surveillance and, just last month, how the United States
military secretly sprayed herbicides on Laos during the Vietnam War.

Now, Congress has begun to tinker with the law. It remains to be seen if the
adjustments will amount to a mere fine-tuning or to the broad overhaul sought by
business groups and by Federal lawenforcement and intelligence-gathering
agencies, which maintain that the flow of information has become entirely too
free.

The Administration's active lobbying for ''reform'' comes at a time when the
White House is conducting a campaign against what it says have been damaging
security leaks. Last week, the White House announced new internal procedures for
handling sensitive National Security Council documents. The campaign began early
last month, after plans for selling arms to Taiwan and the presence of advanced
Soviet-made fighter-bombers in Cuba were reported in the press.

Consequently, the drive to revise the information statute could take on even
more importance. Later this month, the Senate Judiciary Committee is due to
consider a bill that, among other things, would permit the Attorney General to
keep secret the Government's accounts of investigations into organized crime,
terrorism and foreign counterintelligence. The bill would also put beyond the
reach of the public records that would ''tend to'' identify confidential
Government sources.

This legislation, an amalgam of proposals developed by the Administration and by
a subcommittee he aded by Senator Orrin G.  Hatch, Republ ican of Utah, emerged
from a series of stormy hearings. The bill alre ady has been opposed by press
and public-affairs groups and has promp ted the American Newspaper Publishers
Association to assemble a gr oup to monitor prospective changes in the act. ''We
don't think t he case has been made that the Freedom of Information Act should
un dergo a significant change,'' said W. Terry McGuire, general couns el for the
association.

There is general agreement that some aspects of the act, which was broadened
over the veto of President Ford in 1974, do need refining.  For instance, even
those who differ stridently on other elements of the act agree that there ought
to be some modification in the strict 10-day limit a Government agency is given
to respond to a request for information; that there should be some restructuring
of the fee schedule, and that procedures governing business records should be
changed to permit businesses that submit confidential information an opportunity
to protect that information through reasonable procedures.

Early last autumn, William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence,
recommended that intelligence agencies be granted ''total exclusion'' from
provisions of the act. That recommendation was deferred, but the Hatch
subcommittee has proposed substantially weakening the standard of judicial
review in the event an intelligence agency balks at providing information.
Currently, such agencies must present a complete argument in court justifying
their decision to refuse to provide documents. Under the provisions of the Hatch
bill, the court would only decide if the agency acted in an arbitrary and
capricious manner.

William H. Webster, director of the F.B.I., has argued that the act has spawned
among potential Government informers a belief that their identity cannot be
protected. Documents can be kept secret if they ''would disclose'' the identity
of the source. The Hatch subcommittee bill would exempt from the act any
information that would ''tend to'' disclose the identity of a confidential
informer, a change that opponents charge gives the agencies far too much
latitude in shielding information.

The American Civil Liberties Union, the Reporters Committee for the Freedom of
the Press and several other groups are also concerned about provisions in the
bill giving the Attorney General absolute discretion in keeping certain
documents secret and exempting from the act records given to the Government by
any party in connection with the settlement of a legal action in which the
United States is a party. No longer would only information that would interfere
with current Government enforcement proceedings be beyond the act; under the
Hatch bill, an agency would only have to show the info rmation relates to an
ongoing procedure.

But the groups are especially troubled by a provision that would broaden the
kinds of business information to be kept beyond the reach of the act, a change
that they argue would keep information about dangerous consumer products,
ranging from unsafe foods and drugs to hazardous tires, from the public. ''If
this is passed,'' said John H.F. Shattuck, legislative director of the American
Civil Liberties Union, ''giving information to the Government will be like
putting it in a safe-deposit box.''

The maneuvering over the legislation may lead to a dead end.  Representative
Glenn English, Democrat of Oklahoma, has said his House information subcommittee
will not take up the matter until the Senate has completed action. If the Senate
goes too far, the House may not act at all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of U.S. planes spraying Agent Orange in Vietnam

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE PUTS THOSE SOCIAL ISSUES ON THE FRONT BURNER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2132 words


THE economy and the Federal budget are high-priority matters on Capitol Hill
these days, but conservative lawmakers remain determined to press for enactment
of their ''social issues'' agenda. Last week the Senate, ignoring arguments that
the measure was unconstitutional, approved the most stringent antibusing
legislation ever enacted by either chamber, an amendment that would take away
the power of Federal courts to order students to be bused more than five miles
or 15 minutes from their homes.

The amendment, affixed to an authorization bill by a 58-to-38 vote, would also
bar the Justice Department from asking judges to use busing as a means of
achieving desegregation. The ultimate fate of the amendment isn't clear; Senator
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., a liberal Republican from Connecticut, promised to try
killing it with a filibuster.

Senator Jesse Helms, a conservative Republican from North Carolina, speculated
that after the busing vote this session of the 97th Congress will take final
action on controversial matters such as abortion and school prayer. If it
doesn't, he said, ''We'll have to start over'' next January, when the 98th
Congress is sworn in.

Last week, The Week in Review invited two Republican Senators who disagree on
most social issues - Charles McC. Mathias Jr., a liberal from Maryland, and
William L. Armstrong, a Colorado conservative - to consider the f ate of social
legislation this year. Following are excerpts of their discussion with Steven V.
R oberts and Martin Tolchin, reporters in the Washington Bureau o f The New York
Times, and Michael Wright, an editor of The Review.

Question. What's the outlook for social issues in this session of Congress?

Mr. Armstrong. In the Senate, the 1982 session is likely to focus on budgetary
matters. But it's my impression that Howard Baker, the Senate majority leader,
not only does not intend to put social issues on the back burner, but has
suggested that they be brought up early in the session, and it's now a question
of working out the details and scheduling.

I think he has expressed appreciation to the proponents of these social issues
for giving the President's economic program a chance to be acted on last year
and in effect has said 'Okay, this is your turn.' I think you'll see very little
of the guerrilla tactics that have characterized these debates in the past.

There will probably be a lengthy and controversial debate on abortion, school
busing and prayer. The probability is that no definitive action will be taken,
although the Voting Rights Act will be extended, in one form or another.

Mr. Mathias. I would add a caveat. People who are not intimately familiar with
the ways of Government, and Capitol Hill, may not fully appreciate how much
chance or circumstance affects public decisions.  And it may be that somewhere
along the line this spring the proponents of one of these issues will see too
tempting a situation and will try to press for an advantage. That could destroy
the balance that Senator Baker has created and could really throw the system out
of whack.

Busing and abortion and school prayer are subjects the American people really
haven't come to any final conclusions on. These are issues that have been
stretched out for a generation, and polls indicate there still is no
overwhelming consensus on any one of them.

Q. Proposed restrictions on busing keep bubbling up. Is that an issue whose time
has come?

Mr. Armstrong. I think clearly busing is a failure in every respect, even in
terms of the initial objectives of people who favored it. A nd I think those who
supported it at the outset have now looked ba ck and said, this isn't working
and there are other and better remedi es to the problem of school integration.

Mr. Mathias. From the very beginning, people said that the only ones who would
really like busing are those who sold school buses.  And I think that's true. No
parents want their children to have long, tiring bus trips before they start the
school day. It never was anything more than an experiment in trying to bring
about the desegregation of education.

Q. Do you think it worked?

Mr. Mathias. Well, I have only one problem with Bill Armstrong's comment that
there are other and better alternatives - I'm not sure there are.

Mr. Armstrong. Oh, sure there are. How about the magnet schools, for example. If
you want to see a system that is solving this problem, come out to Denver,
Colo., which is under a court order for busing. And which, by the way, I think
may, at some point relatively soon, be relieved of that obligation by the court.

Mr. Mathias. Or you can go to Columbia, Md., a town that is so designed that
there don't have to be any school buses. But that's a very rare and exotic kind
of answer to this problem. And when you get down into the center cities of the
older metropolitan areas of America there just are not very many good
alternatives. And that's the problem.

Q. For some time we have had ongoing filibusters in effect on school prayer and
busing. Are moderate-to-liberal Republicans to continue resisting, whether you
call it a filibuster or not?

Mr. Mathias. Those were issues that came out of the Appropriations Committee, of
which Senator Weicker is a member, so he naturally took the lead. The real
question is will people attempt to use the appropriations process as a means for
bringing about substantive change in the law. And if they do, it really is your
duty to resist.  I think many Senators feel very strongly that it's not just the
issue at stake - whether it's school prayer, busing or abortion or anything
else. There is a procedural aspect to this that has to be resisted, and that is
to use the appropriations process to change the law.

Q. Did you feel the same way about using the appropriations process to attempt
to end American involvement in the Vietnam War?

Mr. Mathias. No, and I'll tell you exactly why. That was a question of the level
of funding for an operation. That was the only question before the Congress.

When you get to a question of whether the courts will have a range of
jurisdiction or whether the courts will ha ve a range of judicial remedies, that
really is a matter that ought to be resolved in the Judiciary Committee and
debated on the floor only after the experts in that committee have a chance to
consider t he question of the spectrum of court power and authority. To try to
compress complex constitutional questions into the funding of the Federal courts
or the funding of the Justice Department and res tricting its ability to get to
the court is to me a perversion of the system.

Mr. Armstrong. In my judgment, if somebody has an issue that they want to raise
and the rules permit it to be raised through use of an appropriations bill, I
don't criticize them for doing so. If somebody wants to filibuster to prevent an
amendment from passing, you'll never hear me criticize that either. The rules
exist in order to establish a framework under which decisions may be made, and
there's nothing inherently right or wrong about any particular procedure.

I do think it lends credibility to a proposed amendment, for example, if it has
been the subject of hearings and study in the committee that has jurisdiction
over it. But that doesn't make it wrong to raise it on an appropriations bill -
particularly where a limitation on funding is the issue, such as the limitation
on funding for abortion. Clearly, that is in every sense a proper amendment on
an appropriations bill.

Q. What about the extension of the Voting Rights Act? The key issue that has
emerged in Senate hearings is how to define what is and is not a discriminatory
act. Do you judge it by its effects or by its intent? That is an increasingly
emotional and angry point of discussion between Senate liberals and Senate
conservatives. How would you like to see the law defined?

Mr. Armstrong. It appears to me that it is very difficult to justify the way the
law has been applied in some jurisdictions, and let me cite my own state of
Colorado as an example.

Some counties fall under the supervision of the Federal courts even though there
has been no proven instance of anybody's voting rights ever being abridged. It
seems to me that if you apply an 'effect test,' you open the door to a lot of
unnecessary interference with local governments. And so my tendency is to
support the intent test rather than a wholesale application of some sort of
predetermined effects test.  There may be even another possibility that I'm not
aware of; but if it comes down to the choice between the present law and some
kind of broader net, I would tend to stick with the present law.

Mr. Mathias. I'm an old city attorney. No municipal lawyer worth his salary is
going to allow his board of aldermen or his mayor or his town council to get
into a situation where their intent to discriminate can be proved in court.

Therefore, I go back to the original Congressional intent, which I voted for in
1965. That is that we should have; whenever there is a wrong being perpetrated
it should be remedied without a lot of legal mumbo-jumbo about who intended to
do what. If there is a body of citizens whose rights are threatened, then we
ought to protect them.  It's just as simple as that.

Q. How do you feel about anti-abortion efforts? Is that a legitimate attempt to
change a court interpretation or change a court decision?

Mr. Mathias. As long as it doesn't try to tamper with court jurisdiction, as
long as it doesn't try to look for some backdoor way to get a constitutional
amendment that can't be achieved out in the open, then I think it's perfectly
legitimate for people to offer bills and amendments to pursue their point of
view.

My main reservation about such efforts is that they are coming at a time when
there are other serious, urgent and critical problems facing the country. Maybe
it's even a waste of time to devote so much attention to abortion when we may
not dispose of it this year.

Mr. Armstrong. The same could have been said about slavery in 1860. Even after
we fought a war over it, the bitterness and controvery lasted for years. And
even a hundred years later, a residue of bitterness is present in our society.
That doesn't mean it was wrong to go ahead and try to resolve the problem. I
wouldn't want to be understood as saying that we ought to wait until there's
unanimous agreement on abortion or ...

Mr. Mathias. Which you never will have.

Mr. Armstrong. Which we'll never have.

Mr. Mathias. But on most of those issues, if the polls are of any value at all,
you have a preponderance of people taking one side or another. And it's clear
that there is enough agitation about them that they aren't going to be resolved.
The people really haven't made up their minds. Blackstone said that the law
should be the highest expression of the ethic of a people. And I think we really
haven't resolved what our ethic is in any of these questions.

Mr. Armstrong. I happen to feel that abortion is wrong, that it's simply a
practice which should not be encouraged or permitted, and I wo uld counsel
someone to that effect. Yet I h ave never said, and I don't say today, that the
best way to handle the matter is through anamendment to the United States
Constitution.  Nor do I necessarily saythat the way to do it is by imposing
limits o n the jurisdiction of the court. It may be that there is a statutor y
approach short of either of those remedies which would resolve the question, if
not to the satisfaction of everybody, at least by ta king the minimum number of
steps that are necessary to get to a decis ion.

Now, having said all that, I believe it's pretty clear that public opinion does
not at the present time support my point of view, that by a very wide margin the
polls show that the public endorses the notion of abortion. But, again, if this
is a basic human right - if it is, for example, analagous to slavery - the
question isn't what public opinion polls say. It's a question for each of us to
decide as an issue of what we believe to be right.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senator Armstrong photo of Senator Mathias
photo of students being bused in Georgia

TYPE: interview

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THE TET OFFENSIVE WAS NO SURPRISE TO JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 704 words


To the Editor:

Your Jan. 24 editorial ''War, Intelligence and Truth'' draws from the CBS
documentary of Jan. 23 precisely the conclusion it clearly projected: ''that
Lyndon Johnson himself was victimized by mendacious intelligence'' before the
Tet offensive of January 1968.

he conclusion is false; and those who produced the documentary know it is false.
President Johnson received directly and read voraciously the captured documents
to which you refer - not summaries - as well as reports of C.I.A., State
Department and A.I.D. officers in the provinces; prisoner-of-war interrogations;
intercepts, and all manner of other basic information.

Each week, Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker filed a long country-team report covering
every dimension of the situation in South Vietnam, military and nonmilitary,
which historians will find exceedingly accurate and done with patent integrity.
On the basis of this flow, it was clear by November 1967 that Hanoi planned a
maximum offensive in the time ahead, including efforts to induce ''a great
uprising.''

Late in November 1967, through Deputy Ambassador Eugene Locke (briefly in
Washington), I asked the country team in Saigon to prepare a comprehensive
analysis of the coming offensive, including the possibility of fruitful
negotiations when it was turned back.  That evaluation plus the observations of
the Washingto n intelligence community went to the President on Dec. 16. W
ithout the benefit of these particular papers, he had already decid ed to send
to Vietnam the forces he had promised General Westmorela nd by mid-1968. These
were airlifted out before Christmas.

On Dec. 21, talking to the Australian Cabinet on the occasion of the memorial
service for Prime Minister Holt, President Johnson explained that a maximum
effort, with ''kamikaze'' tactics, was about to be made and that there were dark
days ahead, after which a bombing halt and negotiations might be possible.

Just before Tet, General Westmoreland asked the President for permission to
cancel the Tet truce in I Corps, put U.S. forces on alert and made special
dispositions for Saigon's protection.

The only surprise at Tet was that the Communists attacked as many as 40
provincial capitals. Most of the attacks were on a small scale and easily turned
back. The surprise was not the scale of the Vietcong forces revealed but the
bold imprudence of the effort: an unlikely diffusion of resources that resulted
in a disaster from which the VC

(and their political cadres) never recovered.The only city entered and partially
held for a significant interval was Hue. This was done by North Vietnamese, not
VC, forces; and they were rooted out mainly by the South Vietnamese.

President Johnson was fully aware of the Vietcong order-of-battle debate, at the
center of the CBS documentary. It concerned the size of the logistical and local
forces, not the VC main force units or the North Vietnamese forces.

It was at my suggestion that General Wheeler ordered an effort to reconcile the
Washington and Saigon estimates at a Honolulu meeting.  It was precisely because
order-of-battle estimates were so inherently difficult that we relied on the
widest possible ran ge of intelligence, never on the order-of-battle numbers
alone.

CBS is quite aware of all this, from its own research and from a three-hour
taping session with me on Jan. 24, 1981, in New York. The director of the
documentary, George Crile, wrote to me on Jan. 15, 1982, explaining that nothing
from that session was to be used and that CBS was therefore relieved of the
requirement of providing me a transcript of the taping. (CBS had every right to
make that decision.)

His letter included this sentence: ''We did not suggest that the enemy's attack
at Tet came as a surprise to the White House or to the American military
command.'' Whatever his intention, you and every other viewer of the documentary
had the right to draw a contrary conclusion.

It is difficult enough for the nation to digest and put in perspective our
experience in Southeast Asia without complicating the task with distorted
renditions of what happened.  W. W. ROSTOW Austin, Tex., Jan. 26, 1982

The writer was special assistant to President Johnson.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
W. W. Rostow's reference, in his letter published Feb. 7, to a taping session
with CBS should have been dated July (not Jan.) 24, 1981. We regret the
typographical error.

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

...AND INTELLIGENCE PEDDLED NO OPTIMISM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 276 words


To the Editor:

As a former Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs who opposed the
Vietnam War, I am naturally sympathetic to the antiwar sentiment behind Mike
Wallace's CBS documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' and to
your Jan. 24 editorial ''War, Intelligence and Truth.''

But in the name of truth, I must also say t hat you have been taken in and that
Wallace's documentary is a prize example of irresponsible,
when-did-you-stop-beating-your -wife journalism that strains for the dramatic at
any cost.

I was no longer in Government at the time in question, but even moderately
careful research by an outsider shows that the disagreement over enemy strength
was an honest argument over whether or not to count political cadre, militia and
so on in with main-line, regular Vietcong troops. This kind of disagreement
occurs all the time. It happened in World War II over German ''home guard''
troops.  It is happening right now over Soviet first-line and reserve divisions.

Finally, if Wallace had checked with someone like Thomas L. Hughes, who
succeeded me as Director of Intelligence and Research at the State Department
and who now heads the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, he would have
found that a post-mortem study of the intelligence estimates for the entire
period of the Vietnam War shows that the only branch of our Government
consistently pessimistic about Vietnam was the intelligence community -
including the C.I.A.

If President Johnson had in fact listened to what the intelligence community was
saying, he would not have been optimistic at all.
ROGER HILSMAN, New York, Jan. 28, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

In the Land of Khmer Rouge

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 257 words


As a relief worker on the ground in Cambodia and now as projects officer of
Oxfam America, a Boston-based nonprofit relief and development agency, I have
been involved since August 1980 with the international effort to aid the six
million people inside Cambodia (''In the Land of Khmer Rouge,'' by Christopher
Jones, Dec. 20).  During this time, I have traveled the length and breadth of
the country, most recently visiting the magnificent Angkor temple complex at
precisely the time Ieng Sary alleged, according to Mr. Jones, that these temples
were under Khmer Rouge control. Not once in the course of these journeys, during
conversations with hundreds of Government officials, shopkeepers, fishermen and,
most significantly, the dirtpoor peasants struggling to feed themselves and
their families, have I heard a single person express anything but fear and
hatred for the Khmer Rouge. Far from supporting the Khmer Rouge struggle, the
people of Cambodia actually tolerate the Vietnamese presence, so great is their
dread of Pol Pot's return.

Naturally, I was impressed with the daring of Mr. Jones's adventure with the
Khmer Rouge. But I have seen the other Cambodia, the Cambodia that lives in
spite of all it has suffered. I fear that articles such as Mr. Jones's, even as
they inform, ultimately stand to prolong the suffering of the people of Cambodia
by legitimizing a political movement which deserves only the profound moral
condemnation of the entire world.
JOEL R. CHARNY, Southeast Asia Projects Director, Oxfam America Boston

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BITTER AND BITTERSWEET

BYLINE: By TOM O'BRIEN; Tom O'Brien is a freelance critic who teaches English at
Fordham University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1329 words


THE DEATH OF DESCARTES By David Bosworth.  182 pp. Pa.: Pittsburgh University
Press. $9.95.
DUBIOUS PERSUASIONS By Jack Matthews.  155 pp. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press. $10.95.

THESE two collections of short stories suggest that both the tragic and comic
spirits are alive and well. David Bosworth's ''The Death of Descartes,'' his
first collection, is filled with the passion and protest of late disillusioned
youth; Jack Matthews's ''Dubious Persuasions,'' his latest of three collections,
is filled with the wry and wistful insights of middle age. Mr. Bosworth has the
voice and temper of a poet; Mr. Matthews is a master of prose conversation and
deadpan charm. Mr. Matthews is ironic, cool and shrewd; in Mr.  Bosworth we find
the raw materials of something grander.

As Mr. Bosworth's title story suggests, his fiction involves philosophy, not as
found in the clouds or classrooms but as an explanation of our need for
certitude and security in ordinary life.  His writing is not abstract; rather,
he uses philosophy and history at times as a symbolic background for sensational
plots and scary stories rooted in solid dramatic contexts. The central figure of
the title piece, for example, is not Descartes but a widowed detective living in
retirement on the Maine coast who is called in to help solve a local murder. In
''Psalm,'' the plot involves a couple driving their son to a hospital in the
morning rush hour and trying to get there without waking the child, who is dying
of premature aging. At the center of each of his plots is Mr. Bosworth's strong
grasp of the conflict between our need for domestic security and the uncertainty
of human hopes and plans.

He best sums up this conflict in one image in the story called ''Alien Life.'' A
businessman is crossing his backyard late at night after watching stars from a
tree house his children no longer use.  ''Far above him in Ursa Minor,'' Mr.
Bosworth writes, ''and on the still, silver surface of the birdbath's water, a
single meteor announced itself, cut the lustrous streak of a prophecy no longer
understood.'' This is Mr. Bosworth's world: human tensions at the intersection
of birdbath and stars, the domestic and eternal.

In the title story, a Maine fisherman claims that during a rainstorm he saw
someone watching, or maybe helping, another person fall off a 500-foot cliff
into the sea. The local police call in a retired detective. The cliff is near
the summer house of a nuclear physicist and his wife, a professor of medieval
history, and when it turns out that the physicist is missing, the plot
predictably thickens. The detective interrogates the wife, and she answers him
only in enigmatic parables about love and truth. Gradually he begins to see the
similarities between her marriage and his own and between her husband's search
for an understanding of the mysteries of the atom and his own passion for
certitude in detecting. To a degree, the story succeeds as a detective
cat-and-mouse game, as an exploration of emotional relationships and as a
critique of pure reason.

But the story also illustrates a problem Mr. Bosworth has in a number of his
pieces, deriving not from the scope of his ideas or the combination of
foreground action and background issue, but from the degeneration of plot. In a
number of stories, Mr. Bosworth fails to follow conception with execution,
breathtaking opening with appropriate climax. He brings the central character to
a point of climactic insight or ''epiphany,'' but then does not find an
objective way of depicting it. His detective action in the title story gives way
to a detective symbol; his plot collapses into soliloquy.

In ''Excerpts From a Report of t he Commission'' Mr. Bosworth gives fresh
meaning to the overworked belief about what John Kennedy's death meant to those
growing up in the 60's. Using that material as background, he sorts out evidence
of how one man's life was affected by national catastrophes and illusions of
Camelot. The narrator of the story is never named, but Mr. Bosworth's use of
personal detail gives it a haunting autobiographical quality.

The foreground, for example, is a poignant record of personal loss - of a father
who dies of lung cancer and a friend who, having boasted he was fated to
survive, disappears, missing in action in Vietnam. Punctuating these losses is
the growth and decay of the hero's affair with a Catholic girlfriend, a
worshiper of the Kennedys, with whom he matures through hot chocolate and sex in
Vermont cabins (1967), the discovery of Libra and Scorpio (late 60's), rural and
urban communes (early 70's) and Volkswagen repair lectures and seminars to teach
men how to cry (1973) - in short, through all the rituals and cant of that era.
Each touch in this story is perfect. Mr. Bosworth uses an inclusive, notational
syntax that captures large segments in history in lightning strokes. The story
reveals what Mr. Bosworth calls ''the strange and bitter fruit of this
unexpected decade.'' Mr. Bosworth knows there is no ''theory'' to account for
the losses he describes; detection again leads him nowhere. But his tragic power
is based on his refusal to respond to loss by taking shelter in irony.

* If Mr. Bosworth is bitter, Mr. Matthews is bittersweet. He writes a simple,
lucid prose and employs slight but engaging plots. His choice of names in story
titles indicates his range: ''Irma, the Good Sport,'' ''Elma,'' ''Polly Sue and
the St. Louis Dodgers,'' ''Love Song for Doris Ballinger.'' Together with such
characters as Beanie, Elsie and Tillie, these are the dramatis personae of
unusual, sometimes nostalgic comic vignettes. They are spiced by Mr.  Matthews's
shrewd depiction of how married people talk - the ''dubious persuasions'' one
grows accustomed to after scores of years.

His plots insinuate that life is unpredictable but rarely catastrophic. In
''Irma, the Good Sport,'' a tall hairdresser dashes across country to find a man
who has been writing her charming letters through a lonely hearts club, only to
find his line was a lie; she adjusts anyway. In ''Elma,'' a girl and boy grow up
as neighbors. As the boy tells it, ''Elma's mother was never to be put off. She
was such a fool you almost had to respect her. ... She was a big woman with a
lantern jaw, a smile of maniacal innocence in her eyes, and a single-minded
dedication to mating me with Elma.'' So he flees to an all-male college, but
only to wake up one day and find - an appropriate refrain for a Matthews plot -
that there were things about Elma he should have noticed years before.

This comic vision is complicated, however, by wistful romanticism.  Many of Mr.
Matthews's characters are deeply nostalgic, with a fixation on the past. He
maintains an ambivalent distance from their eccentricities, at times treating
them like obsessions, at times like reverie, and most intriguingly, at times as
normal. In ''The Last Abandonment'' a rich widower tries to avoid t he clutches
of a buxom and avaricious lady suitor. Both attracted an d repelled by her, he
isfinally moved to a decision by the reappearan ce of his departed wife,Tillie,
who always seems to materialize weari ng her oddest and ugliest old clothes. Mr.
Matthews's deadpan comment almost domesticates the spirit. Naturally the widower
talked to his wife, he writes: ''After all, a human being is not an electronic
component; he is not wired so that when a particular circuit is cut, the sound
and image fade swiftly, leaving a surface as cold and dead as pearl. Most of our
realities are internal, after all; and it is not really so strange that since
Tillie's death, Hal Sibley had spoken more words to her than to any other human
being.''

In Mr. Matthews's stories there is no manipulation of philosophy or history in
the background, but he has a gift for making us see how we really act and for
making the eternal homely, even frumpy. If his writing is not always exciting,
it is always enjoyable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Nonfiction in Brief

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words


LOST HERO The M ystery o f Raoul Wallenb erg.  By Frederick E. Werbell and
Thurston Clarke.  Illustrated.  284 pp. New York: McGraw-Hill.  $12.95.

Raoul Wallenberg was made for legend: a man of shining character and great
courage defying the forces of evil to rescue innocents and then vanishing, still
young, into the mists of history. In ''Lost Hero'' his story is told again in
most readable form. When the authors must speculate, they give the grounds for
their speculations; they do not claim to know more than the evidence permits.

Wallenberg, for the reader who has somehow missed the past 30 years of charges
and denials, was a 31-year-old Swede of impeccable background who was turned
into an instant diplomat in 1944 and sent to Budapest with the blessings of
President Roosevelt. He was, in the authors' words, ''the only American agent
sent into an Axis country for the sole and express purpose of saving the last
remnants of European Jewry.''

Hungary's Jews had been largely spared until late in World War II, but in the
spring of 1944 they drew the attention of Adolf Eichmann.  In the following
months, Eichmann and Wallenberg seemed to be the two people in the world who
cared most passionately about what happened to them. Wallenberg waged his fight
for their lives with a combination of diplomatic gobbledygook, strategic bribery
and sheer bravado, distributing Swedish passes first to Jews who actually had
family or business connections in Sweden and then to any Jews within reach. The
writers estimate that he helped save 40,000 people, a fraction of the number
that fell to Eichmann and Hungary's fascists.

Early in 1945, as the Russian saviors marched through Hungary, Wallenberg
disappeared into a Soviet gulag. The reports cited here indicate that he was
held on suspicion of being a German or American spy and died after 20 years in
captivity. His own Government is criticized for being slow to press the Russians
for information concerning his fate, but it is unlikely that much could have
been got out of the Stalin regime. As one Soviet official is reported to have
reasoned, ''It is totally illogical for someone like Wallenberg to leave
peaceful Sweden to come and risk his life in Budapest to save strangers.'' Quite
so; that's what makes legends.
KIPLING AND CONRAD The Colonial Fiction.  By John A. McClure.  182 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $16.50.

Inspired by a term in the Peace Corps in Kenya and literary studies at Stanford
and Rutgers, John A. McClure set forth to chart the colonial experience as
revealed by its two great explorers, Rudyard Kipling and Joseph Conrad. Much of
his journey is rewarding.  He finds that for all the differences of background,
philosophy, sensibility and style, the two shared a grim view of the relations
between colonizers and colonized. Both Kipling, a champion of British
imperialism, and Conrad, a ''Burkean conservative in a Hobbesian world,'' wrote
memorably of the demoralization of the white rulers, all-powerful yet
essentially powerless exiles in lands where they could never truly belong.

Mr. McClure is a studious guide to their lives and several of their major books,
tracking the apparent differences between the two authors to reveal concealed
similarities and then moving beyond to even deeper differences. Kipling, an
''orientalist,'' believed that the Western mission to benighted lands could best
be accomplished by emissaries who steeped themselves in the culture of those
lands. For Conrad, the abiding pessimist, the corruption that flowered in the
East had its root s in the West.

Despite his admiration for their works, Mr. McClure finds both writers
insufficiently progressive. He chides them for their culturebound attitudes,
their tendency to look upon the exploited as ''savages,'' and he makes clear
that he is a more enlightened, 20thcentury sort of guy. By the end of his slim
book, he is making speeches: ''We rejoice when people in similar situations -
Americans in Vietnam, Portuguese in Africa - recognize that the only way to
break out of their own slavery is to make common cause with the peoples they
have been trained to oppress.'' A voyage into deep waters ends up in familiar
shallows.
U.S.v.CRIME IN THE STREETS By Thomas E. Cronin, Tania Z. Cronin and Michael E.
Milakovich.  212 pp. Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press.  $17.50.

Some years ago, Presidential speech writers took to declaring war on unpopular
conditions, but no President has ever stayed in office long enough to celebrate
a victory. The War on Cancer goes fitfully forward. T he War on Poverty
languishes. And the War on Crime, the subject of th is useful book, has been an
unmitigated defeat.

Although crime statistics are not models of reliability, you don't have to be a
statistician to be nervous about strolling through sections of our major cities
after dark. While liberals address themselves to the roots of crime, which they
like to believe are unemployment and other shortcomings of the society,
conservatives concentrate on get-tough remedies, including liberating the police
from the shackles imposed by the courts, but excluding gun control.
Conservatives blame liberals for shedding more tears over the culprits than over
the victims; liberals blame conservatives for being insensitive to civil
liberties. In fact, neither party can be sure of what causes crime, much less of
how to go about reducing it - although that never stops politicians in the heat
of a campaign.

The authors of this book trace the hapless career of the Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration (L.E.A.A.), created in 1968 in response to cries for
law and order. For the first time, the Federal Government could bring its
resources to bear on ''crime in the streets.''

In its dozen years of ill-managed existence, the L.E.A.A. spent $8 billion
without laying a glove on the enemy. From the beginning, the major battles were
not over how to use the money sensibly but how to distribute it to keep the
political dogs at bay. Most of the funds were divided among state houses as
block grants, an arrangement that assured the L.E.A.A. of the enthusiastic
backing of governors but effectively robbed the agency of control over how its
money was used. As the authors assess the situation: ''Despite the fact that the
Safe Streets grant programs were charged with inefficiency, mismanagement and
ineffectiveness, despite the fact that they had not been shown to reduce crime,
L.E.A.A. monies had become an accepted part of the budgets of countless police
chiefs, mayors and governors, who now felt entitled to these funds.'' Not that
this mugging of the agency mattered much, since our Federal bureaucracy had no
better notion of how to combat crime than our state bureaucracies did.

The experience produced a few negative lessons. Among the reforms that do not
seem to work are college education for police officers, quicker response times,
saturation patrolling and advanced technology. The liberal faith in
rehabilitation is as questionable as the conservative faith in the death
penalty.

The fact that the L.E.A.A. is now being phased out does not sadden its
chroniclers; they have doubts that Washington has any direct role to play in
meeting what, in our system, are local problems. The authors sum up their gloomy
yet illuminating tale: ''We simply did not know enough to start a heavily funded
crash program, and we ended up funding our fears.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Raoul Wallenberg

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG, REJECTING VIETNAM PARALLEL, REFUSES TO BAR FORCE IN CARIBBEAN

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1205 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 7


Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., refusing again to rule out the use of
military force in the Caribbean region, says that it is wrong to draw parallels
between American involvement there and in Vietnam because Central America is at
the heart of American strategic concerns.

In an interview in his office on Friday, Mr. Haig spoke at length about the
debate over the Administration's concerns about Cuban and Soviet backing for
insurgents in the region, and the increase in American military and economic aid
for the area.

Mr. Haig arrived tonight in Madrid on the first stop of a weeklong trip to
Spain, Portugal, Morocco, and Rumania. In Madrid, he will represent the United
States at a meeting of the Conference on European Security and Cooperation at
which he plans to lead Western foreign ministers in accusing the Soviet Union
and Poland of violating the human-rights section of the Helsinki Final Act by
imposing martial law in Poland.

Comparison to Vietnam

Some critics, such as Representative Gerry E. Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts,
have charged that by aiding the Government in El Salvador the Administration was
making the same mistakes that drew the United States into the Vietnam war. Mr.
Studds and other critics have accused the Salvadoran Government of being
repressive and have urged the Administration to pressure it into negotiating
with leftist insurgents.

Mr. Haig, who has been outspoken in his alarm at what he regards as growing
Cuban and Soviet support for subversive and insurgent movements, was asked about
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger's reported view that American military
action in the region was not practical given the lack of popular support for it
in this country.

''There are no curr ent plans for the use of American forces,'' he said. But on
the other hand, ''the sterility of drawing lines around America's potential
options constitutes the p romulgation of roadways for those who are seeking to
move against Ame rica's vital interests.''

'Self-Defeating' Statements

He said such statements were ''self-defeating'' and that no prudent sovereign
state would rule out options in advance.  Mr. Haig has repeatedly refused to bar
the use of American forces in the region, even though President Reagan has said
there were no plans to send combat forces anywhere and Mr. Weinberger has been
clearly unhappy with the prospect of becoming involved in the Caribbean area.

When asked about a possible Vietnam parallel, Mr. Haig said that ''I think the
Central American case is very, very different.'' ''This is a profound challenge
to the security of our hemisphere, to the whole character of t he southern
hemisphere, its political orientation a nd its compatibility with traditional
hemispheric values,'' he said.

'Distinctly Different' Ambiguities

''We are talking about the creation, first in Nicaragua, of a totalitarian,
militarized state which is subservient to Cuban and Soviet influence,'' he said.
''And in that sense, the ambiguities are distinctly different than they were in
Vietnam.''

In the Vietnam case, he said Americans had difficulty deciding whether the
country was ''a vital challenge to fundamental American interests.''

''Had it been determined at that time that South Vietnam was indeed a vital
challenge to fundamental American interests, then perhaps some of the conduct of
the whole affair would have been somewhat differently handled,'' he said.

Describing the situation in the Central American region, Mr. Haig said: ''We are
talking about the growing vulnerability of other states in the Central American
complex which could be rapidly exploited by externally mounted subversion.''

'Strategic Vulnerability'

''It could threaten even our closest neighbors,'' he said. ''We're talking about
the strategic vulnerability of the Canal, our fundamental dependence on its
being retained in friendly hands. We are, in effect, at the very core of United
States hemispheric interests. The history of the region, of the disputes in the
region, in no way parallel the anguish and the ambiguities associated with
Southeast Asia, starting with the French, the North-South demarcation question,
and the internal debates associated with who were the true proponents of social
justice.''

When reminded that there was some similarity between the present criticism of
American policy in El Salvador and that of American involvement in Vietnam in
the 1960's in that in both cases disatisfaction with support for the governments
involved was a central point, Mr. Haig retorted ''we've never suggested that we
are comfortable with the current situation in Salvador.''

He asserted that the Administration was pressing for the Salvadoran Government
to carry out its plans for social change and was doing all it could to insure
fair elections. He said that the United States had refused to press the Salvador
Government to negotiate with the insurgents for a settlement because that would
give them power that they had not been able to acquire otherwise.

Mr. Haig has said that one of his first assignments in Washington was in the
Pentagon in the early 1960's when there was considerable concern about stopping
Cuban subversion. He indicated that he remains deeply worried about Cuba.

'Deep, Deep Scars'

He said that Vietnam ''left deep, deep scars,'' and that opponents of military
involvement in Central America had been able to ''structure parallels between
the two situations obviously that ignore basic differences between the two
situations.''

''I don't think any American wants or would be enthusiastic about another
American military involvement,'' he said. But he asserted that Americans have
viewed the threat from Cuba historically - even during the Vietnam period - as
one ''which they do not take lightly.''

To back up his claims of Cuban military activity, Mr. Haig read from a list of
new equipment received by Cuba from the Soviet Union last year - a year in which
he said 66,000 tons were shipped to Cuba aboard some 30 Soviet ships.

In addition to the arrival of new MIG-23's that had been previously disclosed,
he said that the Cubans had also received various minesweepers and missile
attack boats; additional anti-aircraft missiles and improved air defense radar.
Asked if the Cubans might have arrange to obtain the minesweepers in order to
prepar e for a possible naval blockade such as the mining op eration the United
States performed against Haiphong harbor in 1 972, Mr. Haig asserted that
delivery of most of this equipment had t o have been planned for before the
Administration took office.

But he said that recent deliveries might have been in response to increased
Cuban concerns about Administration policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of a helicoper in El Salvador

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CENTRAL AMERICA FOUND TO REGRESS ON HUMAN RIGHTS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk u

LENGTH: 2588 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 7


The Reagan Administration, in its first report on human rights around the world,
said today that the situation was deteriorating in Central America and several
African nations.

In El Salvador, however, the Administration said that while human rights
violations by both left and right continued to be numerous, ''there was a
downward trend in political violence.''

The 1981 report to Congress, covering 158 countries, was sharply critical of the
Soviet Union and its activities in Af-
Excerpts from report, page A10.
ghanistan and Poland. It also included negative assessments of developments in
Taiwan, Zaire and South Africa.

In an introduction to the report, the Administration reiterated what it has
described as its evenhanded approach to the place of human rights in world
affairs, saying that the United States, which first gave constitutional
authority to the protection of liberties, has now ''taken the lead in opposing
in international fora the double standards applied to human rights violations.''

Gains Seen in South America

The United States, the report said, ''was p articularly concerned that Latin
American countries supportive of t he West were being singled out for
condemnation while equal or g reater violations of human rights in Eastern
Europe, the Soviet Un ion and Cuba went virtually unnoticed.'' The report found
that conditions on the South American continent were continuing to improve .

The introduction to the report also stated the Administration's belief that
terrorism ''erodes democracy'' and ''corrodes the very basis of human rights.''
The report itself, based on embassy and nongovernmental agency reports and
framed by the State Department's regional desks and its Bureau of Human Rights
and Humanitarian Affairs, then went on to detail infringements of rights by
terrorists as well as by governments.  In language recalling a State Department
memorandum circulating among officia ls last November following the appointment
of Elliott Abrams as Ass istant Secretary of State for Human Rights, the
report'sintroduction says: ''We will have to accept the fact that bilateral
relations wit h a friendly country may be damaged because of our human rights
concern. This is the unavoidable price of a consistent policy.''

Administrations have been required since the mid-1970's to produce for the House
Foreign Affairs and Senate Foreign Relations committees an annual report on
human rights worldwide. The requirement first applied only to countries
receiving United States aid. Because the reports were useful on a wide range of
foreign policy matters, however, the requirement was extended in 1979 to include
all member countries of the United Nations.

The annual human rights report is separate from certifications mandated by
Congress for certain countries. The Reagan Administration is required, for
example, to certify every six months that El Salvador is making progress on
human rights in order for that country to continue to receive United States aid.
The same evidence is often used, however, in both reports.

The new volume, the Reagan Administration's ''Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices for 1981'' - available from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402 at a price not yet announced
- appears more muted in tone than opponents of the Administration's human rights
policies had expected.

Treatment of Libya Evenhanded

Libya, for example, is treated more evenhandedly than Administration reports
about Libyan terrorism and the possible threat of Libyan assassination squads
would lead analysts to expect. The Reagan report's section on Cuba begins with
the description: ''Cuba is a Marxist-Leninist state closely allied with, and
heavily dependent on, the Soviet Union.''

In the 1980 report, the last to be compiled by the Carter Administration, the
introduction to the same section said, ''Cuba is a totalitarian Marxist-Leninist
state.''

In examining the status of human rights in each country, the State Department
report follows a specific check list: It asseses ''respect for the integrity of
the person, including freedom from torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment; disappearances; arbitrary arrest and imprisonment;
denial of a fair public trial, and invasion of the home.''

It also examines the country's ''respect for civil and political freedoms,
including freedom of speech, the press, religion and assembly; freedom of
movement within the country, foreign travel, emigration and repatriation, and
freedom to participate in the political process.''

El Salvador
In El Salvador, the report said, the situation remained ''troubled,'' with
evidence that terrorists of both the left and the right have used torture.

''Despite constitutional bans and Government policy against using torture,'' the
report said, ''individual members of the security forces may have been involved
in unsolved crimes of murder with torture. There have been credible accounts of
torture and abuse at interrogation centers operated by the security forces,
especially the treasury police.''

The Administration acknowledged that its figure of 6,116 violent deaths recorded
by the United States Embassy last year was only half the number recorded by
church sources within El Salvador.

The report added that ''El Salvador's judicial system does not function
effectively when politically motivated crimes are brought before it.''

It also said that since March of last year the civilian-military junta had given
itself power to limit free expression, although this had not prevented reports
calling for an end to the present Government.

''In practice,'' the report said, freedom of speech and the press are limited
not so much by governmental dicta te as by fear of retribution from rightists
and leftist terror ists.

''Since October 1979 two major morning dailies, both conservative, and one
conservative afternoon daily have been the victims of leftist terrorist bombs,''
it said. Two leftist papers, it went on, ''have been harrassed out of business
by rightist terrorists.''

Guatemala
The report found a marked increase in violent clashes between the Guatemalan
Government and leftist guerrillas over the last year.

''While the number of killings which appeared to be politically motivated ranged
from 70 to 1 00 each month in 1980,'' the report said,''the es timate for 1981
was 250 to 300 per month. Most of these victims were noncombatants.''

Citing a series of killings in Guatemalan villages over the last year where
there was strong evidence of Government involvment, the report said:

''The greater number of apparently politically motivated killings are probably
attributable to groups associated with the extreme right or with elements of the
Government forces, rather than to the extreme left. This would indicate that the
Government has been unable to bring indiscriminate violence under control,
whether by elements of its own forces or by others.''

Haiti
In Haiti, the Reagan Administration report observed, a period of relative
improvement from 1976-80 was followed in November 1980 with the arrests of
''dozens of persons'' on charges of conspiracy and subversion. Among them were
many journalists as well as political opposition leaders.

Concerning the treatment of detainees, the report said that ''beatings, a
traditional practice in Haitian jails, continue to be administered with some
frequency in connection with the interrogation of suspects or the punishment of
prisoners violating prison discipline.''

Nicaragua
During 1981, the report said, the human rights performance of the Sandinista
Government in Nicaragua, which came to power with the resignation of Anastasio
Somoza Debayle in 1979, ''deteriorated'' with respect to civil and political
liberties.

The Sandinistas, the report said, hold about 7,000 prisoners.  ''About 4,500 of
these can be classified as political (mostly exmembers of the National Guard who
were convicted by special tribunals).'' The report added that ''many credible
reports'' of prisoner abuse had been recorded in 1981. ''Prisoners within all
centers of the penitentiary system are said to be subjected at times to
psychological harassment, such as the use of alarms and lights to keep them
awake at night.''

The report said that in 1981 there had been 30 cases of ''disappearances''
documented by Nicaragua's independent human rights organization.

Poland
While finding several of the Eastern European nations relatively well off in
terms of civil rights and economic progress, the Reagan Administration report
saved some of its sharpest language for an addendum inserted in the section on
Poland to take into account events since Dec. 13, when martial law was declared.

''There is strong reason to believe that Polish authorities acted under strong
pressure from the Soviet Union,'' the report said.  Since then, it went on,
''the state security organs have undertaken a far-reaching and concerted
campaign of harassment and intimidation against major segments of Polish
society.''

Noting that the Polish Government had admitted 6,000 detentions, the report said
that formal charges had been pressed against only ''a few'' detainees.

Soviet Union
The Administation details Soviet activities growing out of what it called the
Government's ''intolerance for activity deemed incompatible with Communist Party
control.'' About 10,000 dissidents were in Soviet jails or labor camps, the
report said.

''A detailed examination of the Soviet Union's external conduct is beyond the
scope of this report,'' the document said, ''but several developments
nevertheless require brief mention. Soviet armed forces continue to occupy
Afghanistan, and their number there has recently been increased to 90,000 men.
Soviet practices in Afghanistan have continued to include the reported use of
chemical weapons, 'trick' explosives and the indiscriminate bombing and shelling
of the Afghan people.''

South Africa
In one of the longest sections in the report, the Administration extensively
documents the present situation in South Africa, noting that despite moves to
''reform'' the apartheid system, ''the political struct ures provided for blacks
grea tly limit their political expression.''

Tracing severe racial discrimination into many aspects of South African life,
the report noted: ''Under Section 10 of the South African Citizenship Act of
1949, any white immigrant, regardless of language, may automatically gain
citizenship after five years. By contrast, African persons born in South Africa
are not considered South African citizens.''

The report observed that South Africa, which is moving toward greater
restrictions on the press, ''extends little or no cooperation to various United
Nations bodies investigating its human rights record .''

Zaire and Uganda
The report found a deteriorating situation in Zaire, where extortion and torture
at the hands of authorities were documented in 1981.  Corruption and bribery
were found to be common. The report also said:

''Although there is no way of knowing the number of detainees currently being
held without charges and benefit of formal legal procedures, arbitrary arrests
appeared to be more frequent this year than during 1980.''

In Uganda, the report listed brutal interrogations and beatings in an
increasingly lawless society. At roadblocks, ostensibly set up to prevent
guerrilla infiltration, police and army personnel were said to have committed
acts of robbery against average citizens.

South America
The Reagan Administration found improvements in human rights in Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Bolivia. In Colombia, the report noted, a state of
siege in effect in the face of guerrilla activity has led to charges by the
Inter-American Human Rights Commission that constitutional guarantees are not
being strictly observed. The report found continuing, sporadic allegations of
torture throughout Latin America, some of the instances charged to local police
officers.

Pakistan
In a section that appeared to be harder on Pakistan, which is to resume
receiving United States military aid this year, than on India, with which
relations have been cool, the Administration report described allegations of
torture, including electrical shocks.  Censorship, the report noted, is
widespread.

Southeast Asia
The report accused Vietnam of continued interference in Cambodia, but noted that
the Cambodian people were finally beginning to benefit from large-scale
international relief efforts.

The report found resistance to the Vietnamese in Cambodia, and subsequent
''repression, restrictions and surveillance increasing as resistance to the
regime grows.''

Torture in Cambodia, however, was reported to be rare both in zones held by the
present Phnom Penh Government of Heng Samrin and those controlled by the ousted
Pol Pot regime.

In Vietnam, the report said, ''whole classes of people'' continue to be
politically persecuted and disadvantaged, and state control of the society has
been extended to an unprecedented extent.  Information on the total prison
population varied from the Government figure of 25,400 to 126,000 estimated by
''informed observers.''

In the Philippines, the report said, there were improvements in some areas of
human rights since the lifting last year of martial law by President Ferdinand
E. Marcos. Reports of torture were fewer, the Administration study said, and
were largely confined to areas of guerrilla combat. Censorship was largely
removed from the news media.

Taiwan
In Taiwan, the report found, there is censorship of both domestic and foreign
publications. Electronic monitoring of peoples' homes is ''widely believed to
exist,'' it said.

The case of Prof. Chen Wen-chang, a Taiwan-born United States resident and
professor at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh, who was found dead on
July 3 in Taiwan, ''clouded'' the human rights climate there, the report said.

South Korea
''The climate for civil and political rights in 1981 was dominated by the strong
'law and order' measures enacted by the Government of President Chun,'' the
report said in its section on South Korea. ''In preparation for lifting martial
law in January 1981, the legislature enacted 189 laws that profoundly affected
the political system.''

The new laws, the report said, sharply limited political organizing and
campaigning and put strict controls on the press, public demonstrations and
labor groups.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM INTERVIEW WITH SECRETARY OF STATE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1417 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 7


Q. There is great fascination with El Salvador and th e Caribbean right now.
Could you share some idea of what is going to happen in the next few weeks?

A. I think basically our approach has been a clear one from the outset. First,
we have to deal with the socio-economic conditions that create the breeding
ground for external intervention and subversion. That is our first approach -
that's the Caribbean Basin initiative, plus the economic programs, the works we
do bilaterally with each of the nations within the region in the area of human
rights, internal reform, land reform, sound economic planning.  Secondly, we
attempt to assist the nations. We inherited this situation when the
Administration came in - the insurgency in Salvador was running rampant, there
was a major offensive in January of last year which was defeated by the
Government, but which did not eliminate the threat.

We had a period where, because of our emphasis on the subject early last year,
we had some decline in the shipment of armaments into Salvador. In the
subsequent months, those arms began to pick up again, and they are now at a
level which approximates the high point when we came into office.

Q. Is this coming through Nicaragua primarily?  A. This is coming from a
multiplicity of entry routes. It comes over water; it comes over land; and it
comes by air; it comes by road transport.

A Coordinating Center?

Q. Is there a coordinating center for that? Do you have evidence to suggest that
the Cubans or Nicaraguans are involved?  A. I would refer you back to that
ignominious white paper which had a few minor details that might have been
better refined, but the overall weight of that report was a clear reflection of
the central planning, the Cuban role, the East European and the Soviet roles, to
include the shipment of arms from as far away as Vietnam.

Q. Of course, that was in 1980, primarily. Where is the new stuff coming from?
A. We see the same pattern.  Q. From Vietnam as well?  A. I can't say we have
any recent information that there have been new Vietnamese-source shipments. But
I think you have to look very carefully at Cuba today. Cuba has received this
past year, 66,000 tons on some 30 Soviet transports. What they have gotten in
Cuba with those gross tonnages is first of all three times the level of 1980.
It exceeds in a large measure the quanitity and quality of anything that was
shipped to Cuba since 1962.

Arms Imports Listed

The significant items include Mig-23 Floggers, Mig-21 aircraft, An-26 light
transports for the Cuban Air Force. For the Navy, they had a Koni-class frigate;
Turya-class hydrofoil torpedo boats; Yevgenyaclass in-shore minesweepers; a
Sonya-class minesweeper; several Osa-II class guided missile attack boats. Cuba
has also received mobile SA-6 launchers and radars associated with that air
defense missile; additional SA-2 transporters; SA-2 missile cannisters; new
earlywarning and height-finding radar stations.

They have also received electronic warfare vans; T-62 tanks; BMP armored
infantry fighting vehicles; BRDN armored reconnaissance vehicles; self-propelled
guns; towed field guns; anti-tank guns; antiaircraft guns, as well as large
quantities of small arms and ammunition, all of which contribute to a force
projection capability.

That quantity of armaments shipped this year suggests both an enhancement of
Cuban force-projection capabilities, but it also suggests a large residue of
arms for introduction in such insurgency-prone areas as Colombia, Salvador, the
rearmament of Nicaragua, and Guatemala, perhaps Honduras, although we have no
evidence of that.

Q. What do you think they are doing with those minesweepers? Are they there
because they are anticipating the United States might be planning a blockade. Is
this just prudent defense activity?

'Neither Black Nor White'

A. While increased levels of concern have been registered by this
Administration, the buildup we have witnessed this year had to have been the
product of planning and decisions made before. It does not mean to suggest that
more recent deliveries might not be a response to increased concerns, so what
I'm telling you is, it is neither black nor white, but the fundamental buildup
had to have been decided before this Administration came into office.

Q. There's a lot of talk going on about how the United States is getting itself
into a ''no-win, Vietnam situation.'' You've been through the whole Vietnam
experience. Is there really a legitimate parallel?

A. I think the Central American case is very, very different. This is a pr
ofound challenge to the security of ou r hemisphere, to the whole character of
the southern hemisphere, its political orientationand its compatibility with
traditional hemispheric values.  We are talking about the creation, first in
Nicaragua, of a total itarian, militarized state which is subservient to Cuban
and Soviet influence;and in that sense, the ambiguities are distinctly differen
t than theywere in Vietnam.

We are talking about the growing vulnerability of other states in the Central
Amrican complex which could be rapidly exploited by externally mounted
subversion. It could threaten even our closest neighbors. We're talking about
the strategic vulnerability of the Canal, our fundamental dependence on its
being retained in friendly hands. We are, in effect, at the very core of United
States hemispheric interests. The history of the region, of the disputes in the
region, in no way parallel the anguish and the ambiguities associated with
Southeast Asia, starting with the French, the North-South demarcatiuon question
and the internal debates associated with who were the true proponents of social
justice.

'A Repressive Regime'

Q. You get a little of that now with people saying that we're supporting a
repressive regime in El Salvador.  A. We've never suggested that we are
comfortable with the current situation in Salvador. A major aspect of our policy
has been to work in meaningful ways to support the reforms that are under way,
and above all, to have whatever Government was to represent the outcome there to
be a reflection of the will of the people, the selfdetermination of the people
of Salvador. That is why we have been extremely reluctant to join calls for
negotiated settlements in which political forces of the left that have been
unable to accumulate the popular support to sustain it, would, by prearranged
negotiations, acquire political pwoer. That is why we have supported the free
electoral process scheduled for this March. The discrediting of that process has
become a focal point of insurgent activity.

Q. You've always refused to rule anything out, but others have ruled out any
military action on the excuse that the public won't support it. Do you think the
public will support it?

A. I think the President has made his own views rather clear on this. There are
no current plans for the use of American forces. On the other hand and as a
matter of principle, the sterility of drawing lines around America's potential
options constitutes the promulgation of roadways for those who are seeking to
move against America's vital interests. It is the most self-defeating kind of
contemporary public relations manipulation that I can conceive.  Sovereign
states never indulge in it if they are prudent about their public statements.

It is clear that Vietnam left deep, deep scars. To the degree, either rightly or
wrongly, opponents to doing anything in Central America can structure parallels
between the two situations, obviously that ignores basic differences between the
two situations.

I don't think any American wants or would be enthusiastic about another American
military involvement. On the other hand, I do think Americans view the threat
from Cuba historically as one which they do not take lightly. I think polls we
have seen would suggest that over a number of years, even through and in the
wake of the Vietnam experience.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Alexander Haig

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LET LATIN AMERICA BE LATIN AMERICA

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 337 words


To the Editor:

The Administration has just gone to great lengths and expense in making a film
to impress the world with the sins of the Polish Government. I propose that we
now make a film about the sins of the various South American gove rnments that
we are supporting- with money, with weapons and, in the case of El Salvador,
with armyadvisers and trainers as we did in Vietnam. As a dramatist, I am
offering my services in the writing of the film.

Judging by eyewitness accounts, the brutality of these fascist dictators, the
tortures and the mass murders they commit, may be strong movie fare for our pu
blic, which is co nditioned by the news media to believe that only socialist
countrie s can do wrong, never capitalist nations and certainly not ours.

Whatever the sins of the Polish Government the Poles must correct, and in time
they will. But those sins are not of our doing. We are not supplying money and
arms to suppress the Solidarity forces. On the other hand, the tragic plight of
the people in El Salvador, Guatemala and other third-world countries struggling
for a freer and better life is our responsibility since their junta governments
could not exist without our support.

So we Americans are made unwilling accomplices to their crimes.  Therefore, let
us stop using Poland as a diversion from what our Administration is perpetrating
in our name.

While we celebrate the anniversary of Franklin Roosevelt's birth, let us
remember that he was not a hypocrite and purveyor of hate but a champion of the
oppressed and underprivileged everywhere, including our own people. And it was
his hope that out of the war would come not a single power but a United Nations,
to be the arbiter of disputes between people and their governments and between
nation and nation.  HOWARD KOCH Woodstock, N.Y., Feb. 1, 1982 The writer's film
and stage credits include ''Letter From an Unknown Woman,'' ''Sergeant York,''
''Casablanca'' and ''In Time to Come,'' a play about Woodrow Wilson and the
League of Nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 962 words


International
Human rights conditions are declining in Central America and several African
nations, the Reagan Administration said in its first report to Congress on human
rights worldwide. Rights violations in El Salvador by both left and right
continued to be numerous, but ''there was a downward trend in political
violence,'' the report said. The Soviet Union's activities in Afghanistan and
Poland were sharply criticized. Taiwan, Zaire and South Africa also made a poor
showing.  (Page A1, Column 4.)
The use of military force in the Caribbean region was again not ruled out by
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. In an interview he said that it was
wrong to draw parallels between American involvem ent there and Vietnam because
Central America was at the heart of American strategic concerns. However , Mr.
Haig said that ''there are no current plans'' for the use of American forces.
(A1:2-3.)
Poles are ''overcome by anger'' at events in their country, Archbishop Jozef
Glemp, the Roman Catholic primate of Poland, said in a sermon in Rome, where he
has been visiting Pope John Paul II. He said Poland was ''sick,'' and that a
place must be found for the Solidarity union as well as the Roman Catholic
Church through a dialogue with authorities that would avoid force. (A1:1.)
A pro-Soviet stance was reaffirmed by France's Communist Party, which also
reiterated its support for the Polish military crackdown at its 24th annual
congress. Georges Marchais, the party's hard-line leader, was re-elected
secretary general. (A3:4-6.)
National
The Reagan budget was defended by the budget director, who said there are few
acceptable or feasible options for cutting the deficits it projects. David A.
Stockman also said Congress would be substantially reponsible if the budget is
not approved and the economy stalls. He also agreed with Mr. Reagan's top
economic advisers, who said that Wall Street should not be overly worried about
the size of the deficits projected in the budget - $98.6 billion in 1982, $91.5
billion in 1983 and $82.9 billion in 1984. ''That clearly is not an intolerable
burden on the markets,'' he said. (1:6.)
The end of abortions paid by Medicaid under President Reagan's ''new
federalism'' is feared by supporters of ''right-of-choice.'' The future of
Medicaid-financed abortions is among the many issues raised by the President's
program. Supporters of abortion say that sweeping realignment of govermental
responsibility for health and social services could end the Medicaid abortion
program, which has already been sharply reduced. Opponents of abortion contend
that the total takeover of Medicaid financing by the Federal Government would
serve as a helpful step toward the abolition of abortion. (A1:6.)
President Reagan will campaign this week in several Middle Western states on
behalf of his theory of Federalism and to help raise funds for Republicans
running for office this fall. He will go to Minnesota, Iowa and Indiana,
starting today with fund-raising events in Bloomington, Minn., and a speech
before the State Legislature.  Each of the states he will visit has a Republican
governor and two Republican senators. He will bypass Illinois, Michigan and
Ohio, where Democratic hopes are soaring with unemployment rates. (A1:3-5.)
Soldiers at four atomic tests in 1956 and 1957 were exposed to dangerously high
levels of radiation, according to a former Army medic, who broke 25 years of
silence. Van R. Brandon, the former medic, said he was ordered to enter false
data to hide the fact that the soldiers had been exposed to radiation at the
test site in Yucca Flat, Nev. He said he was told that would be charged with
treason if he disclosed information about the tests. (A14:1-2.)
Metropolitan
Analysis of the social-service cuts proposed in President Reagan's budget has
raised major concern in several areas among officials of the New York
metropolitan region. The greatest impact on the New York City and New York State
budgets, according to the officials, would come from the proposal to require the
city and state, by 1986, to bear the burden of incorrect payments in the
Medicaid, food stamp and Aid to Families with Dependent Children programs.
(A1:5.)
A liberal college-entry policy was reversed by Wesleyan University because of
cuts in Federal educational aid. Since the early 1970's, Wesleyan had admitted
students without regard to their financial status, a policy known as
''aid-blind'' admissions that has been followed by many other private
universities. Other universities were also said to be re-examining their
aid-blind admissions policy.  (A1:1-2.)
Radioactive steam was released into the atmosphere during the recent accident at
the Robert A. Ginna nuclear power plant near Rochester, N.Y., because operators
turned off emergency pumps too late, a preliminary evaluation by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission said. A second release occurred 35 minutes later because
the operators restarted the pumps for ''unknown'' reasons. (B1:3-6.)
Rent-stabilized status will be lost by about 4,500 apartment houses in New York
City because they failed to pay dues to the group that represents them. The Rent
Stabilization Association announced that it was dropping the buildings. It
predicted that many of the buildings would be abandoned or be taken over by the
city and have their rents raised. (B3:4-6.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
West German Ship Saves Refugees From Pirates

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 152 words

DATELINE: BONN, Feb. 9


The crew of a West German rescue ship saved 99 Vietnamese ''boat people'' from
the hands of pirates after a sea chase in the Gulf of Thailand, a refugee aid
organization reported today.

A spokesman for the privately sponsored Com mittee of Emergency Doctors said a
boat with 124 refugees on boar d left Vietnam last Thursday, but it was boarded
by pirates who s hot to death 14 of the boat people.

The committee's 5,200-ton converted freighter, Cap Anamur, spotted the pirate
vessel with the refugee boat in tow Monday and gave chase.  The pirates let the
refugee boat go, but kept 19 women prisoner on board their own vessel.  When the
Cap Anamur came within two miles of the pirates, they threw eight women
overboard. They were taken aboard the Cap Anamur after a difficult rescue
operation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

4 DEMOCRATS URGE U.S. TO SEEK A TRUCE IN SALVADOR

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 674 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 10


Four Democratic members of Congress introduced a resolution today calling on the
Reagan Administration to seek an internationally supervised cease-fire in El
Salvador and negotiations leading to a political solution to the civil war
there.

Senators Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut and Paul E. Tsongas of
Massachusetts, and Representatives Michael D. Barnes of Maryland and Stephen J.
Solarz of Brooklyn, all considered liberals, said at a news conference this
morning that they believed that they could win bipartisan support for their
nonbinding resolution.

They added that if the Administration failed to heed the sentiments of the
opposition in Congress they would seek legislation blocking further American
assistance to the civilian-military junta led by Jose Napoleon Duarte. But the
prospects of such legislative moves in a generally conservative Congress are not
seen as bright.

Vietnam Parallel Is Drawn

''The situation in El Salvador is all too reminiscent for many of us of a decade
and a half ago,'' Senator Dodd, a member of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, said this morning. ''Because we failed to properly debate the issue
before we became too deeply involved and enmeshed and mired in Vietnam, we found
ourselves in an extremely difficult situation.''

The Reagan Administration has consistently rejected the idea of negotiations
with the armed Salvadoran opposition, saying this would be tantamount to handing
the country over to leftists who would create an undemocratic government.

Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, has
said several times in hearings over the last two weeks that the example of
Nicaragua taught the Administration that however broadly based the opposition
might appear to be, once in power, it would drift leftward toward a totalitarian
system.

Putting its hopes on an election for a constituent assembly in El Salvador
scheduled for March 28, the Administration has begun sending, under a
Presidential order that does not require Congressional approval, $55 million in
emergency military equipment and other supplies to the Salvadoran Government.
Mr. Enders has said that more military and economic assistance will be requested
from Congress.

Certification on Rights

At the end of last month, the White House concluded that El Salvador had made
adequate progress in reducing human rights violations and political violence to
allow continued United States assistance to that nation. The cer tification
requirement was attachedto foreign aid legislation late last year.

The White House certification has provoked widespread criticism of the
Administration's support of the Salvadoran Government.  On Tuesday, the head of
the National Conference of Catholic Bishops repeated his opposition to continued
support for military aid to El Salvador voiced at the time of the White House
certification decision.

Archbishop John R. Roach of Minneapolis-St. Paul, who is president of the
conference, said nothing occurred in the last year in El Salvador to change the
view of many Roman Catholic bishops that ''internal issues of social justice and
human rights are the principal questions in El Salvador.''

Rights Group Disputes Reagan

Amnesty International's United States office sent a telegram to President Rea
gan on Tuesday taking issue with the White House findings that led to
certification. In the telegram, the organization, which monitors cases of
political prisoners and rights violations ar ound the world, said that President
Reagan's contention that the situ ation had improved and that the junta had
increased its control over the armed forces was ''not consistent with Amnesty
International information.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Chan Sy Is Confirmed As Cambodia Premier

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 169 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 10


A Cambodian military figure believed to have spent more than 15 years in Vietnam
has been elected Prime Minister of the pro-Vietnamese Government in Cambodia.

The Cambodian news agency S.P.K. announced that the 50-year-old Chan Sy was
elected to the post on Tuesday, the fourth day of a National Assembly session.
The session ended today.

The election appeared to reinforce the pro-Vietnamese loyalty of political
leaders in the Phnom Penh Government, which was installed after a Vietnamese
invasion in January 1979.

Mr. Chan Sy, chief political commissar of the armed forces since 1979, became
Deputy Minister of Defense last June, according to a Western diplomat who
monitors Cambodian affairs.

In December, Pen Sovann, the Communist Party leader and Prime Minister, resigned
for unspecified health reasons. President Heng Samrin assumed the leadership of
the party and Chan Sy was made acting Prime Minister.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WISHFUL THOUGHTS ABOUT OIL OFF CHINA

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 261 words


To the Editor:

As petroleum consultants who have been concerned with Chinese geology and
petroleum developments since the 1960's, we found information in your Jan. 19
Business Day article ''Oil Riches Off China's Shores'' grossly misleading.

he article quotes Selig S. Harrison of the Carnegie Endowment as saying, ''There
is a whole series of North Seas out there.'' Conservative estimates of North Sea
reserves run to about 25 billion barrels.

To date, some 16 wells have been drilled in the waters between Vietnam and North
Korea. Most have been dry. A few near the shore of the Yellow Sea have been
successful. Only one well in the East China Sea may have had oil and gas shows.

In the South China Sea, perhaps five wells have yielded petroleum, but none have
been developed commercially. Wells off Hainan Island still have to be proven
commercially. The most promising to date are in Bohai Bay.

In the last paragraph of the article, a Caltex executive is quoted as saying,
''Geology is not an exact science for us. Oil companies have spent billions of
dollars trying to solve that one in advance - they still don't know for 100
percent sure until they've drilled.'' This is still true of the offshore areas
of China, and exaggerations by non-geologists are unfair both to China and to
its possible future business partners.  A. A. MEYERHOFF, J. F. MASON Tulsa,
Okla., Feb. 4, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DR. ARTHUR BARSKY DIES AT 83; A PLASTIC SURGEON IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By DAVID W. DUNLAP

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 449 words


Dr. Arthur Joseph Barsky, a pioneering plastic surgeon who treated Vietnamese
children during the Vietnam War and victims of the Hiroshima atomic bombing,
died Tuesday in southern France at the age of 83. He lived in the village of Le
Beausset and maintained an apartment in Manhattan.

The ''Barsky Unit'' was the name given by the Vietnamese to the Center for
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery in Saigon, which opened in July 1969 and
treated 1,200 children a year up to South Vietnam's surrender in April 1975.

Dr. Barsky and a lawyer, Thomas R. Miller, were so moved by reports of war
injuries that they established Children's Medical Relief International in 1966,
and, with Federal assistance, set up the 50-bed Barsky Unit in Saigon three
years later.

The children treated in Vi etnam were not on ly victims of war but also of
diseases common throughout Asia and s imply of domestic accidents.

Dr. Bernard E. Simon, a partner of Dr. Barsky's for more than 20 years, said
that what made the unit extraordinary was its apolitical philosophy.

Treated 'Hiroshima Maidens'

''They knew damned well they were taking care of Vietcong kids,'' Dr. Simon
said. ''It never occurred to anyone to say, 'You can't come here because you're
from the other side.' ''

It was as chief of plastic surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital that Dr. Barsky first
treated victims of warfare. A group of some 75 deformed orphans of the Hiroshima
bombing of 1945 were brought to this country in 1958, and over the next year and
a half, more than 150 operations were performed in what was called the Hiroshima
Maidens Project.

A New York native, Dr. Barsky was educated at the University of Pennsylvania and
New York Medical College. He wrote ''Principles and Practice of Plastic
Surgery,'' one of the first textbooks on the subject, published about 40 years
ago.

Dr. Barsky founded the plastic surgery services at Beth Israel Hospital, Mount
Sinai Hospital and Albert Einstein Medical College, all in New York City. The
children's plastic and reconstructive surgery unit at Beth Israel was named in
his honor in December 1980.

At the time of his death, he was a professor emeritus at Albert Einstein and
consulting surgeon, an honorary title, at the two other hospitals. He was also
consulting, from his home in France, with African governments on the treatment
of deformed children.

Dr. Barsky is survived by his wife, Hannah, of Le Beausset; a son, Arthur J. 3d
of Boston, and three grandchildren.  Plans for a memorial service here were
incomplete last night.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Dr. Arthur J. Barsky

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'WHALES OF AUGUST,' BY DAVID BERRY, AT THE WPA

BYLINE: By Frank Rich

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 607 words


DAVID BERRY'S ''The Whales of August,'' at the WPA, is set in a summer home off
the Maine coast. But philosop hically and dramaticallyspeaking, this play is
only a stone's throw f rom Ernest Thompson's Golden Pond. Mr. Berry gives us two
quarrelso me elderly characters - in this case, widowed sisters from Philadelph
ia - who have vastly different outlooks on old age. Spunky Sarah ( Bettie
Endrizzi) believes that one can never live too long, th at every sunrise brings
a new chance to seize the day. The crotchety, elder Libby (Elizabeth Council) is
all too ready to give up and embr ace the ''escort'' of death.

Mr. Berry, author of the Vietnam play ''G.R. Point,'' may not be the synthetic
and manipulative writer that Mr. Thompson is, but ''The Whales of August''
nonetheless proves a sluggish rehash of familiar material. The author seems to
believe, as one line has it, that ''some things bear repeating many times.'' In
the dawdling Act I, it takes him forever to establish his central characters and
themes - even though the sisters frequently announce their past histories
point-blank. The cathartic scenes that propel the women to reaffirm both their
love of life and one another in Act II are ready-made authorial contrivnces.

Metaphorical nature imagery abounds, and all of it is embalmed by William Ludel
, a director who here goes in for whale-sized pauses.  Libby sits on the porch
in her rocker, waiting to spot the ''whales of August'' - only to receive the
inevitable news, by the final curtain, that they're never going to come her way
again. We hear, too, of amber gris, seals, clouds, herring, the Northern Lights
and ''the sounds of the sea.'' Weather reports are frequent, and the changing of
t he seasons is duly noted. There are also pointed references to Eleanor
Roosevelt, Gen. Douglas MacArthur, ''Mr.  Truman'' and the end of World War II -
odd for a play set in 1954.  Didn't anyone in Maine like Ike?

If there's any pleasure in the evening, it comes from watching veteran actors
display their craft. All things considered, the acting is decent, and, in two
cases, better than that. George Lloyd brings some depth to the role of a
gentleman caller - a gallant White Russian emigre now reduced to sponging off
the kindness of female strangers. Vivienne Shub, as an aged, gossipy neighbor,
is affecting when she suddenly breaks stride to grieve over the suspension of
her driver's license. ''Six months is a very long time,'' she cries - and with
such conviction that ''The Whales of August'' almost seems brief by comparison.
Frank Rich
Near Golden Pond
THE WHALES OF AUGUST, by David Berry; di- rected by William Ludel; setting by
Edward T.  Gianfrancesco; costumes by David Murin; lighting by Phil Monat.
Presented by the WPA, Kyle Renick, producing director. At 138 Fifth Avenue.
Sarah Louise Logan Webber .............Bettie Endrizzi Elizabeth Mae Logan
Strong ..........Elizabeth Council Letitia Benson Doughty
..................Vivienne Shub Joshua Brackett ..........................Daniel
Keyes Nicholas Maranov .........................George Lloyd

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM ANNUAL REPORT OF ECONOMIC COUNCIL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3275 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 10


President Reagan transmitted his Economic Report to Congress today. The 357-page
document, with explanatory tables, comprises the Economic Report of the
President, signed by President Reagan, and the Annual Report of the Council of
Economic Advisers, signed by Murray L. Weidenbaum, chairman, and the other two
members, Jerry L. Jordan and William A. Niskanen.
The following excerpts are from the council's Annual Report:

A Summary of Economic Conditions
General economic conditions during 1981 reflected the transitory effects of the
necessary changes in Federal economic policies. The major elements of the
Administration's economic policy are designed to increase long-term economic
growth and to reduce inflation.  Uniformly favorable near-term effects were not
expected.

The primary redirection of economic policy that affected economic conditions
during the year was the reduction in the growth of the money supply relative to
the record high rate of growth in late 1980. This monetary restraint reduced
inflation and short-term interest rates but also influenced the decline in
economic activity in late 1981.

Beginning in late 1979, substantial variability in money growth rates was
associated with unusually large swings in interest rates.  By the end of 1980,
as a result of an unprecedented degree of monetary stimulus, interest rates had
risen to new peaks.

The rise gradually produced an ever-widening circle of weakness centering on the
most interest-sensitive industries, notably home building and motor vehicles.
Falling demand for housing and autos gradually affected an increasing number of
other sectors, ranging from forest products to steel and rubber to appliances
and home furnishings. The high interest rates also contributed to a squeeze on
farm incomes - already under pressure from weaker farm prices - and weakness in
industries and services closely tied to the farm sector.

Excessive monetary expansion in the latter half of 1980 helped to drive interest
rates to record highs. Rates were kept at those levels for the next six months
or so by a variety of factors, including the transitory impact of the shift to
monetary restraint. Rates then fell because of the monetary restraint that
characterized Federal Reserve policy during most of 1981. The high interest
rates were an important factor in precipitating the downturn in the final
quarter of 1981, when real output fell at an annual rate of 5.2 percent.

In short, the conflict between continued expectations of rising inflation, based
on the history of the last 15 years, and the more recent monetary restraint
explains many recent problems. Continued monetary restraint and a reduction of
the within-year variability of money growth, however, are necessary both to
reduce inflation and provide the basis for sustained economic growth.

Prospects for Recovery

The series of tax cuts enacted in 1981 provides the foundation for increased
employment, spending, saving and business investment.  Inflation and short-term
interest rates are now substantially lower than they were at the beginning of
1981. At the time this report was prepared, it appeared that the recession which
started in August - as determined by the National Bureau of Economic Research -
will be over by the second quarter of 1982. This would make it about average in
length for a post-World War II downturn. Output and employment are expected to
increase slightly in the second quarter and at a brisk pace through the rest of
the year, when growth in output is expected to be in excess of a 5 percent
annual rate. Inflation is likely to continue to decline and to average about 7
percent for the year, with further reductions in 1983 and beyond.

The outlook for 1983 and subsequent years is based on continuation of the
Administration's spending, tax, and regulatory policies, continued monetary
restraint, and broader public recognition that the Administration is committed
to each of these key elements of its program. Prospective budget deficits are a
consequence of the difference in the timing of the spending and tax policy
actions, and of the impact on nominal gross national product growth of continued
monetary rest raint. Although the prospective deficits are undesirablyhigh, they
ar e not expected to jeopardize the economic recovery program.

Concerns have been expressed that the Federal Reserve's targets for money growth
are not compatible with the vigorous upturn in economic activity envisioned
later in 1982. Any such upturn, it is feared, will lead to a renewed upswing in
interest rates and thus choke off recovery. We believe that such fears, while
understandable on the basis of recent history and policies, are unjustified in
light of current policies and the Administration's determination to carry them
through.

Interest rates, after more than a decade of rising inflation, contain sizable
premiums to compensate lender s for the anticipated loss in value of future
repayments of princip al. It is our estimate, however, that such premiums will
decline over the course of 1982 and beyond. Such a decline would occur while
''real'' (inflation-adjusted) interest rates remain hi gh as a result of private
and public sector credit demands even as private saving flowsincrease. In other
words, the market rate of interest is likely to continue on a downward trend,
even though sho rt-run fluctuations around the trend can be expected.

A critical element in this outlook is the assumption that inflationary
expectations will, in fact, continue to recede. If they recede at a relatively
fast rate, market rates of interest will decline significantly, wage demands
will continue to moderate, and the pro-inflationary biases that have developed
throughout the economy over the past decade will quickly disappear. Thus, the
greater the degree of cooperation between the Administration, the Congress, and
the Federal Reserve in continuing to support a consistent, credible
anti-inflation policy, as embodied in the Administration's program, the more
rapidly will real growth and employment increase.

Gold Standard

It is useful to review at this point how gold standards actually performed in
the past. The evidence does not suggest that it achieved greater stability in
price levels or growth. The gold-standard period was very deflationary on the
whole, with the price levels in the United States and the United Kingdom
dropping by 44 percent.  Second, price-level cycles were deep and protracted.

Again, the evidence is clear that the achievement of low (and often negative)
rates of inflation over the long run during previous gold-standard periods came
at the cost of a high variability in inflation rates.

In sum, the evidence presented indicates that previous goldstandard periods were
characterized by: (1) lower average inflation and money supply growth; (2)
greater fluctuations in inflation, money supply growth, and output growth; and
(3) higher unemployment rates than in the period 1946 to 1979. Although
comparisons across time periods are difficult to make because of the difficulty
of controlling for differences, including the effects of wars, droughts, and
other shocks to the economy, it is far from clear that gold standards produced
better overall results than those produced during the post-World War II period.
A Monetary Rule

Enactment of a statute or constitutional amendment requiring the monetary
authorities to abide by a rule regarding monetary growth or inflation is another
method that has been suggested for dealing with the problem of maintaining
long-run price stability. Such a rule would free the Federal Reserve from having
to interpret either the ''social welfare function'' of the country or, more
practically, the objectives of current elected officials. The rule could be
stated either in terms of an ultimate objective for inflation, as it is in some
industrial countries, or in terms of a monetary growth target that would be
consistent with the maintenance of price-level stability.

A rule fixing a final outcome for inflation would oblige the monetary
authorities to maintain monetary conditions consistent with the stability of a
broad index of commodity and service prices (for example, the Consumer Price
Index).

The advantage of formulating a rule on the final outcome for inflation is that
the monetary authorities would be free to devise the best monetary strategy to
achieve the mandated outcome. The disadvantage would be the rule's potential
inflexibility. Temporary changes in the price level can be caused by a variety
of shocks for which the monetary authorities cannot be held accountable. One
approach would be to state the final outcome in terms of the average rate of
growth of the Consumer Price Index or nominal G.N.P. over a period of several
years.

At this time it is not clear which rule, if any, would be optimal and likely to
prove preferable over a long period. Hence, the Federal Reserve's current policy
of gradually reducing the target growth rate of money over several years is
providing a transition to a less inflationary environment.

Defense

Real military spending is expected to grow 9 percent annually between 1981 and
1987. Over that period, military spending (including military retirement) will
rise from 5.6 percent to 7.8 percent of G.N.P., and from 25 percent to 37
percent of total Federal spending. Although the military's shares of national
output and Federal spending will not be as high as in the early 1960's, the
buildup will be a sharp reversal of the trend of the last decade. As a result,
some concern has been expressed about whether this increase could adversely
affect the economy. Any economic effects, however, must be assessed in the
context of the overriding need for maintaining the level of defense spending
necessary for national security.

T he concern over the economic impact of def ense spending has probably been
overstated. The United States e conomy as a whole shouldbe able to accommodate
the projected expansio n in defense spending without experiencing an increase in
the gener al inflation rate.  Monetary and budget policies can offset the i
mpact of a large increase in Government spending for national security, although
unusual growth in any spending category, mili tary or civilian, makes the goal
of overall restraint that much more difficult to achieve.  Moreover, the economy
currently has ample sla ck to accommodate the beginning of a major expansion in
defense wor k.

As the economy emerges from the current recession, however, growth in the
defense program will compete with expanding demands in the private sector. As
the Administration's economic recovery program begins to take full effect,
private demand for producer durables should rise significantly. Expenditures for
defense also will be concentrated in the durables sector. Real purchases of
defense durables (research and development and procurement of major weapon
systems) will grow at an estimated rate of 16 percent annually between 1981 and
1987. This exceeds the 14 percent annual rate of increase that occurred during
the three peak years of the Vietnam buildup. The current defense buildup thus
will add to pressures on the durable manufacturing sector in these years.

Although it is difficult to predict which industrial markets will be especially
affected, three results of the defense buildup can be anticipated. First, the
substanial transfer of resources in the durables sector to defense production
may increase relative prices in at least some of the affected industries. Both
the Department of Defense and private purchasers may have to pay more for goods
from these industries. Second. increased demand may produce delays in the
delivery of military goods. Delivery timetables that seem realistic today may in
some cases become obsolete as producers try to accommodate the defense buildup
and vigorous expansion in civilian investment at the same time. A third effect
may be some temporary crowding out of private investment. Defense procurement
and associated production equipment use many of the same physical resources
needed for private investment in civilian producer durables. Some private firms
may turn to foreign sources for materials while others may cancel or postpone
plans for expansion.

The Department of Defense is attempting to minimize the potentially adverse
economic effects of the defense buildup through long-term planning, better
management of defense contracts, and the development of more comprehensive cost
estimates. This long-term planning will help defense industries increase their
capacity in anticipation of new orders. The department's plans to place greater
reliance on multiyear contracts will also help defense contractors operate more
efficiently, especially by providing incentives to increase capacity and to plan
optimal production rates.

Why Deficits Matter

The Administration is strongly committed to reducing the projected deficits in
the years ahead. A variety of economic reasons, as well as considerations of
practical policymaking, make deficits a cause for continuing concern. In
particular, the magnitude of the projected deficits demands attention to their
current and prospective economic impacts.

Financing a budget deficit may draw on private saving and foreign capital
inflows that otherwise would be available to the private sector. The Federal
Government's demand for funds is insensitive to changes in interest rates - that
is, the Treasury will raise the funds that it requires regardless of interest
rates. Weak and marginal borrowers may be ''rationed'' out of the market by
higher interest rates unless saving flows are adequate.

The impact of a specific deficit will vary, however, depending on the conditions
that lead to it. For example, during a recession - as now exists -the borrowing
requirements of business and consumers tend to be relatively small. At such a
time a given deficit can be financed with less pressure on interest rates than
during a period of growth, when business and consumer demands for credit are
increasing. This is why it is important for the Government to reduce the budget
deficit in fiscal 1983 and beyond, a period of anticipated rapid economic growth
when private investment demands are expected to rise substantially.

The impact of a deficit of a given size will also depend on the extent of pri
vate saving in the economy. An economy with a higher saving rate c an absorb the
demands of public sector borrowing more easily than o ne with lower saving and
still accommodate the needs of private borro wers. Much of the Administration's
tax program is designed to i ncrease the private saving of the nation. As a
consequence, both public and private borrowing will be accommodated more easily.

A higher volume of Federal borrowing to finance deficits makes the task of the
Federal Reserve System more difficult when it is following a policy of monetary
restraint. However, maintenance of monetary restraint is a key part of the
Administration's program and hence the potentially inflationary effects of
monetizing the Federal deficit will not be realized.

Continued budget deficits may generate unce rtainty about the ability of
Government to control spending. An y increases in interest rates which reflect
this uncertainty, in turn , will tend to increase further the size of the
deficit. In contrast, the maintenance of a long-term policy to reduce the size
of budget deficits - the policy of the Administration - will tend to counterb
alance the pressures for further increases in Government spending.

Prospects for 1982 and 1983

The current recession is expected to end early in 1982, followed by a resumption
of growth by midyear. The moderating pattern of price increases which began last
year should become more generalized and significant this year. With money growth
expected to be moderate, the extent of the deceleration of inflation will become
the critical factor in sustaining economic recovery beyond 1982. Apart from the
very high rate of expected inflation reflected in current interest rates, the
economy is generally free of impediments to expansion.

The key areas of rebound in the economy this year are expected to be consumer
goods, housing, autos, and defense. The principal areas that are anticipated to
lead the expansion next year are business investment, inventories (including a
rising trend of defense work in progress), and a further acceleration in defense
deliveries.

The decline in inflation, which has so far been most evident in the Consumer
Price Index and in producer prices, will influence trends in wages as 1982
progresses. But the expected 1 to 1 1/2 percentage point slowdown of inflation
in product prices will be only slightly less than the slowdown of labor costs.
Therefore, the currently narrow margin of corporate profits is likely to recover
only modestly during the year.

The unemployment rate is expected to reach the vicinity of 9 percent this spring
until growth strengthens in the summer.  Thereafter, the rapid pace of expansion
should pull the unemployment rate down between one-quarter and one-half of a
percentage point a quarter.

The decline in interest rates that began last fall, and improvements in
household financial positions due to the reduced consumer debt burden and the
first step of the personal tax cut, should lead to increased consumption early
this year. The second step of the tax cut and the scheduled step-up in Social
Security benefits will raise household disposable income roughly 2 percent this
summer.

The recent improvement in early indicators of housing activity presages a rapid
recovery that should be apparent by spring and proceed through the year. In 1980
the decline in housing early in the year was quickly reversed and the ensuing
recovery was quite rapid.  Though the second reversal in the housing industry in
as many years has forced some builders out of business, a rapid expansion this
year is still possible.

Business fixed investment has been maintained at a reasonably high level during
the past year. The stimulus of the Accelerated Cost Recovery System depreciation
package should make itself felt when recovery begins. Since businesses have not
allowed inventories to build by large amounts, stepped-up sales this spring and
summer will translate quite directly into rising output.

The Administration's program of strengthening United States defense capabilities
will continue to be reflected in the overall economy as 1982 progresses.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Murray L. Weidenbaum

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY;
'KARAMAZOV' PLAY, WITH CAST OF JUST 4, DUE ON BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Carol Lawson

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1280 words


''NICHOLAS NICKLEBY'' is gone, but yet another British adaptation of a classic
novel is on its way to Broadway. ''Brothers Karamazov,'' which was commissioned
by the Edinburgh Festival last summer to commemorate the 100th anniversary of
Dostoyevsky's death, is due in November. However, while ''Nicholas Nickleby''
lasted eight and a half hours and had a huge cast, ''Brothers Karamazov'' will
approach the epic novel of Dostoyevsky from another extreme, with a cast of only
four actors and the brothers' saga told in a drama of conventional length.

The ''Brothers Karamazov'' adaptation was w ritten by Richard Crane,formerly
resident dramatist at the National T heater in London. With his wife, the
director Faynia Williams, Mr. C rane founded the experimental Brighton Theater
Company 18 mont hs ago. Miss Williams directed the B righton troupe in the
premiere of ''Brothers Karamazov'' at Edinburgh and will stage the New York
produ ction, which is to be cast with an all-male cast of American acto rs that
canplay as an ensemble. The producer is Manheim Fox, a co-pro ducer of
''Sophisticated Ladies,'' and he plans to capitalize ''Kar amazov'' at$650,000.

''The whole play is seen through the eyes of the brothers,'' said Mr. Crane, who
is in town for the opening Monday night of his play ''Clownmaker'' at the
Wonderhorse Theater. ''Each brother at some time in the play assumes the role of
the father by assuming a big fur coat.'' The four actors will not only portray
the three brothers, their father and the illegitimate Smerdyakov but also a
number of other roles, including the women.

''We either had to do 'Karamazov' in two nights with hundreds of characters -
like the famous 1910 Moscow Arts Theater production - or pare it down,'' Miss
Williams remarked. ''We decided we wanted to get to the core of it.''

Mr. Crane noted that he has dropped the word ''the'' from the Dostoyevsky title:
''It departicularizes it, if you see what I mean.  Ultimately, it is a story
about brothers everywhere - and sisters.''

Elizabeth Taylor is in town to rehearse ''The Little Foxes'' for her March 5
opening in London and to work on the star-studded Broadway subscription series
that she and Zev Bufman are planning for next season. Mr. Bufman reports that
the first play, scheduled to open Christmas week, is likely to be Tennessee
Williams's ''Sweet Bird of Youth,'' starring Miss Taylor.

''We are in negotiations with Tennessee,'' Mr. Bufman says. ''I have to have the
cable rights tied up. Every play has to be tied into a cable and video cassette
deal.''

''Tennessee and Elizabeth are old friends,'' he adds. ''The desire on both parts
is to have a deal.'' Three plays are to be offered each season in the
subscription series. Mr. Bufman says that ''The Front Page,'' starring Jack
Lemmon and Walter Matthau, is being considered for the second production.

''We will sell subscriptions for all three plays for under $100,'' the producer
promises. ''I don't agree with the notion that the bigger the hit, the higher
you push the price button.''

Bob Gunton does not like to talk much about his year in Vietnam. He calls it
simply ''a lost year'' in his life, and says that in retrospect, as a former
seminary student, he probably should have applied for conscientious objector
status instead of allowing himself to be drafted.

Now, more than a decade after the fact, Mr. Gunton has found a means of coming
to terms with his Vietnam experience. It is Amlin Gray's play about Vietnam,
''How I Got That Story,'' in which the 36-year-old Mr. Gunton plays a
14-year-old bar girl, a G.I. and 19 other characters that populate the dismal
landscape of the Vietnam War. ''How I Got That Story'' is currently in previews
and will open next Wednesday at the Westside Arts Theater, where his wife, Annie
McGreevey, closed last weekend in her one-woman show, ''From Flatbush to
Broadway.''

'' 'How I Got That Story' is not quite psychodrama, but is very close to it for
me,'' says Mr. Gunton, who starred in the play once before, in December 1980, in
an Off Off Broadway production at the Second Stage that received outstanding
reviews. ''Emotionally, it has helped me deal with the guilt I felt going over
there.

''I was a grunt, walking around in the jungle of Vietnam, trying not to find the
enemy,'' Mr. Gunton adds. ''Because I am so big, they were going to give me
either a heavy radio or a huge machine gun to carry. I carried a radio.''

''How I Got That Story'' was such a success the first time it was staged that
there was talk of immediately moving it to an Off Broadway house for an extended
run. But Alan Pakula, the Hollywood director, quickly dashed those hopes. ''He
came to the last performance and walked backstage and said, 'That was an
incredible performance; I want you for my movie,' '' Mr. Gunton recalls with a
broad grin. ''It was a scene right out of a movie.''

Mr. Pakula signed Mr. Gunton for a role in ''Rollover,'' starring Jane Fonda and
Kris Kristofferson. ''I had never done a film,'' Mr.  Gunton says. ''I tell
people that I flew to California without the plane.''

His 13 months on Broadway as Juan Peron in ''Evita'' never brought him such
attention as ''How I Got That Story.'' '' 'How I Got That Story' is extravagant
in a way that none of my Broadway performances have been,'' says Mr. Gunton, who
also appeared in the musicals ''Happy End,'' ''King of Hearts'' and ''Working.''
''People in the business did a double take when they saw me in this play. I
transform my 190-pound phys ical reali ty into a diminutive Oriental girl
selling her body, and I do it w ithout slapping on a ponytail or lipstick.''

The night ''How I Got That Story'' ope ns, Mr. Gunton will be seen opposite Mars
ha Mason on CBS in the television film ''Lois Gibbs and the Love Cana l.''
''It's a little bit of a career overload,'' Mr.  Gunton jokes.  ''I've been
running around so much this last year. Now I'm ready to stay in one dressing
room a number of months, I hope.''

Quentin Crisp is returning to New York, but not as Quentin Crisp this time. The
flamboyant entertainer and author, who starred Off Broadway in his one-man show
''An Evening With Quentin Crisp,'' will portray Lord Alfred Douglas in the
Stonewall Repertory Theater's production of Eric Bentley's new play, ''Lord
Alfred's Lover.'' Performances begin on March 12 at the Courtyard Playhouse, 39
Grove Street. ... Christopher Durang's black comedy ''Sister Mary Ignatius
Explains It All for You'' is moving on Feb. 24 from Playwrights Horizons, where
it originated, to the Westside Arts Theater, 407 West 43d Street, for an
open-ended run. This marks the first time Playwrights Horizons is moving a
production on its own, without making an alliance with an outside producer. ...
Joe Pintauro's ''Snow Orchid,'' starring Peter Boyle, will begin performances on
March 11 at the Circle Repertory Theater. ... Mark Linn Baker, Patti Perkins,
Deborah Rush and Larry Riley will make up the cast of Randy Newman's musical
''Maybe I'm Doing It Wrong,'' directed by Joan Micklin Silver. Opening night is
March 14 at the Astor Place Theater...

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of Bob Gunton

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'REDS' AND 'GOLDEN POND' TOP OSCAR NOMINATIONS

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2082 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Feb 11


Warren Beatty, Hollywood's current version of the Renaissance Man, was nominated
for four Academy Awards today for ''Reds,'' his complex epic about the life of
the radical American journalist John Reed.

Mr. Beatty received nominations for best actor, best director, best screenplay
and producer of one of the five movies nominated for best picture. Only two men
in Hollywood history have ever achieved those four major nominations for a
single movie -Orson Welles for ''Citizen Kane'' in 194l and Mr. Beatty himself
for ''Heaven Can Wait'' in 1978.

''Reds'' headed the Oscar field with 12 nominations, including Diane Keaton as
best actress and Jack Nicholson as best supporting actor. This is the largest
number of nominations for one picture since 1966, when ''Who's Afraid of
Virginia Woolf?'' got 13. The four pictures Mr. Beatty has produced - ''Bonnie
and Clyde,'' ''Shampoo,'' ''Heaven Can Wait,'' and ''Reds'' -have earned 35
Academy nominations. Mr. Beatty personally has been nominated seven times in
five categories.

10 for 'Golden Pond'

''Reds'' was joined in the best-picture category by the elegaic ''On Golden
Pond'' (the second most honored movie with 10 nominations), a film about coming
to terms with old age and approaching death; ''Chariots of Fire'' ( seven
nominations), the inspirational true story of two men who competed for very
different reasons in the 1924 Olympic Games; ''Atlantic City'' (five
nominations), the saga of a small-time crook who briefly but gloriously hits it
big, and ''Raiders of the Lost Ark'' (eight nominations), a daredevil,
cliff-hanging boy's adventure story that has sold more than $187 million worth
of tickets and is already in fifth place on the list of top money-making movies.

The biggest surprise in the acting categories was the nomination of Susan
Sarandon, as a waitress with her eye on better things, for best actress for
''Atlantic City.'' The nomination was particularly surprising since Paramount,
the studio that released ''Atlantic City,'' had been pushing Miss Sarandon for
supporting actress. A flabbergasted Miss Sarandon said today that even she had
voted for herself in the supporting-actress category.

Miss Sarandon, a first-time nominee, will join Katharine Hepburn, who has won
best actress a record-breaking three times, and whose 12th nomination comes for
her performance as a wife who has spent 50 summers with her now 80-year-old
husband in a cottage ''On Golden Pond''; Diane Keaton as Louise Bryant, John
Reed's mistress and eventually his wife in ''Reds''; Marsha Mason as an actress
struggling out of alcoholism in ''Only When I Laugh,'' and Meryl Streep as the
exotic, mysterious ''French Lieutenant's Woman.'' Miss Keaton was nominated once
before, for ''Annie Hall'' in 1977, and won. Miss Streep won a supporting Oscar
for ''Kramer vs. Kramer,'' while Miss Mason has had three previous nominations
but has never won

Fonda and Lancaster Named

The surprise in the best-actor category was the Academy's failure to nominate
Richard Dreyfuss for his performance as a quadraplegic who wants to die in
''Whose Life Is It Anyway?''

Competing for the Oscar are Mr. Beatty as the flamboyant American Communist in
''Reds,'' John Reed, of whom Walter Lippmann said, ''The central passion of his
life was an inordinate desire to be arrested''; Henry Fonda, as the angry, aging
husband in ''On Golden Pond'' who realizes how few summers are left to him; Burt
Lancaster as a numbers runner on a glorious fling in ''Atlantic City''; Dudley
Moore as an alcoholic millionaire in ''Arthur,'' and Paul Newman as a man whose
life is ruined by a newspaper article in ''Absence of Malice.''

Only Mr. Lancaster has won before, for ''Elmer Gantry'' in 1960, but Mr. Fonda
was given an honorary award by the Academy in 1980.  Among the critically well
received and commercially successful movies that did not get a nomination were
''Body Heat,'' Alan Alda's ''Four Seasons'' and ''Superman II.'' ''Superman II''
was not even nominated for best achievement in visual effects, that nomination
going to ''Dragonslayer'' and ''Raiders of the Lost Ark.'' However, ''Heaven's
Gate,'' the $40 million box-office failure that caused Hollywood to rethink its
spiraling movie budgets, got one nominati on -for best ach ievement in art
direction.

Ragtime Cited 8 Times

In a mild surprise, ''Prince of the City,'' which placed second to ''Reds'' in
the New York Film Critics' balloting for best picture and won the critics' award
for best director for Sidney Lumet, got only a single Academy nomination, for
screenplay. On the other hand, ''Ragtime'' rather surpri singly got eight nom
inations, tying with ''Raiders of the Lost Ark'' for third place i n the number
of its nominations.

For the first time in nearly 20 years the directors of the five movies nominated
for best picture were all nominated for best director. In addition to Mr. Beatty
for ''Reds,'' Louis Malle was nominated for ''Atlantic City,'' Mark Rydell for
''On Golden Pond,'' Steven Spielberg for ''Raiders of the Lost Ark'' and Hugh
Hudson for ''Chariots of Fire.'' The dovetailing of director and picture last
occurred in 1964.

In the supporting-actress category, Jane Fonda matched her father with a
nomination for playing his estranged daughter in ''On Golden Pond.'' She was
joined by Melinda Dillon as a woman driven to suicide in ''Absence of Malice,''
Joan Hackett as a narcissist who is terrified of turning 40 in ''Only When I
Laugh,'' Elizabeth McGovern as beautiful but daffy Evelyn Nesbit Thaw in
''Ragtime'' and Maureen Stapleton as the dedicated anarchist Emma Goldman in
''Reds.''

None of the five women has won an Oscar as supporting actress, although Miss
Fonda has won twice, for ''Klute'' and ''Coming Home,'' in the best-actress
category. Miss McGovern was nominated despite the fact that Paramount did not
take out a single advertisement for her.  In general, the advertising campaigns
put on by the studios to get Academy nominations seemed muted this year.

Nicholson Cited Again

Three of the five actors for supporting actor are first-time nominees: James
Coco as the homosexual friend of Miss Mason in ''Only When I Laugh,'' Ian Holm
as the dour running coach in ''Chariots of Fire'' and Howard E. Rollins, Jr. as
the black pianist whose rage starts a guerrilla war in ''Ragtime.'' John
Gielgud, the butler and surrogate father to ''Arthur,'' was previously nominated
for ''Becket.'' Jack Nicholson, who got his sixth nomination for his role as the
sardonic and alcoholic Eugene O'Neill in ''Reds,'' won for best actor in 1975
for ''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest.''

Nominated for best foreign-language film were Andrzej Wajda's ''Man of Iron''
(Poland), ''The Boat Is Full'' (Switzerland), ''Mephisto'' (Hungary), ''Muddy
River'' (Japan) and ''Three Brothers'' (Italy).

''Pixote,'' the Brazilian film about predatory street children which has won
numerous awards, including best foreign film from both the New York and Los
Angeles film critics, was declared ineligible by the Academy because it was
test-marketed in Brazil before the eligibility date of Nov. 1, 1980.

Another controversy ended happily when the makeup artists were finally awarded
their own Oscar category after years of begging for one. Although honorary
Oscars were given to William Tuttle in 1964 for ''7 Faces of Dr. Lao'' and to
John Chambers in 1968 for ''Planet of the Apes,'' there has never been a regular
award for makeup.

The establishment of the category came after a furor when the Academy refused to
honor the makeup achievement in ''The Elephant Man'' last year. Nominated in the
new category were Rick Baker for his werewolf transformations in ''An American
Werewolf in London'' and Stan Winston for the robots in ''Heartbeeps.''

Award for Danny Kaye

The Academy also announced an honorary award to Barbara Stanwyck, the actress.
The Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award was given to the comedian Danny Kaye. The
Thalberg Award, given at the Academy's discretion to a producer for his body of
work, was awarded to Albert (Cubby) Broccoli, producer of the James Bond movies.

Top winner among the studios today was Paramount with 35 nominations for
''Reds,'' ''Ragtime,'' ''Raiders,'' ''Atlantic City'' and ''Dragonslayer.''
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer managed a bare three nominations for ''Pennies From
Heaven,'' while 20th Century-Fox did not get a single nomination.

The winners will be announced March 29. Other nominees included: Original
Screenplay: Kurt Luedtke, ''Absence of Malice''; Steve Gordon, ''Arthur''; John
Guare, ''Atlantic City''; Colin Welland, ''Chariots of Fire''; Warren Beatty and
Trevor Griffiths, ''Reds.'' Adapted Screenplay: Harold Pinter, ''The French
Lieutenant's Woman''; Ernest Thompson, ''On Golden Pond''; Dennis Potter,
''Pennies From Heaven''; Jay Presson Allen and Sidney Lumet, ''Prince of the
City''; Michael Weller, ''Ragtime.'' Original Song: ''Arthur's Theme (Best That
You Can Do),'' ''Arthur''; ''Endless Love'' (title song); ''The First Time It
Happens,'' ''The Great Muppet Cap er''; ''For Your Eyes Only'' (title song);
''One More Hour,' ' ''Ragtime.'' Original Scor e: ''Chariots of Fire,''
Vangelis; ''Dragonslayer,'' Alex North; ''On Golden Pond,'' Dave Grusin;
''Ragtime,'' Randy Newman; ''R aiders of the Lost Ark,'' John Williams.  Art
Direction : ''The French Lieutenant's Woman,'' art direction: Assheton Go rton,
set decoration: Ann Mollo; ''Heaven's Gate,'' art direction: Tambi Larsen, set
Decoration: Jim Berkey; ''Ragtime,'' art directi on: John Graysmark, Patrizia
Von Brandenstein, Anthony Reading, se t decoration: George de Titta, Sr., George
de Titta, Jr., Peter Howitt; ''Raiders of the Lost Ark,'' art dire ction: Norman
Reynolds, Leslie Dilley, set decoration: Michael Ford; ''Reds,'' art direction:
Richard Sylbert, set decoration : Michael Seirton.  Cinematography:
''Excalibur,'' Alex Thomson; ''On Golden P ond,'' Filly Williams; ''Ragtime,''
Miroslav Ondricek; ''Raider s of the Lost Ark,'' Douglas Slocombe; ''Reds,''
Vittorio Storaro .  Costume Design: ''Chariots of Fire,'' Milena Canonero; ''T
he French Lieutenant's Woman,'' Tom Rand; ''Pennies From Heaven,'' Bob Mackie;
''Ragtime,'' Anna Hill Johnstone; ''Reds,'' Shir ley Russell.  Documentary
Feature: ''Against Wind and Tide,'' ''Brooklyn Bridge,'' ''Eight Minutes to
Midnight: A Portrait of Dr. Helen Cal dicott,'' ''El Salvador: Another Vietnam,
'' ''Genocide.'' Documentary Short: ''Americas in Transition,'' ''Close Har
mony,'' ''Journey For Survival,'' ''See What I Say,'' ''Urge To Build.''
Editing: ''Chariots of Fire,'' Terry Rawlings; ''The Frenc h Lieutenant's
Woman,'' John Bloom; ''On Golden Pond,'' Ro bert L.  Wolfe; ''Raiders of the
Lost Ark,'' Michael Kahn; ''Reds ,'' Dede Allen, Craig McKay.  Animated Short:
''CRAC,'' ''The Creation,'' ''The Tender T ale of Cinderella Penguin.'' Live
Action Short: ''Couples and Robbers,'' ''First Winter ,'' ''Violet.'' Sound:
''On Golden Pond,'' Richard Portman, David Ronne; ''Outland,'' John K.
Wilkinson, Robert W. Glass, Jr., Ro bert M.  Thirlwell, Robin Gregory; ''Pennies
From Heaven,'' Micha el J.  Kohut, Jay M. Harding, Richard Tyler, Al Overton;
''Raid ers of the Lost Ark,'' Bill Varney, Steve Maslow, Gregg Landaker, R oy
Charman;

''Reds,'' Dick Vorisek, Tom Fleischman, Simon Kaye.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dudley Moore in ''Arthur''

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 13, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
Kissing And M aking Up

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 918 words


The United Nations has gone too far this time. For the Secretary General to
postpone a lunch with Mayor Koch just because the Mayor accused the world body
of ''hypocrisy, immorality and cowardice'' is an act of ill grace.

Don't they realize that this is just his picturesque way of expressing himself?
After all, he calls some of his commissioners worse things all the time.

Just a while back, he called the City Council President, Carol Bellamy, ''a
horror show'' who ''likes to torture people.'' She didn't get upset or cancel
any lunches. She sent him a book about turtles and he calmed right down.

We do hope the U.N. people calm down, too. We would miss them if they took the
Mayor's good-riddance remarks seriously and moved out.  Who would we have to
knock around anymore? What would the newspapers do to fill the yards of space
they devote annually to stories about diplomats who refuse to pay their parking
tickets or skip out on felonies by citing diplomatic immunity?

What other group offers us such a juicy stationary target, so swollen a
repository of the things we love to hate - a place that Mayor Koch, with his
pruning hook, correctly skewered as ''a den of iniquity.''

We would miss the Mayor, too - if he decides to run for Governor.  Where would
we get another stone-carver like him?  There is, however, a possible solution.
Let them both move to Albany.  Nelson Rockefeller put up a lot of low-rent tall
buildings in the state capital where they would have world-class space for their
mudwre stling. And the beauty part, aside from the views of the cementboats on
the Hudson, is that all of it would take place out of the inhibitive glare of
national television. Afte r all, the only reason we lost in Vietnam was that
television was th ere and you couldn't get yourself a moment of privacy to burn
down the necessary villages.

Just think of all the intransigent world problems a Governor with Edward Koch's
energy could solve in that isolated setting, away from the enticements of
favorite restaurants and the City Hall press room.

What's more, how could t he normally mulish Legislature resist a manwho
successfu lly scales international walls that others find too precipitous ( and
makes vows at biblical walls where others fear to swear)?

For example, the Mayor strode into an Irish pub here this week and, to a roar of
acclaim usually reserved for punk-rock groups, shouted: ''England, get out of
Ireland!'' Now that's the way to bypass pusillanimous diplomacy.

But there will always be critics. No matter how tastefully Mr. Koch insults
them, third-world pinstripers will still fulminate at him.  He knows how to deal
with such muggers, though. For major perfidy, he could invoke the death penalty
-and, as a public example, the hangings could be conducted in front of the
Isaiah Wall. For lesser insults, there would be work camps, surrounded by barbed
wire and patrolled by wolves.

Consider the new spirit this would breathe into Albany, once the most
determinedly backward duchy in the Northeast. Not to mention what it would do
for the barbed-wire industry up there.

But what would it mean for New York City? Well, someone else would be Mayor -
Carol Bellamy or Harrison Goldin or Thomas Cuite. Can you imagine any of these
public servants putting on a funny hat, riding a camel, doing a soft-shoe
routine in the Inner Circle show, leading cheers on the Brooklyn Bridge during
the transit strike, having a bedroom picture taken in a T-shirt for a national
magazine, going to Spain with David Garth and not talking politics? Can you
picture them training their gimlet eyes on Albany and telling off the Governor
or the U.N., whichever annoys first?

On second thought, let's forget the idea. Mayor Koch and the United Nations
should stay right where they are. As the Mayor said the other day: ''If the U.N.
would leave New York, nobody would hear of it again.'' Imagine taxpayers footing
the bills for all those clownish debates and not getting their money's worth by
at least being able to watch the entertainment once in a while.

And without Mayor Koch, where would we find another human paradox so intriguing
that he would fight graffiti in the subway yards while chiseling his own into
the Isaiah Wall at First Avenue and 43d Street?

Let's remember the aftermath of the Bellamy ''horror show'' episode. Said the
Mayor, about putting his tongue in motion before his good sense was in gear:
''It was stupid of me to do it. It was self-indulgent and I'm wrong.''

''This, too, shall pass,'' said Miss Bellamy.  Then, as cameras swarmed, he
kissed her on the cheek.  There simply is no denying that we would feel deprived
were the Mayor and the United Nations to leave us. Like the hoary adage about
Chinese food, they would be gone but an hour and we would be hungry again.
Speaking of meals, maybe the Mayor and the Secretary General ought to put aside
their emotions and meet for lunch anyway next Wednesday, as planned. They could
eat first and then kiss and make up over the fortune cookies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHO WIELDS THE POWER IN HOLLYWOOD?

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2449 words


LOS ANGELES Spiraling production costs, a slump at the box office, and, in some
quarters, disillusionment with the wunderkind school of filmmaking, are causing
strains these days in the economic -creative partnership that makes Ho llywood
run. Francis Ford Coppola, the Oscar-winning director whos e two ''Godfather''
movies are considered classics by some film his torians, says again he may be
facing bankruptcy and blames his pr oblems on the fact that ''the studios,'' not
creative people, contr ol the movies.

Peter Bogdanovich, another prize-winning director, was forced to distribute his
latest movie, ''They All Laughed,'' to theaters himself because he couldn't
interest one of the major film studios to do so on acceptable terms.

And another celebrated director, Robert Altman, says that he can't even get
studio executives to return his telephone calls.  Other filmmakers tell
comparable stories. ''It seems they want to say 'no,' whatever you ask,'' one
disheartened screenwriter said recently after coming from a studio production
meeting.

Studio executives acknowledge that they are saying ''no'' more often. But they
blame their hesitation on the soaring cost of making and marketing movies, high
interest rates and the profligacy of some directors recently as well as a
lackluster response to many of the movies they've made recently. ''I think
people are being very cautious,'' said Alan Ladd Jr., the former 20th
Century-Fox executive who now heads his own company.

Mike Medavoy, the head of production at Orion Pictures, said things are likely
to remain that way for a while, especially in trying to keep directors within
their budgets.

''I think people (at the studios) are going to get tougher,'' he said.  Like
many other executives, Mr. Medavoy says he doesn't think much of Mr. Coppola's
claim that it's unfair that filmmakers are beholden to the money men at the
studios.

''The creative people have to be responsible not only to their craft, but to
those people who make it possible for them to practice their craft,'' he said.

A senior executive of another major studio, who spoke on condition that he not
be identified, said: ''This really isn't the businessmen versus the artist. In
the absence of any big hits this fall, it means everybody's confidence is
eroded. That's most of the problem right there.

''Some directors are being told that they can't have the blank check they once
assumed was theirs by divine right.'' But Mr. Coppola and other directors
contend that there would be more hits if the studios would let them practice
their profession without interference, and if they didn't inflate budgets with
what they consider to be excessive studio overhead and distribution charges.

Conflict between Hollyw ood's creative artis ts and its businessmen is
longstanding, and Mr. Coppola's plaint fal ls upon unsympathetic ears in the
case of Freddie Fields. Mr. Field s, the head of production at
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, suggests a possible amelioration of the conflict through
the restoration of au thority to producers, whose power waned as the hegemony of
director s and stars waxed in thepost-World War II years.

''You can't let the inmates run the asylum,'' Mr. Fields said. ''I think Francis
speaks with a forked tongue. He says that he can do a better job than the
studios, but his little studio keeps going bankrupt.''

If anything, Mr. Fields said, many directors need more supervision - not
necesssarily from studio executives, but from producers, a specialty in
Hollywood that has lost ground in recent years because of the director/star
system.

''This has become a director's medium, and not all for the good,'' he said.
''There was a time when it was a producer's medium, and I think all directors
should work with a good producer to keep a step ahead of him, to help him plan.
You go back to the days of Selznick and Spiegel. They knew what they were doing.

''The producer is forgotten now a lot of the time. The director is trying to run
the whole show, and it's taken away the director's support system. I don't think
it's good. This is a collaborative art form.''

Siding with arguments advanced by both Mr. Coppola and Mr. Fields is Blake
Edwards. ''The trouble,'' said Mr. Edwards, the director of ''10'' and other
films, ''is that you have no creative people running the studios. There is
nobody there who knows how to make a movie.  It's appalling to me that the
people in charge of studios don't even know the least thing about making a
movie. Until you get some Thalbergs, we are not going to realize the full
potential of the business.'' He was referring to Irving Thalberg, who was widely
respected for turning out high quality pictures as the head of production at
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in the 1930's.

The debate has a familiar sound to it: Even in the best of times, the
relationship between the men and women who make movies and the studios that
finance and distribute them is one that ranges from tense to warl ike.

Hollywood's ''creative people'' and the moguls who hold the purse strings have
probably been feuding since the day a handful of furriers from New York arrived
in the West and started the motion picture business more than 70 years ago.

Until the 1960's, however, it was an uneven battle. Directors, like the actors
and actresses whose performances they guided, were essentially hired hands -
directing pictures under contract to the studio and under the guidance of
producers; the studios, until a post-World War II collapse in movie attendance,
were grinding out hundreds of pictures annually to feed their networks of
theaters around the country. In the 1950's, the major studios and the Federal
Government entered into a series of consent decress that forced the studios to
sell their theaters and thus end what the Government had maintained was a
monopoly in motion picture production-exhibition.  With the collapse of the
studio system came a new generation of stars - and star directors - who migrated
from studio to studio, selling their services to the highest bidder and
ultimately negotiating percentages of a studio's profits on each picture.

Directors began to gain substantial independence and many evolved into
multipurpose ''hyphenated'' filmmakers - men and women who not only directed
films but also often wrote and produced them. The power of the star directors,
such as Mr. Coppola, Mr. Altman and others increased at the expense of the
studio executives. Now, in many ways, the pendulum has swung in the opposite
direction, largely because the industry is undergoing another of its cyclical
transitions.

In recent years, the industry has followed a kind of boom-and-bust cycle. During
the mid-1960's, it brought forth a number of blockbusters, notably ''The Sound
of Music,'' and this touched off production of a string of big-budget films that
flopped, and, by 1968, had rolled up hundreds of millions of dollars in losses
for the major studios.

Then there came a brief flirtation with low-budget pictures, led by ''Easy
Rider'' and later ''American Graffiti,'' directed by George Lucas, that was
followed by another era of go-for-broke blockbusters.

To some extent, the natural antipathy between the money men and the filmmakers
was subdued during much of the 1970's by an avalanche of cash that these
pictures brought in.

Pictures such as ''The Godfather,'' ''The Exorcist,'' ''Jaws'' and ''Star
Wars,'' made the studios - and the conglomorates that were buying the studios -
rich.

A number of these highly profitable pictures were directed by youthful graduates
of university film schools and, for a while, it seemed as if they could do no
wrong. They became Hollywood's new royalty - and the toast of Wall Street.
Hoping for more blockbusters and confident that the projected in come from sales
of the movie to network and pay television and vi deo recorder markets made it
all but impossible for their pictures to lose money, they opened their purses to
the new generation of di rectors.

But 18 months or so ago, the euphoria that formerly was so evident at the
restaurants where Hollywood made its deals began to fade a little.

A number of big-budget movies, some of them starring major players such as Burt
Reynolds and Clint Eastwood, began to fail at the box office, and some of the
new star directors, such as Steven Spielberg, who had made ''Jaws,'' as well as
the critically lambasted ''1941,'' turned out to be mortals after all.

Most traumatic of all was the disaster of director Michael Cimino's ''Heaven's
Gate'' and the realization that the management of United Artists Studios had
allowed him to spend more than $35 million with virtually no controls.

Executives at other studios blame the ''Heaven's Gate'' disaster principally on
inaction by the people running United Artists in exercising more control over
production costs.

Still, some executives admit privately that it can be very difficult to assert
authority over a film once it get out of financial control and a director asks
for still more money to complete it; they acknowledged that, with bad luck, they
might have their own ''Heaven's Gate.'' The experience, some say, was not only
depressing but a signal that it was time to exert more discipline over the new
breed of star directors such as Mr. Cimino, whose ''Deer Hunter'' won an Academy
Award. And it is this attitude, coupled with the dismal performance of most
movies during the past year or so, that has led to the heightened level of
hostility between filmmakers and the studios.

Mr. Coppola, who barely survived a bout of economic brinkmanship four years ago
when his Vietnam War saga, ''Apocalypse Now,'' far surpassed its budget and
United Artists made him mortgage his home and other assets in order to finance
the picture, assailed the reliance that filmmakers have on the studios during a
press conference last month following the premiere at Radio City Mus ic Hall of
his f inancially troubled new film, ''One From the Heart.''

The picture was financed in part by Paramount Pictures, but Paramount
subsequently refused to release it. Later, Mr. Coppola entered into an agreement
for Columbia Pictures to distribute the film.

''One From the Heart'' is a love story set amid an expensive, neongaudy
fantasy-world replica of Las Vegas that Mr. Coppola had built at his Zoetrope
Studios in Hollywood and which some of his critics have said is a prime example
of the kind of expensive, self-indulgent excesses that spell trouble for the
film industry - and which his friends have said would have been praised as
innovative and original had ''One From the Heart'' had been a hit, which now
appears doubtful.

Mr. Coppola's problem, many people in Hollywood say, is simply that ''One From
the Heart,'' is not a very good motion picture, and that, taken with his
over-budget history on ''Apocalypse Now,'' he is a less attractive investment
for the studios at a time of economic troubles. They point out that certain
other directors, such as Mr.  Altman, are having difficulty, too, because of the
present lack of money-making movies - ''Health'' and last year's ''Popeye'' by
Mr.  Altman are regarded as evidence by some studio executives that at least for
now, Mr. Altman has lost his commercial touch.

There is an old axiom around Hollywood that a once-successful star or director
can survive one or even two flops but often not three.  Herbert Ross's
innovative Depression-era musical, ''Pennies From Heaven,'' which features a
number of unusual elements, including Steve Martin mouthing songs recorded by
Bing Crosby, is thought by some people to be an overblown and expensive flop.
But, at least for now, many of his peers think of the picture as an honorable
failure and he still commands respect because he is a man who made such pictures
as ''The Turning Point'' and ''The Goodbye Girl.'' Similarly, Warren Beatty's
epic story about the Russian Revolution, ''Reds,'' whose production costs have
been reported variously at between $35 million and $50 million, is also
considered by some people to be a symbol of the directorial self-indulgence that
ails the industry. Still, Mr. Beatty is regarded as a winner because not only is
''Reds'' considered a good picture, but he has behind him films such as ''Heaven
Can Wait,'' ''Shampoo'' and ''Bonnie and Clyde.''

Just about everyone agrees in Hollywood these days that, while directors with
consistent records of making hits will continue to get most of the money they
want, the film industry has passed a kind of turning point in its generosity
toward other directors.

''We all got too big for our britches,'' said Mr. Bogdanovich.  Some members of
the new generation of directors are still given the kind of blank check they
want, including George Lucas, who directed ''Star Wars,'' and Mr. Spielberg, who
rebounded from ''1941'' with ''Raiders of the Lost Ark,'' and whose track
records have given them the clout in dealing with studios that allows them to
keep a bigger chunk of the profits than their colleagues.

Indeed, said David Chasman, a senior executive of Metro-Goldwyn Mayer, directors
with profitable track records have little to worry about despite the film
industry's current troubles.

''A director's freedom is directly proportional to his commercial success,'' he
said.  As for the recent new strains placed upon the Hollywood's tenuous
economic-creative partnership, Mr. Chasman, a student of movie lore, noted that
it was really nothing new, and that if history was a guide, the stresses would
ease when the next cycle of hits begins.  ''What this business needs is hits,
not platitudes,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW HE WROTE THAT PLAY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1959 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Jeremy Gerard is a freelance writer specializing in theater.

By JEREMY GERARD

It was the spring of 1979, and Amlin Gray had three weeks to come up with a
play. A resident playwright at the Milwaukee Repertory Theater, Mr. Gray had
spent nearly half a year working on ''Option Four,'' a play about the final days
of the American military presence in Vietnam. But with three weeks to go before
rehearsals, the playwright had come to the realization that he had no script.

He did, however, possess a file box of ideas. On one of the cards in that file
he had described a play in which a reporter would confront a ''Historical
Event.'' The event itself wasn't yet important. The confrontation was. It was
Mr. Gray's idea to have the ''Event'' played by a single actor assuming a
variety of roles that would challenge and ultimately destroy the reporter.

The idea on the index card merged with the Vietnam play he had been unable to
write. The result was ''How I Got That Story,'' opening Wednesday at the
Westside Arts Theater, in which Don Scardino portrays a naive young reporter out
of Dubuque, freshly dispatched by the ''TransPanGlobal Wire Service'' to cover a
guerrilla war in ''Ambo Land.'' Bob Gunton returns as ''The Historical Event,''
repeating the role he created in the highly praised Second Stage production of
the play Off Off Broadway a year ago. Mr. Gunton assumes no fewer than 21 guises
in the play, ranging from the TransPanGlobal bureau chief to Am-bo Land's
treacherous dictator, Madame Ing.

The bizarre Am-bo Land of ''How I Got That Story'' is not too far removed from
the Vietnam of Mr. Gray's own experience. Born in New York City and raised in
its environs, he was drafted in 1966 during his second year at St. John's
College in Santa Fe. A conscientious objector who had refused the student
deferment, he trained as a medic for alternative service and spent a year at an
Army hospital before being sent to Vietnam. As a non-combatant close to the
front, Mr.  Gray was both participant and observer there, a paradoxical
experience that would preoccupy him for a decade.

'' 'How I Got That Story' is about dislocation,'' Mr. Gray explained one
afternoon recently. ''The play is about a man who goes into a situation with a
set of tools which he actually uses with reasonable competence, but which are
wholly inappropriate to the situation. The reporter seems to think he's
understanding something.  But what he comes to, instead of a moment of
illumination, is a moment of complete reversal.''

In one scene, for example, the reporter witnesses the selfimmolation of a
political protester. Horrified, he tries to record the scene in his notebook.
But the words - ''charred,'' ''twisting with pain'' - are equally horrible. He
tells himself, ''You're not here. You're just recording this. You look at it,
you take the penc il and you write it down.'' But the ruse doesn't work; later
he will remember that in asserting his non-presence, he had done nothing to
prevent the gruesome death of a man right before his eyes.

Unlike David Rabe's ''The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel,'' or David Berry's
''G.R. Point'' - graphic, naturalistic depictions of the Vietnam experience
which Mr. Gray admires -''How I Got That Story'' incorporates elements of farce
and surrealism to achieve its effect. The play is structured as a flicker of
scenes (the longest is nearly ten minutes, the briefest just 30 seconds) in
which the reporter comes into contact with the many ''subjects'' of his story.

Of key importance was that all the subjects be played by one actor using an
array of costumes, voices and gestures. ''The play presented itself to me in
that form,'' Mr. Gray recalled. ''What that does is help the audience to keep
focusing on the subject of the play, which is the confrontation of a single
individual and the 'Event.' If the audience had to absorb a new performer each
time one of the 'Event' characters appeared, the subject would just have been
hopelessly obscured.'' Its form also makes it possible, Mr. Gray added, on a
pragmatic note, to do the play ''in a basement, or a back room, more or less
anywhere.''

In fact, the first production of the play was at the Court Street theater, a
workshop space at the Milwaukee Rep, Mr. Gray's home base for the last five
years. A tall, lanky man with thinning blond hair and pale gray eyes set in an
intensely expressive face, Mr. Gray, 35, studied acting at the American Music
and Dramatic Academy in New York after his discharge from the Army in 1968. He
appeared in a number of Off Off Broadway shows throughout the city in the early
70's, even touring for a year with the National Shakespeare Company, a
bus-and-truck repertory group.

Performing, however, never satisfied him. ''I discovered that what I had taken
to be my impulse act was an impulse to write,'' Mr. Gray explained. ''I was
involved in trying to clarify textual idea s. It was quite cle ar after a couple
of years that I was going to bore myself, if no t everybody else, right out of
the theater.'' So in 1973, while o n the road with Shakespeare, he bought a used
typewriterand wrote ''F ounding Father,'' a historical play about Aaron Burr.
It was staged the following summer at the Eugene O'Neill Playwrights Conference,
i n Waterford, Conn.

It took him two years to complete a second play. ''Pirates'' was totally
different from the first work, being ''sort of a sadomasochistic fantasy romance
about a voyeuristic stowaway and a murderous woman pirate who spends the first
half of the play disguised as a man,'' according to the author. It, too, was
done at the O'Neill (''and never again,'' Mr. Gray says), where it was directed
by John Dillon.

A year later, Mr. Dillon took over the Milwaukee theater and invited Mr. Gray to
join the company. This represented a considerable step up for the playwright,
who had spent two years living backstage at the Off Off Broadway Theater for the
New City (''I was literally playwright in residence there''), though it was
another year before the Milwaukee group actually created a staff position for a
playwright.

In the meantime, he worked as a jack of all trades, editing the Rep's subscriber
magazine, adapting plays, speaking on behalf of the group. ''I was very
interested in working with a permanent company that had an ongoing relationship
with a community,'' Mr. Gray said.  ''It seemed to me that the pickup cast,
one-shot style of producing in New York, given the financial pressures on the
theater, is not going to produce very good work. A lot of the best writing in
recent years has been coming out of the resident theaters.''

Working with a company, Mr. Gray went on, allowed for an ongoing artistic
relationship with actors and directors. At the Rep, for example, the associate
director Sharon Ott has staged nearly all of the seven Gray plays produced
there, and the playwright has had the opportunity to create roles for specific
actors in the company.

Yet the resident theaters can offer problems to the playwright, along with the
security of a weekly paycheck. ''There's a danger of being overprotected,'' Mr.
Gray admitted. ''The regionals serve the middle class. There's a constant
pressure from the audience to coopt the artists and get them to uphold the
status quo.''

In his own plays, Mr. Gray noted, protagonists are often too complex to be
easily categorized as good or evil. The reporter in ''How I Got That Story,''
for example, is an innocent, but his innocence assumes a measure of guilt as the
play progresses.  ''Audiences want to be clued in as to how to respond to a
character,'' Mr. Gray said, and when they aren't, or when there's ''a lot of
swearing,'' an audience can be alienated. ''But they'll come,'' he added, ''to
pay their cultural dues.''

In addition to his own original work, Mr. Gray does commissions from the
theater, the most recent having been ''Kingdom Come,'' his adaptation of O.E.
Rolvaag's ''Giants of the Earth,'' a sweeping novel about 19th-century Norwegian
immigration to the Middle West.  The work, which opened in January, has been w
ell received. He is currently working on the season closer, a ver se adaptation
of ''Secret Injury, Secret Revenge,'' by the 17t h-century Spanish playwright
Calderon.

But it is Mr. Gray's Vietnam play that has brought him the most renown. ''How I
Got That Story'' has been done at several regional theaters around the country.
Carole Rothman, who directed the New York premiere last season, also staged the
play at the Kennedy Center, and is directing the new production, as well.
Another production is currently at the GeVa Theater in Rochester.

The play arouses strong audience response wherever it has been presented. The
playwright and his various directors have made a particular effort to invite
veterans to the show, contacting local groups with veterans affiliations.
Reactions vary. On opening night in Rochester, for example, two veterans left
after one of the more violent scenes. ''One had been in Vietnam, the other had
been in World War II,'' Mr. Gray said, ''and they'd just found it impossible to
go through in the theater.''

Most, however, stay. After seeing the show in Chicago, a black veteran
approached the playwright. '' I don't know if anyone can understand who wasn't
there,'' he said. ''But I fell in love with that country.'' ''That really
frightened me,'' Mr. Gray recalled.  ''Veteran audiences have been enormously
and freely responsive, in a way that sometimes non-veteran audiences are
constrained from being.'' Veterans, he suggests, are generally more accepting of
the play's nihilistic humor than those who did not experience the war first
hand.

Though the original New York production received positive notices, Mr. Gray was
surprised to discover commercial interest in a play of his. ''The needs of the
commercial theater seem farther and farther away from me,''he insisted. He does
not think that the people paying $40 a ticket for a Broadway show are the same
audience as those who come to see h is plays, or even that the experience is in
any way similar. The cost alone, Mr. Gray said, ''changes the event, makes it a
differen t occasion. I'm certainly not ambitious to get into thatarena.'' In f
act, it comes as a bit of a shock to him to learn that tickets to '' How I Got
That Story'' will cost as much as $17.

Mr. Gray is anxious to return to Wisconsin after the show opens.  There is the
Calderon project to finish, of course, and new plays to write. Asked to reflect
on what it is that compels him to write plays, Mr. Gray paused for a long
moment. Like the reporter in ''How I Got That Story,'' he is an obsessive
observer constantly seeking to explain what he sees and how it relates to him.
''The reason I write,'' he responded, ''is my need to find out what I think and
feel. Writing what I see, in a way that incorporates my reaction to what I see,
helps me to live life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of playwright Amlin Gray photo of players in ''How
I Got That Story''

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CENTRAL AMERICAN AGONIES: THE MEXICAN VIEW

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 598 words


To the Editor:

Mexico's approach to the turmoil in Central America may provide lessons for the
direction of U.S. foreign policy.  From Mexico's perspective, it is not Moscow,
Havana or, to quote Secretary Haig, ''Cuba's new-found ally, Nicaragua,'' which
inject tensions into the region. Central American instability arises instead
from far more complex internal economic, social and political forces locked into
the histories of the different countries.

Guerrillas fight not to carry the banner of Marxism or to promote Cuban, Soviet
or Nicaraguan interests. They oppose existing regimes in order, primarily, to
address the national problems that have built up during the 20th century:
massive poverty, unequal income distribution, malnutrition, illiteracy,
political repression.

Raymond Bonner's recent interviews with the Salvadoran rebels (news story Jan.
26) appear to substantiate Mexico's emphasis on the internal national rather
than the external Communist settings as the chief arena of unrest.

By stressing the ''Communist'' external forces, especially in El Salvador, the
U.S. may be falling into the trap of dealing with consequences rather than
causes.

A predominantly military approach to El Salvador has predictable results:
greater involvement over time, alignment with those who likely will use U.S.
military power to restrict political participation, and the crystallization of
opposition within the country and within the region - not excluding allies such
as Mexico and Venezuela.

Washington may only prolong the inevitable process of change and wind up on the
wrong side. Current emphasis on military solutions does not seem balanced
against hindsight. U.S military involvement in Vietnam made allies out of
traditional adversaries: the North Vietnamese and the Chinese. Washington's aid
and intrigue in Iran helped set the scene for the Shah's overthrow and for
massive anti-Americanism. Economic militancy against Cuba in 1960-61 helped push
Cuba into Mosc ow's hands.

The keys to U.S. foreign policy may lie more in the direction of strengthened
trade relations in the Central American region and the encouragement of maximum
domestic participation in the political processes.

Mexico's perspective should not be disregarded. It is close to the action in
Central America, and its own stakes in the outcome are high. Its oil resources
are located near the Guatemalan border, where instability is growing.

Mexico's own 1910 revolution eventually produced one of the most stable
political systems in Latin America, a unique system of checks and balances among
its own left and right forces. Yet in 1968 Mexico faced many of the problems now
at work in Central America: guerrilla eruptions, urban violence and massive
demonstrations, including the famous university outbreak. As a reaction to these
problems, the country opened its political system - much as it now is
encouraging in El Salvador - by legalizing leftist parties.

It still has problems: corruption, strong regional bosses, bureaucratic
inefficiencies. But its record in balancing contending groups is unique.

Mexico would like to see the U.S. strengthen its trade ties with Central
America, demonstrate greater willingness to work with international
organizations to promote peaceful political change, talk less about military
solutions and, indeed, even recognize Cuba in the future as a means to wean it
slowly away from Moscow.

Mexico's approach merits our attention.
W. RAYMOND DUNCAN, Visiting Scholar, Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and
Peace, Stanford, Calif., Feb. 6, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S WRONG WITH THE MILITARY?

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3444 words


Senator Gary Hart, Democrat of Colorado, is a member of the Senate Armed
Services Committee. His legislative aide, William S. Lind, helped him prepare
this article.
By Gary Hart

There is an anecdote about a conversation in the mid-1930's betweenthe French Pr
ime Minister, Leon Blum, and Charles de Gaulle, then a French Army c olonel. The
future leader of France reproached Blum about the sta te of the country's
defenses.

Blum was nettled. ''But we are spending more for defense than the previous
Government!'' ''It is what you are spending it on,'' de Gaulle said, ''that I
want to discuss.'' What they were spending it on was bigness. The French had the
largest - and, by most accounts, finest -army in the world. They underwrote huge
military budgets. They constructed the most massive defense installation since
the Great Wall of China - the Maginot line.

And when World War II came, all of it collapsed. Hit by the German blitzkrieg of
1940, the French would try to seal off a panzer breakthrough by forming a new
defense line 10 miles to the rear - only to find that the Germans had bypassed
it already. Twenty, 30, 50 miles back - it made no difference; the Germans were
always beyond the new defenses before the French were ready. The situation
continued to deteriorate at an ever-increasing pace, until the French,
recognizing their inability to react in time, gave up.

What had happened? In his book ''To Lose a Battle,'' Alistair Horne puts his
finger on the essential reason. Realizing that, in combat, ideas were at least
as important as weapons, the Germans had overhauled their strategic and tactical
doctrines of World War I. The French General Staff, on the other hand, ''allowed
itself to become bogged down in bureaucratic method; paperasserie, as the French
call it, the blight to which all armies are susceptible, flourished. It was
difficult to see where the power of decision lay. ... There was not much
discussion on a higher strategic and tactical plane, and what there was tended
to follow abstractly intellectual paths from which little practical ever
emerged.''

After seven years on the Senate Armed Services Committee, I am convinced that we
are well along the road to repeating the French mistake. It has been more than
30 years since the last clear-cut American victory, the brilliant and audacious
landing at Inchon.  Vietnam, the Pyrrhic victory in the Mayaguez affair and the
failed Iranian rescue attempt all attest to some deep-seated problems in our
armed services. Yet our national defense debate, in Congress and in the press,
continues to revolve largely around how much to spend. New ideas, from inside or
outside the services, are seldom heard and less often welcomed.

A growing number of my Congressional colleagues have come to feel that there is
something profoundly wrong. We have joined in what amounts to a military reform
movement, an alliance of (mostly younger) military officers, civilian defense
analysts and members of Congress. The reformers' goal is to bring our defense
priorities back into line with what history tells us is important in winning -
and, therefore, deterring - wars.

In seeking to determine where we have gone wrong, we must start by looking at
the basic building blocks of any military - (1) personnel, (2) tactics and
strategy and (3) hardware.

Personnel questions are usually discussed in terms of pay, service entrance
tests, and so on. But these issues miss many of the most critical aspects of
military personnel policy.

One such issue is unit cohesion, the psychological bonding between individuals
that takes place within the small, basic unit - the fire team, the squad, the
aircraft crew, the ship's section. In the stress and chaos of combat, people
fight less for ''king and country'' than for their buddies. If the person next
to them is not a buddy but a stranger, they are more apt to sit out the fight or
break and run.

Cohesion can develop only when a unit contains the same people for long periods.
It takes time for strangers to come to rely on one another. Today, we do not
provide that time. Many Army combat companies have a personnel turnover rate of
25 percent every three months, the highest in the world. So our troops remain
strangers to one another, and strangers do not fight well together.

The present Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Edward C. Meyer, has recognized this
problem. The Army is experimenting with ways to improve unit cohesion, such as
adopting the British practice of having people spend their entire service career
in a single regiment. These initiatives are vitally important if our All
Volunteer Force is to succeed.  Troops and noncommissioned office rs are more
likely to reenlist in a regiment where they can continu e serving with their
friends. The more people re-enlist, the fewer new recruits we need.

When we look at tactics and strategy, we find that here, too, basics tend to be
ignored. Our doctrine in this field is based on a style of warfare known as
''firepower-attrition,'' the object being to destroy the enemy man by man,
killing his troops and blowing up his equipment faster than he can do the same
to us. We have fought this way for more than a ce ntury. The Union won the Civil
War with firepower and attrition, overwhelming the Confederacy with more men and
more guns , more supplies and more firepower. We rolled the same way over the
Germans in 1918 and the Axis in World War II.

This style, however, is badly outdated. Firepower-attrition can work for the
side with superior numbers, an advantage we no longer possess. We cannot
overwhelm the Soviet Union with superiority in manpower and materiel. We need a
different style of warfare - ''maneuver warfare.'' Here, the object is to
destroy the enemy's cohesion - and the opposing commander's ability to think
clearly - by creating surprising and dangerous situations faster than he can
cope with them.

The German exploit in 1940 is a good example. So are most of the Israeli
campaigns and Stonewall Jackson's Shenandoah Valley campaign in the Civil War.
The Marine Corps is showing openness toward the maneuver concept; the Second
Marine Division has proclaimed maneuver warfare as its doctrine. The Army is
also beginning to show interest: Maneuver ideas are reflected in one segment of
''Air/ Land Battle 2000,'' a briefing for other services and members of Congress
on the way the Army will fight in the year 2000. But the Army briefing is
internally contradictory, most of it being devoted to further promotion of
complex weaponry and linear defenses, while the Marine effort has largely been
the product of local initiative.

A new way of looking at the nature of conflict has been explored in the work of
a retired Air Force colonel named John Boyd. While still a captain, Boyd
developed the basics for the system of air combat currently used by the United
States. His ideas were influential in the design of the F-16, possibly the
world's finest fighter plane.

Conflict, Boyd argues, is a matter of ''observation-orientationdecision-action
cycles,'' which each contending commander consistently repeats. First, the
commander observes - not only with his eyes and ears but with his radar,
reconnaissance, etc. He orients - that is, he forms a mental picture of his
relationship to his opponent. On the basis of this picture, he determines a
course of action - he decides. He acts. Then he begins observing again, to see
the effect of his action.

The commander with the faster cycle will eventually win, because he is already
doing something different by the time the enemy gets to the action part of his
own cycle. The enemy's action becomes irrelevant. If one side is consistently
faster, the margin of irrelevance keeps growing, until the enemy either panics
or becomes passive. At that point, he has lost.

It stands to reason that rapid execution of the Boyd cycle requires commanders
with boldness, imagination and initiative. Yet by and large, this is not the
type of person being promoted in our armed services today. The cycle puts a
premium on decentralization, since rapid decisions can be made only by the
officer on the scene. Yet we are busy centralizing our command systems with the
latest technology, so the President or a general in Washington can direct a
platoon halfway around the world.

The Boyd theory has implications for military equipment as well.  In research
and development, as well as in procurement of new weapons, the changes made must
be quick and major, so as to make the enemy's equipment irrelevant. In our
military establishment, the changes are far too slow. A major new weapons system
can be 10 to 20 years in development. Our procurement policy favors weapons so
complex and expensive that we must keep them in service for decades to get our
perceived money's worth. The Navy, for instance, has built itself around the big
aircraft carrier for more than 30 years.

And much of our equipment is too complex to work well on the battlefield. Look,
for example, at the Army's new M-1 tank. It has all the technology money can buy
- a gas turbine engine like an airplane's, a computer to control the gun,
special layered armor to stop enemy antitank missiles. But it has to stop for
repairs every 43 miles; the engine eats up so much fuel that it gets only one
mile for every 3.86 gallons; the troops often cannot even operate, much less
maintain, the computer, and the armor is ineffective against shells fired by
enemy tanks. Is it really an improvement over the proved M-60 tank, which costs
half as much?

Pentagon spokesmen have taken to calling this a debate between quality and
quantity. They portray the services as supporters of quality, wanting only the
finest weapons for our soldiers, sailors and airmen. They argue that this
necessarily leads to very costly, very complex weapons - the M-1 tank, the F-15
fighter, the big nuclear aircraft carrier. By contrast, they label the military
reformers as people who are willing to accept inferior weapons in order to buy
more of them - or, sometimes, si mply to save money.

In fact, the real debate is between two different definitions of quality. The
Pentagon defines quality in technical terms: High technology equals quality. The
military reform movement defines quality tactically, in terms of the
characteristics that are most important in actual combat. That definition leads
the ref ormers to emphasize suc h characteristics as: Small size.  Often, being
seen means getting killed.  Reliability , ruggedness and ease of maintenance.
Fragile equipment is soon out o f action.  Rapid effec t. Our highly touted
antitank missiles, to cite one shortcoming, require the gunner to guide the
missile for about 20 seconds, a ve ry long time when someone is shooting at you.
Numbers. In tactical terms, quantity is an important quality. A navy that dep
ends on only 13 ships - our 13 large aircraft carriers - is a vulner able navy.
The finest fighter plane in the world is in serious troub le if it is
outnumbered three to one or five to one by enemy fighter s.

The same characteristics that give a weapon tactical quality - small size,
simplicity, ruggedness - also tend to make it cheaper.  Thus, the practical
choice is not between quality and quantity but between technological quality in
small numbers and tactical quality in large numbers. In other words, in most
cases we can choose between a small number of weapons likely to be unreliable in
combat and a large number of more effective weapons. Current Pentagon policy
prefers the former.

Where have these misguided policies come from? To answer that question, we must
confront some serious problems in the military education and promotion systems.

All organizations need a balance among several different types of abilities -
leaders, to motivate other people to overcome obstacles; managers, to organize
procedures and processes, and theorists, to determine what the product should
be. In a military service, the theorist's role is particularly important; it is
the theorist, more than the leader or manager, who understands the art of war as
a whole.

Unfortunately, in our armed forces today, these three roles have gotten badly
out of balance. Our military educational institutions too often stress
management, not leadership or theory. A cadet can graduate from West Point or a
midshipman from Annapolis with only a single one-semester course in military
history. As one cadet recently wrote, ''Cadets are not trained to think and
lead, but rather to respond and manage, a situation that we find deplorable.''

A few of our military colleges have begun to teach about warfare.The Naval War
College reformed its curriculum several years ago to give greater attention to
history; the students now begin by reading Thucydides. The Air Force Academy has
just added four semesters of ''military studies'' to the one-semester history
course. The Marines' Amphibious Warfare School has begun teaching maneuver
warfare, thanks to the initiative of a single lieutenant colonel.

But in other schools, students are likely to pass through the entire curriculum
without even hearing about issues such as style of warfare. Several years ago,
at the Marine Corps Command and Staff College, only about a dozen students
signed up for the militaryhistory elective; several times that number preferred
a course in aerobics and running. The Army's Command and General Staff College
at Fort Leavenworth has just expanded its physical-education program; to make
time for it, the military-history reading requirement was reduced from 14 books
to only four.

Neither gym class nor electrical-engineering nor management courses are likely
to help produce new George Pattons. General Patton, himself a lifelong student
of military history, once wrote to Maxwell Taylor, then Superintendent of West
Point, ''I am convinced that nothing I learned in electricity or hydraulics or
in higher mathematics or in drawing in any way contributed to my military
career. Therefore, I would markedly reduce or wholly jettison the above
subjects.''

Poor education in the military schools is reinforced by poor training in the
field. To become an expert in tactics, a commander needs to spend time in
free-play exercises, where he faces an opponent who is trying to surprise,
confuse and defeat him. Instead, most of our exercises follow rigid scripts,
where everyone knows well in advance what he and his opponent will do and when.
It is more like ballet than war. It is management, not leadership or tactics.

The promotion process further reinforces the manager's predominance.
''Efficiency'' and ''zero defects,'' the hallmarks of the successful manager,
are the best tickets to success. Yet the leader and the theorist seldom meet the
''zero defects'' test. Their imaginative approach to problems naturally leads to
some mistakes, and the promotion system punishes them for these mistakes without
rewarding them for innovation. So problems persist and grow, with the underlying
reasons often unrecognized and the proffered solutions largely conventional and
u ninspired.

How did this situation come about? To some extent, the question answers itself:
If the military schools do not provide an education in the art of war, and if
those who educate themselves and act on their knowledge are not promoted, there
will be few at the top to see the need. But that is not the whole answer. We
must look deeper still, into how our armed services function as inst itutions.

There are essentially two institutional models, the bureaucratic and the
socialized. In bureaucratic organizations, individuals focus on doing their
jobs, defined in narrow ''in-box, out-box'' terms.  This model has become
typically American. We see the attitudes it produces in the paper-pushing
bureaucrat, the Congressman or Senator interested only in getting more grants
for his own district or state, the assembly-line worker who watches the clock
instead of the quality of his work, the executive seeking laws to throttle
foreign competition instead of improving his product.

And we see it in the military. Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr., the former Chief of
Naval Operations, has described some of the ways it works in the Navy. For the
last quarter-century or more, he writes, ''there have been three powerful
'unions,' as we call them, in the Navy - the aviators, the submariners and the
surface sailors - and their rivalry has played a large part in the way the Navy
has been directed. ...  Whichever union a commander comes from, it is hard for
him not to favor fellow members, the men he has worked with most closely, when
he constructs a staff or passes out choice assignments. It is hard for him not
to think first of the needs of his branch, the needs he feels most deeply, when
he works up a budget. It is hard for him not to stress the capability of his
arm, for he has tested it himself, when he plans an action.''

The bureaucrat's narrow focus leads him to believe that the success of his small
group within the organization is more important than the goals of the
organization as a whole. The socialized model, on the other hand, defines an
individual's job quite differently. It seeks to persuade all who work within the
organization to focus on its overall objectives.

This is the approach used by such successful corporations as Toyota, Datsun,
Sony and I.B.M. A professor from Tokyo University gave an example in a talk at
Stanford. He told of a San Francisco bank that had been doing poorly and was
bought by a Japanese bank, which sent in new Japanese management. The American
employees said, ''Tell us what to do differently.'' The Japanese set forth the
values and goals of their bank. The Americans said, ''That's all fine, but tell
us what to do.'' The Japanese continued to explain the values and goals of their
corporation.

The Americans, who wanted detailed instructions, were resentful at first, and
productivity fell still further. Finally, they came to understand that they were
to use their own intelligence and initiative - not only within their narrow jobs
but in everything they could do - to further the bank's goals and values.
Productivity rose dramatically, and the bank became one of the most successful
in the city.

At one time, our military services used this philosophy. But the Army, since its
expansion in 1940, has increasingly hewed to the bureaucratic model; the Air
Force adopted that model when it separated from the Army, and the Navy has been
vacillating between the two approaches. Today, among our armed services, only
the Marine Corps is committed to the socialized model. Not surprisingly, the
Marines are the service most open to new ideas, such as maneuver warfare and
light, simple armored vehicles.

Bureaucratic behavior thus lies at the core of America's military inadequacies.
It is a far more fundamental problem than the budget level of any given year.
War demands rapid change, to present the enemy with the baffling and the opaque,
resolving quickly into the surprising and dangerous. But change is
bureaucratically uncomfortable; it upsets the existing arrangements, the
traditional fiefs. In industry, bureaucratic behavior leads to bankruptcies like
that of Penn-Central. In government, it leads to massive waste. In war, it leads
to defeats such as Austria's humiliation by Prussia in 1866 and France's
collapse in 1940.

Early in this century, the British Navy underwent a series of dramatic and very
controversial reforms at the hands of Adm. Sir John Fisher. In his 1923 book
''The World Crisis, Part 1, 1911-14,'' Winston Churchill wrote of these reforms:

''There is no doubt whatever that Fisher was right in nine-tenths of what he
fought for. His great reforms sustained the power of the Royal Navy at the most
critical period in its history. He gave the Navy the kind of shock which the
British Army received at the time of the South African War. After a long period
of serene and unchallenged complacency, the mutter of distant thunder could be
heard. It was Fisher who hoisted the storm signals and beat all hands to
quarters.  He forced every department of the Naval Service to review its
position and question its own existence. He shook them and beat them and cajoled
them out of slumber into intense activity. But the Navy was not a pleasant place
while this was going on.''
The Pentagon may not be a pleasant place while we re-examine and re form our
military services. But, as in Fisher's time, we can hear th e distant thunder.
It is far less pleasant to confront the new re alities for the first time on the
battlefield.

The time for reform has come.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illust rations : photo of Col. John Boyd (page 19) photo of American
soldiers in Sinai Desert (page 19) photo of U.S.S. Nimitz (page 18) photo of M-1
tank (page 17)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ATLANTIC: IN SEARCH OF A RARE ROLE

BYLINE: By Diane McWhorter; Diane McWhorter is a Boston-based journalist.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6964 words


Mortimer B. Zuckerman jumped up and down, whooping, when the December Atlantic
Monthly's cover flashed on the television screen during the Nov. 10 ''CBS
Evening News.'' The Atlantic's now-famous David Stockman story - in which
President Reagan's budget director revealed his doubts about the Reagan budget
-had broken. Zuckerman, a 44-year-old multimillionaire real-estate developer and
the magazine's new owner, left the banquet he was attending and rushed to his
Boston town house to do the yeoman chores that gladden driven men. He made sure
that copies of The Atlantic would be at the White House by morning. When a
newsman couldn't wait overnight, Zuckerman dictated the Stockman article over
the phone.

Fourteen miles away, in a Boston suburb, 44-year-old William Whitworth, who a
year earlier had ended a quiet 15-year tenancy at The New Yorker to become
editor of The Atlantic, was watching the news at home. ''I was surprised at the
play it got,'' says Whitworth, an editor obsessed with details not scoops. He
anguished over two errant commas in his debut issue last April. '' 'When was the
last time you were on the nightly news?' is not the basis on which I want to be
judged. I didn't feel jubilant or anything. Mort felt that way enough for both
of us.''

It was an odd couple, the entrepreneurial dervish and the literary
perfectionist, who produced The Atlantic's ''Education of David Stockman.'' This
major coup by the magazine's new, unorthodox management was almost as newsworthy
as the budget director's published revelations that the Administration's
economic program had been devised in haste and perhaps in bad faith. The
Stockman story's author, William Greider, a news editor at The Washington Post,
had, in effect, scooped his own paper in a magazine that over recent years had
nursed a reputation for irrelevance. Suddenly, the formerly ''stodgy,''
''moribund'' magazine was hailed by a newsweekly columnist as the ''famed
Atlantic.'' A magazine with minimal newsstand sales - 10 percent of its
circulation of 335,000 - became a scalper's item. The literary quintessence of
upper middlebrow turned up three times in Johnny Carson's monologues.

In the publishing and advertising fields, Zuckerman's Atlantic is seen as a test
case for the viability of the so-called ''quality general-interest magazine'' -
Harper's and, in its previous incarnation, The Saturday Review - as opposed to
mass-circulation publications like Reader's Digest and Life. When Zuckerman
bought The Atlantic in l980, its finances were as bleak as its contents.
Issue-oriented magazines seemed to have little place - economically or
journalistically - in a time quite different from the 19th century that bred
them.

Yet recent Atlantic history has raised the possibility that such magazines might
revive as forums for public issues, perhaps even as self-sufficient businesses.
Unlike the typical buyer of an ailing publication, Zuckerman has not drastically
revamped his. Rather, the ''new'' Atlantic is the same old mix of national or
international affairs and belles-lettres. Only now, some of the staples seem
fresher. Observers have hypothesized that there are ''two Atlantics'':
Zuckerman's (the flashy, newsy one) and Whitworth's (the reflective one).
Actually, the two men - even though their temperaments, backgrounds and
ambitions could hardly be more disparate - appear to be riding in tandem,
heading in the same direction.

The evolution of the Stockman article provides some insight into the symbiosis
between Zuckerman and Whitworth, unconventional in a field where separation of
business and editor ial staffs is considereda condition of serious journalism.
It was Zuc kerman who enlisted its author. While searching for an editor to succ
eed Robert Manning, whomZuckerman had dismissed in May 1980, two week s after
The Atlantic's sale, the new owner interviewed William Greid er. He wasn't
interestedin the job, but, according to Zuckerman, the two men hit it off. Keep
The Atlantic in mind, Zuckerman told him.

In January, Greider asked The Altantic's Washington editor, James Fallows,
whether the magazine might be interested in his plan to follow Stockman through
the budget-cutting process. The second week in October, Greider submitted the
finished piece.

The December issue was by then in the late stages of production, but after
consulting The Atlantic's Washington editor, James Fallows, Whitworth decided
that the piece was ''timely and perishable'' because of the year-end
Congressional budget fight. He yanked the December cover story, on the diamond
industry (which resurfaced on the February cover).

When it came time to reap the glory Zuckerman had sown, the man who had ably
cultivated it was full of demurrals. ''I can't really claim much credit, except
that I'm not stupid enough to turn away a good idea,'' says Whitworth,
admittedly nervous about having to live up to The Atlantic's press clippings.
''I'm afraid people may think we've set out to be provocative. We're not trying
to get 'hot.' ''

While Whitworth was protesting too much, Zuckerman was not letting the fire go
out. Twice, he ordered the issue back to press, printing 210,000 nonsubscription
copies, three times the normal run. He also authorized the costly air shipment
of the issue to sold-out newsstands. All this added up to an extra $40,000.

The precise amount Zuckerman has been spending is as pertinent to The Atlantic's
future as editorial vitality. Some of the expenditures have already paid off.
His quintupling of the nonstaff art and editorial budget -now about $750,000 a
year -financed Whitworth's first, pre-Stockman venture into the limelight.
October's excerpt of the first volume of Robert Caro's Lyndon Johnson biography
made national headlines with its assertions that L.B.J. had accepted ''envelopes
stuffed with cash,'' which he used to ''bend other politicians to his will.''
For exclusive rights to the book, The Atlantic paid a budget-breaking sum that
Zuckerman will only say was ''up in the stratosphere - way more than $50,000.''
Seymour Hersh's coveted book on Henry Kissinger, which will appear in The
Atlantic beginning this spring, fetched a ''comparable'' price, according to
Zuckerman. Another expensive item, a portion of Garry Wills's book on the
Kennedys, was last month's cover story.

The bulk of Zuckerman's outlay, however, has been for a less rewarding purpose:
to cover The Atlantic's accelerating cash losses.  The company's operating
condition, Zuckerman says, was far worse than the previous owners had
represented to him before the sale.  Since summer, buyer and sellers have been
arguing the point in lawsuits and countersuits.

The litigation and the attendant exposure of The Atlantic's insolvency have lent
an urgency to the chronic concern about its fate. Notwithstanding Zuckerman's
commitment to the magazine (''till death do us part''), he admits that his ego,
nourished by phenomenal success in real estate, could not tolerate a losing
property. And the lawsuits' disclosure that he had advanced ''substantially in
excess of $1 million'' over 14 months to cover operating losses (exclusive of
his budgetary increases) did little to assure advertisers that the magazine was
a good candidate for survival. In the image-conscious magazine industry,
''skinny breeds skinny,'' and the advertising diet for the entire class of
general-interest magazines was already dangerously deficient.

Would the new Atlantic attract enough readers and advertisers to survive
independent of a Zuckerman subsidy? He has pledged ''to pay whatever it takes to
get the best writers in America''; Whitworth has a reputation for working very
well with the best. Would the partnership be able to reverse the funereal course
of the company's finances?

The Atlantic's 124-year history is punctuated by bankruptcy and disfavor. When
Ellery Sedgwick bought it from Houghton Mifflin in 1908, its circulation of
16,000 was half the 1860 number. Nor had it been a great literary magazine since
William Dean Howells resigned as editor in 1881. But because it was the forum of
America's first indigenous literary community - James Russell Lowell (the first
editor), Oliver Wendell Holmes, Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau -
''for a large section of the American public,'' as the magazine historian Frank
Luther Mott wrote in the 1930's, ''whatever The Atlantic printed was
literature.''

By the late 1970's, The Atlantic had fallen from what Mott had called its
''perpetual state of literary grace''; the role of the once mighty ''quality
magazines'' had sorely diminished. As recently as 1965, Harper's and The
Atlantic were a kind of road map for what the former Harper's editor Lewis
Lapham describes as a ''fairly unified field of informed opinion.'' The
''information boom'' or ''communications explosion'' beginning in the 1960's
fragmented t he magazine-reading public into ''many more publ ics,'' says
Lapham, ''speaking many private languages.'' Special- interest publications as
narrowly focused as Sail and American Beag le thrived on the much advertised
self-absorption and conspicuous co nsumption of 1970's ''life styles,'' while
broader-gauged ne wcomers like Ms., Psychology Today, Mother Jones and, more
currently, the rash of scien ce and technology magazines, competed for the more
cerebral Harper's-Atlantic audience.

Meanwhile, in response to the growing sophistication and immediacy of television
journalism, newspapers of the 1970's turned into daily magazines, with fat
feature sections and slick designs; their long, investigative pieces were not
simple reactions to events, but magazinelike analyses of the forces behind the
news. Papers like The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times assumed the
national editorial mandate that was once reserved for weeklies and monthlies.
Syndicated columns and Op-Ed pages were usurping the serious journals'
opinion-shaping role.

At the beginning of the 1970's, Willie Morris's Harper's, Clay Felker's New York
and Harold Hayes's Esquire were all considered ''hot'' magazines, fueled by the
cultural ferment of the times and by their own literary trailblazing - the New
Journalism. The Atlantic, if less ''hip,'' had been publishing hard-hitting
Vietnam journalism (much of it very sympathetic to the antiwar movement) - Dan
Wakefield's ''Supernation at Peace and War,'' Ward Just's ''Soldiers.'' At no
other period of Robert Manning's 14-year editorship was the magazine better
served by his preoccupation with hard news (from his many years with the United
Press and Time) and his working knowledge of government (from his tour with John
F.  Kennedy's State Department).

Watergate sustained The Atlantic's vigor, but toward the end of the 1970's,
''the magazine didn't have a program,'' says the former Atlantic executive
editor Michael Janeway. The other magazines were similarly at sea. Esquire was
struggling to recapture the magic it had lost as a consumer-oriented fortnightly
under its previous editor, Clay Felker. The Saturday Review, never having
recovered from the 1971 departure of its editor, Norman Cousins, was in l980
recast as an arts publication under yet a new owner. The best-known journalists
were reluctant to work for magazine rates. Youthful talent was joining the
screenwriting gold rush. Book excerpts, consequently, were filling pages that
used to provide book ideas.

This editorial listlessness only further alienated readers apathetic about the
public affairs preoccupying Harper's and The Atlantic, whose liberal optimism,
furthermore, was no longer relevant to the national mood of retrenchment. The
liveliest cultural debates of the late 1970's were taking place in
neoconservative journals of opinion such as Commentary and The Public Interest.
In June 1980, Harper's announced that it was folding, and even though it was
revived that summer by the John D. and Catherine MacArthur Foundation of Chicago
and the Atlantic Richfield Foundation, obituaries for the serious
general-interest magazine had darkened editorial pages across the country.

It was not a shortage of intellectual currency that was the immediate cause of
Harper's temporary demise. Zuckerman had considered buying it to merge it with
The Atlantic, but its annual losses exceeded $1.5 million. Although The
Atlantic's deficit was smaller - chiefly because its subscriptions were more
profitable and less transient - it, too, was going into a financial tailspin.
Second-class postage rates had jumped 500 percent since 1971. Paper costs had
nearly tripled since 1973. These increases had led The Atlantic to indelible red
ink by 1975.

The advertising sales force that The Atlantic shared with Harper's felt the
squeeze from both magazines, whose publishers competed - bitterly at times. In
the late 1970's, a demoralized Harper-Atlantic Sales watched its accounts drift
to what one advertising executive calls ''the new kids on the block'' -sumptuous
glossies like Quest (now defunct), Geo (recently sold and struggling) and
Smithsonian (doing well). Beginning in 1975 (except for break-even 1978), The
Atlantic lost between $50,000 and $365,000 annually, until it dropped $495,000
in fiscal 1980. In 1981 - a particularly bad year because of the disarray of
Harper-Atlantic Sales after the crisis at Harper's -the Atlantic had 190 fewer
advertising pages than the 498 of 1974.

Around 1977, Robert Manning began to feel that ''without an infusion of capital,
the magazine would move down the road to suffocation.'' In 1980, he says, he was
spending the same number of editorial dollars his predecessor had in 1964. The
magazine's largest stockholder was Marion D. Campbell, who had inherited her
interest from her parents. In 1978, Manning and Garth Hite, The Atlantic's
publisher, suggested to Mrs. Campbell that she ''begin to listen to knocks on
the door.''

In late February 1980, Mort Zuckerman tendered $3.6 million for The Atlantic
Monthly Company (the magazine, the Atlantic Monthly Press, the office building,
on a prime Boston street corner, and a debt of $500,000), along with an
agreement to enrich the operating budget by $1.5 million over three years. The
stockholders unanimously approved, and on April 30 the deal was closed.

The following July, Garth Hite, 15-percent owner of the company and Zuckerman's
most frequent contact among the sellers, gave the new owner cash-loss
projections for the current year. The figure was $871,000, according to
Zuckerman; this was 14 times greater than the ''preliminary estimates'' Hite had
worked out in January, a month before the purchase-and-sale agreement was
signed. Hite, w ho says he told Zuckerman that the January figures were ''in no
way representative of an Atlantic Monthly Company selling pros pectus,''
maintains that the $871,000 projection included Zuckerman' s budgetaryincreases.
Zuckerman denies this, claiming that Hite never offered him any explanation for
the discrepancy.

Invoking a provision in the purchase-and-sale agreement protecting the buyer
against misrepresentations by the sellers, Zuckerman refused to pay five of the
major stockholders their second installment of the purchase price, due April 30,
1981. (The 11 Atlantic employees who were stockholders were paid on time;
otherwise, mass resignation might have ensued.) On June 11, the five unpaid
stockholders - including Hite (whose share was $540,000) and Marion Campbell
($900,000) - sued Zuckerman in Federal District Court for the balance due.

Zuckerman countersued, alleging fraud. In a 1978 confidential report to The
Atlantic's directors, which Zuckerman obtained, Hite stressed that, in order to
attract the ''right buyer,'' it was essential not to divulge the company's
financial condition. Hite defends this as hyperbole necessary to persuade the
board to do something about the magazine's economic predicament. Zuckerman also
produced a memo from Hite to The Atlantic's treasurer and its circulation
director. ''We must do everything we can,'' it said, ''to minimize the 1979
loss.'' Cautioning them against ''anything illegal or unethical,'' he reminded
them that what went on the bottom line ''could make a difference to each of you
of, perhaps, $50,000.'' Hite subsequently described the note, written shortly
after the two employees became stockholders, as ''an appeal to double-check all
the circulation receipts for the fiscalyear.''

The audited 1979 losses were around $365,000; Zuckerman claims that the auditors
were misled and that the deficit was actually $150,000 more. Fiscal 1980,
Zuckerman alleged, was similarly dressed up. According to Hite's office
correspondence, when the treasurer found losses to be $597,000, instead of the
$350,000 Hite had estimated at the time of sale, Hite sent him a memo telling
him to ''try to create a balance that conforms to'' the purchase-and-sale
agreement. (Hite recently explained that there had been so many changes in the
agreement before it was signed, ''none of us was certain about the warranties,''
which protected Zuckerman against misrepresentations.) The audited deficit for
1980 was $495,000.

The attorney for Touche Ross, The Atlantic's auditors, says that the firm stands
by its figures. The sellers contend that it was on the basis of the Touche Ross
audits, not an unofficial sheet of cash-loss projections Hite gave him, that
Zuckerman determined the value of the company. Moreover, several weeks before
the closing, the buyer had received interim financial statements for 1980,
indicating losses of $475,000 over the first nine months. (Still, Hite reassured
Zuckerman in writing that the year's losses would be no more than $350,000.) The
sellers emphatically reject his charges of fraud. Says Hite, who left The
Atlantic last April, ''Zuckerman had 20 years of certified audits that indicated
the operating condition of the company.'' Indeed, many wondered how a
''financial wizard'' of Zuckerman's renown could have so misjudged a business,
but he says that he never entered The Atlantic's offices during the negotiations
and ''relied competely on Hite's assurances'' that the sellers' information was
accurate.

In the summer of 1981, a year after the sale, the new Atlantic publisher, Bruce
Gray, formerly publisher of CBS's World Tennis, discovered that the losses for
the current year would be much worse than the $1.5 million deficit Zuckerman was
expecting. Zuckerman's subsidy since 1980 - ''substantially more than $2
million,'' he said - represents more than double the investment stipulated in
the purchase-and-sale agreement. Five new editorial staff members have been
hired. Direct-mail solicitation of subscriptions has been doubled - a
1.2-million-piece mailing goes out twice a year - and a television campaign for
subscriptions will be tested in 1982.  Fullpage Atlantic ads in national
publications demonstrate to the advertising community the new owner's grand
intentions.

Harper-Atlantic Sales, with its staff of four and an annual budget of $850,000,
has been replaced by The Atlantic's own, individual sales office, with seven
sales employees and a $1.2 million budget.  Some advertising executives feel
that dissolving Harper-Atlantic was a mistake, since together the magazines
could deliver a circulation of more than 500,000 - the minimum circulation some
advertisers will consider. Gray contends that this will be offset by the new
strength, since breaking from Harper's, of The Atlantic's readership statistics.
A recent study by the Media Research Institute shows that, out of a field of 144
magazines, The Atlantic's audience has the highest concentration of college
graduates and managers or professionals, and ranks 12th in median household
income ($27,403).

The lavish sales and marketing efforts are part of a three-and-ahalf-year plan
that the new publis he r worked ou t with Zuckerman to make the company solvent.
The current circula tion of 335,000 should increase by about 25,000 a year to
reach 400,000 by 1985, when a year's subscription will cost $26, compared w ith
today's $18. (In contrast to most magazines, The Atlantic's subscr iption
revenues currently exceed its advertising revenues. Generally, this is not a
desirable economic condition for a publication, since the cost of production can
seldom be met by circulation revenu es alone.) The higher circulation will allow
The Atlantic to raise it s advertising rates (now $8,695 for a full-page color
ad) by about 20 percent, with an additional 10-percent-a-year increase for
inflation.According to Gray's projections, advertising pages should total 525 by
1985 (1981 had only 308), with a preponderance of four- color ads over the less
profitable black-and-whites. By Gray's estimate, gross advertising revenues in
1985 will be roughly $8.2 million (up from 1981's $1.8 million); circulation
revenues will also be ar ound $8.2 million.

Industry experts believe that the company's goals are ambitious but attainable,
given Zuckerman's aggressive promotion and a congenial economy. And the
''trends,'' as they say, are ''up.'' Newsstand sales averaged more than 54,000
copies for the last six months of 1981, compared with 29,319 for the same period
in 1980. (As of July, even before the Stockman issue, average newsstand sales
were nosing up to 40,000 copies.) The subscription-renewal rate for the last
four months of 1981 was 18 percent above the comparable figure for the previous
year. During the last six months of 1981, new subscriptions from cards inserted
in newsstand copies were more than double those for the last half of 1980.
''We're bullish, but not cocky,'' Gray said in December.

Symbol has as much currency as fact in Boston, and among the richest figures in
civic mythology is Mort Zuckerman. He is cast as the ruthless bounder,
profiteering at the expense of the city's cultural monuments. Many Bostonians
were seriously predicting he would replace the attractively worn Atlantic
Monthly building with a highrise.

Zuckerman's biography contradicts Boston's ethnophobic impression of him as a
Duddy Kravitz. True, Zuckerman is Jewish and from Montreal, but he grew up in
what he describes as a ''striving, intellectual, middle-income household,'' with
a ''classic Jewish mother.'' He graduated with ''double first-class honors'' in
economics and political theory from McGill University, then took an M.B.A. at
the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, a law degree at McGill, and an
advanced law degree at Harvard. He taught regional planning for nine years at
the Harvard Graduate School of Design. He has sat on the boards of various local
institutions.

Many Bostonians professed to see these achievements -particularly his purchase
of The Atlantic - as attempts to pirate an entree into Brahmin society. Yet
Zuckerman had consistently flouted the Yankee norm. There was nothing
shabby-genteel about the professionally assembled decor or the Matisses and
Modiglianis in his Beacon Hill town house - one of his four residences. A
Chinese houseman served his meals. His Mercedes had a telephone. He played
squash at the Harvard Club with perhaps too much competitive zest. And his
status as bachelor, ''eligible'' for a while, was regarded as ''unregenerate''
by the time he turned 40 in 1977.

His professional impetuosity also stood out. In l962, as a 24-yearold out of
Harvard Law, he had gone to work for the blue-chip development firm of Cabot
Cabot & Forbes. (Zuckerman is credited with having turned C.C.& F. around,
making his first $5 million in the process.) In 1972, two years after having
started a competing firm with another C.C.&F. executive, he sued C.C.&F. over
the value of one of its properties, in which he had an interest. Although the
court would end up awarding him more than he claimed was his share, Zuckerman,
as he puts it, ''became the heavy.''

It was another piece of real estate - a massive redevelopment project known as
Park Plaza - that made him Boston's all-purpose bete noire. In 1971, Boston's
perennial Mayor, Kevin White, picked the 33-year-old Zuck-erman's new company
for the prized job of redeveloping squalid Park Square. Stuck in the Boston
political quagmire, Park Plaza never happened. As a former head of the Boston
Redevelopment Authority assessed it recently, the city was incompetent to deal
with such large-scale projects. He and at least three other government officials
lost their jobs for failing to get it under way.

Zuckerman, the object of abundant, hostile news coverage, began to look like a
menace to well-meaning public servants and the neighborhood groups that opposed
Park Plaza on environmental grounds. He defended the project he had come to
personify, but, he says, ''people in Boston saw me as an overeducated smart
aleck.'' Nudgeand-wink political machinations indeed made him testy. (A
colleague sums up the swiftness with which he conceives real-estate deals: ''You
and I own a calculator, right? Mort does not own a calculator.'') In connection
with the most publicized objection to Park Plaza - that its buildings would cast
shadows on the Public Garden - a city councilor asked Zuckerman, ''Who's your
shadow consultant?'' ''Lamont Cranston,'' Zuckerman replied deadpan, correct ly
guessing that the Council would not recognize th e name of the old radio hero
''The Shadow.''

Ultimately, Zuckerman decided that winning over the city was a lost cause. On
Dec. 19, 1977, after investing seven years and $1.9 million in Park Plaza, he
abandoned it.

Zuckerman and his company, Boston Properties, continue to incite political
unrest when building in Boston, but 90 percent of his business nowadays is in
suburban Boston, Cambridge, Washington and Los Angeles. With seven million
square feet under development in 11 sites and five million square feet
completed, Zuckerman is one of the biggest real-estate magnates in the country,
worth more than $150 million. Yet his put-downs of the values of other
real-estate men betray his sense of the profession's unworthiness. When in his
30's, he contemplated a career in government, and worked for Presidential
candidates McGovern and Carter. By the time he was 40, he had begun to explore
gentler realms.

Over several years before buying The Atlantic, Zuckerman had looked into
acquiring Esquire, The Village Voice, The Washingtonian, Harper's and some
Boston publications. His unavailing 11th-hour bid to save The Washington Star
last summer intimated the breadth of his publishing ambitions. He has said he
wants to own ''the best weekly and the best monthly in the country'' and it is
no secret to his friends that he has his eye on The New Yorker.

To an extent, such imperial plans arise from the same entrepreneurial drive that
makes him the consummate real-estate deal maker. (''What I'm good at is putting
things together - I'm not an operating man,'' says Zuckerman, who lets his
partner Ed Linde oversee design and construction.) Certainly, his
often-expressed desire to ''contribute to the public dialogue'' is sincere. A
relative sent him a note after The Atlantic's sale, saying, ''Welcome to the
community of scholarship.'' ''It's a community I've always tried to be part
of,'' Zuckerman says. As one friend explains his will to journalistic power,
''Access to people is the most important thing to him.'' And the people whose
recognition he ultimately craves are not the Brahmins of Boston or the
softball-playing writers he summers with in the Hamptons. They are Henry
Kissinger, with whom he dined last winter (''Frankly, he asked to see me''),
George F.  Kennan (lunch) and former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara. At a
Manhattan dinner party in December, he was asking McNamara to write an article
on nuclear weapons when a woman interrupted them. ''Excuse me,'' she said. ''Is
one of you Mr. Zuckerman?''

Predictably, the dismissal of Bob Manning won Zuckerman no friends in Boston.
Few doubted the intelligence of bringing in a new editor, but that Zuckerman
recruited one without the knowledge of the incumbent -who was informed of this
by a member of his staff two weeks after the sale - did not augur a bloodless
turnover. Manning had been the matchmaker between Zuckerman and Marion Campbell,
and during the seven months of negotiations Zuckerman had maintained
emphatically that the current staff would stay on. As owner of 15 percent of The
Atlantic's stock, Manning would have tried to block the sale had this betrayal
been foreseen. Last December, Manning, who is now editor in chief of the Boston
Publishing Company, sued Zuckerman for withholding a $9,000-a-year supplement to
his pension and charged that the buyer, in concealing his intention to remove
Manning, had negotiated with the sellers in bad faith. Zuckerman, who now claims
that Manning was party to the sellers' alleged fraud in misrepresenting The
Atlantic's finances, says he will countersue to recover part of the $300,000
Manning has already received as a settlement of his employment contract and for
his stock. (Garth Hite filed a complaint similar to Manning's concerning his
pension last month.)

From the beginning, a collision between the two seemed inevitable.  Manning was
''proud,'' ''prickly,'' ''absolutely attached to certain principles of business
protocol,'' say former colleagues. He believed, as do many editors, that the
owner should not interfere in the editorial process. Zuckerman - who was being
coached by his good friend Martin Peretz, The New Republic's owner and editor in
chief - was avowedly ''not one to sit back and sign checks.''

As of the July issue, Zuckerman appeared atop the masthead as ''Chairman of the
Editorial Board.'' With Manning still in place, he was pursuing Atlantic
contributors - the science essayist Lewis Thomas and former President Richard
Nixon. He brought back as ''editor emeritus'' Manning's predecessor, Edward
Weeks, who now attended Zuckerman's editorial meetings. ''Weeks was cruelly
scornful of Bob's acquisitions,'' says one staff member. ''It was as if he had
become editor again.''

Meanwhile, before Manning's replacement had even been found, the busy
entrepreneur asked Walter Ber-nard, a former Time art director now a consultant,
to redesign the magazine; he also offered the permanent job of art director to a
respected Boston designer who declined, unwilling to execute someone else's
plan. In his search for an editor, Zuckerman consulted 30 publishing
''experts,'' including Washington Post executive editor Benjamin C. Bradlee, New
Yorker editor in chief William Shawn and the television journalist Bill Moyers.
In June 1980, he chose the effusively recomme nded William Whitworth, known as
the ''inside man'' at The New Yorker and the in-house favorite to succeed the
74-year-old Shawn.

Whitworth had been a New Yorker editor of nonfiction for eight years, having
started as a staff writer, mostly of profiles, in 1966. His career had begun at
The Arkansas Gazette, following his graduation from Little Rock's Central High
and the University of Oklahoma. He had moved on to The New York Herald Tribune
and was about to go to The New York Times when Shawn hired him.

Editing Pauline Kael, Robert Caro, Frances FitzGerald and others, Whitworth
earned a reputation for good judgment and considerate, skillful treatment of
writers. His hallmark, besides his Lilliputian handwriting, was his Talmudic
relationship with the text. He indexed longer stories to pick up repetitions and
inconsistencies; he sometimes read background material on his writers' pieces.

Whitworth turned down Zuckerman's offer, and not just because he agreed with
''Mr. Shawn'' that The New Yorker was his ''natural home.'' ''I was put off at
first because he seemed in such a hurry,'' he explains. ''I felt he didn't know
enough about me.'' The editorial sweepstakes reopened, but in August Zuckerman
returned to Whitworth and sweetened the pot, with an extremely attractive
salary, ample contractual protection and, reportedly, an interest in a Zuckerman
real-estate project. In November 1980, William Whitworth, 11th editor of The
Atlantic, arrived at 8 Arlington Street.

Though considered a coup, hiring Whitworth was probably Zuckerman's biggest
entrepreneurial gamble at The Atlantic. The sum total of Whitworth's experience
was as a manuscript editor. Because Shawn has plenary power at The New Yorker,
Whitworth had never commissioned an article, or selected an issue's contents, or
negotiated a deal with a writer or agent, had never worked with a budget or
managed a staff. New Yorker writers came up with their own story ideas, and
Whitworth arrived at The Atlantic ''uncomfortable'' about suggesting subjects to
freelances. In short, Whitworth had never performed any of the duties he was
being hired to do, and the function at which he was best - text editing - was
not, in most magazine hierarchies, the responsibility of the top editor. Yet
Zuckerman rejected more experienced candidates because he wanted ''someone who
would make his mark with The Atlantic.'' In a gesture of full support, he
retired as chairman of the editorial board.

The key variable in The Atlantic's future prosperity is: Will Whitworth make his
mark? The advertising appeal of magazines like his is predicated on an exciting
editorial product. It is axiomatic on Madison Avenue that The New Yorker, though
of high literary purpose, owes its exalted standing among advertisers to the
fact that it is ''looked at,'' if not necessarily read. The Atlantic, however,
with its minimalist graphics and its austere impression of gray type, will not
be looked at unless it is read. The magazine needs an ''incredibly powerful
image,'' according to Conde Nast's marketing director, Eckart Guthe, to attract
the notice of young, visually oriented media buyers, who base their selections
on computer analysis of audience data. As Guthe says, ''the computer is not
generally kind'' to The Atlantic's small readership, however select.

Whitworth's much anticipated premiere issue, in April 1981, was a bit
anticlimactic: The cover story, a chapter of Philip Roth's new novel (previously
excerpted in The New Yorker and Playboy), was notable mainly for the poetic
justice of the book's title, ''Zuckerman Unbound.'' But The Atlantic did attract
notice as a news maker with October's L.B.J. issue - even if much of the
extensive news coverage concerned the magazine's irresponsibility in offhandedly
asserting that Lyndon Johnson accepted ''envelopes stuffed with cash'' without
documenting the charge. (Caro's cavalier reaction to the demands for
documentation - ''Read the book'' - did not help give the magazine story
credibility.) The Stockman article two issues later provided a month of almost
constant ''impressions'' (the marketing word for incidents of exposure). While
acknowledging the importance of such publicity, Eckart Guthe says that ''unless
it's followed up, it will just be a bubble that bursts.'' Bruce Gray concurs:
''No new advertiser has taken out a schedule specifically in response to the
Stockman article.''

For someone who insists that ''The Atlantic is not in the scoop business,''
Whitworth has a curious knack for attracting scoops.  When Robert Caro's agent,
Lynn Nesbit, gave him first crack at the Lyndon Johnson biography, he seemed as
surprised as the rest of the publishing community - and apologetic besides. ''I
didn't want to poach on Mr. Shawn's territory,'' says Whitworth, who edited
Caro's biography of Robert Moses for The New Yorker. The well-publicized Caro
deal prompted Seymour Hersh to think of The Atlantic for his work-in-progress on
Henry Kissinger.

The Atlantic would be beneath the consideration of the Hershes and Caros if it
were not for its generous rates. Whitworth says that he can compete with the
industry's biggest spenders, Playboy and The New Yorker, only for the occasional
hot property; he consults with Zuckerman about expenditures that his budget
can't co ver. Most articles, he says, have been in the $1,5 00-$5,000 range, c
ompared with Manning's $200-$2,000. (The Atlantic can also offer writers
dramatic cover display, which Playboy and The New Yorker d o not.) But, says
Hersh, whose work The Atlantic has agreed to pro mote in advertisements in The
New York Times and the Washington Po st, ''it wasn't just the money - you'd be
underselling the magazine to say so. Whitworth is a wonderful editor and he's
done a helluv a job.''

In between blockbusters, Whitworth's Atlantic has been a thoughtful,
unflamboyant magazine that does not reflect the typical editor's concern about
''the mix'' of an issue or ''overkill'' on certain subjects. Lengthy book
excerpts of the Philip Roth novel, James Fallows's ''National Defense,'' Julian
Simon's ''The Ultimate Resource,'' and V.S. Naipaul's ''Among the Believers''
ran serially in his first few issues - a practice that some feel is almost
profligate, considering a monthly's space limitations. So far, the only really
ambitious ''enterprise journalism'' sponsored and published by the
Zuckerman-Whitworth team has been the Stockman article.

There are no packaging or stylistic lagniappes to lure the dubious customer.
Walter Bernard's new design - per Whitworth's wishes, ''not too beautiful'' -
has, under the day-to-day art direction of Judy Garlan, become handsome, if
still not terribly inviting. The editorial presentation of the articles is also
deliberately unprovocative.

The cover stories have been ''significant'' (Naipaul on Iran), though sometimes
almost perversely untopical (Otto Friedrich on Auschwitz) or rather tired in the
writing (Bruno Bettelheim on why children don't like to read). The
back-of-the-book arts section favors listlike essays over criticism and at times
is ''heavier'' than Whitworth, an amateur trumpet player with a passion for
popular music, would like.

Whitworth's Atlantic is, in sum, hardly a revolutionary change from the previous
regime's, except for its steadier supply of big names and big books and ''The
Education of David Stockman.'' Mostly, blockbusters aside, The Atlantic is
manifestly the product of its deliberate, firm and untrendy editor - who is
often described as ''monkish.'' He is not a glad-hander; he puts in marathon
hours at the office, subsisting late into the night on Cornnuts and other
packaged ''novelties.'' Following New Yorker custom, a few new stages have been
added to the editing process: A fact checker reviews all articles, edited by the
staff, and Whitworth edits, on galley proofs, everything in the magazine.
(Overall, the writing in The Atlantic seems more careful, but one wonders how
lines like the following from Caro's L.B.J. book slip in: ''He would sit talking
to a little girl or boy for hours - with, on his face, that great hard face to
which, it sometimes seemed, no man could bring a smile, a broad, gentle grin.'')
Freelance writers have found him open to their ideas, and decisive. He often
hears them out with little obvious enthusiasm, occasionally commenting, ''I'm
not sure that's true,'' and then abruptly offers the by-now despairing writer a
lucrative assignment.

Perhaps it is because Whitworth is an essentially cerebral creature,
uninterested in office power plays, that he has been able to work so easily and
noncompetitively with his antithesis, Mort Zuckerman. Whitworth has contractual
assurances - unusual in the business - of his complete editorial control. Yet
Zuckerman's influence has been real. The two talk virtually every day (and
Zuckerman's real-estate firm has just moved into The Atlantic Monthly building).
Several months ago, Zuckerman sent Whitworth a couple of books by Moshe Safdie,
the architect of his latest Boston development, a waterfront hotel. Impressed,
Whitworth assigned Safdie a piece on post-modernist architecture, published in
December.

Zuckerman has imposed but two editorial caveats -against viciously ad hominem
pieces and articles that ''challenge Israel's right to exist.'' They may be open
to interpretation. A few years ago, Zuckerman reneged on a commitment of 0,000
to The Nation because its coverage of Israel drew his disapproval. It had been
agreed at the time of Zuckerman's financial pledge that he would have no
editorial influence, and, arguably, an article criticizing Israel for its
military and commercial connections with South Africa (the principal piece he
found objectionable) did not dispute the country's franchise. Whitworth seems to
have circumvented potential controversies by appealing to Zuckerman's expert
opinion on such issues as the Middle East and business. This collaboration, with
the editor seeking reinforcement from his boss, has led one magazine editor to
speculate that Zuckerman may represent to Whitworth ''a different kind of Mr.
Shawn.''

On the other hand, the editor has repeatedly showed himself capable of reversing
Zuckerman, who makes a great show of playing editorial acolyte to Whitworth's
guru. He has turned away writers solicited by Zuckerman. And an insecure man
would have been alarmed when Zuckerman announced, ''What I really want to be is
one of Bill Whitworth's great writing discoveries.'' But Whitworth was
impressively coldblooded about the writing sample Zuckerman sent him, a jocular
piece about his 1977 trip to China, published in The Boston Globe.  ''Mort,'' he
said. ''I don't think funny is your department.''

Nor did he find anyth ing ominous about the gift Zuckerman presentedto him at a
recent staff party: a leatherbound copy of the April issue, embossed with the
words: ''Whitworth Bound.'' Perhaps the realissue is not whether Whitworth is
bound by his employer's expectations, but whether any editor - however
Promethean -can overcome the crises of identity and finances fettering the
magazine industry today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of James Russell Lowell (page 56) photo of William
Dean Howells (page 56) photo of Ellery Sedgwick (page 56) photo of Edward Weeks,
Charles Morton and Charles Rolo (page 56) photo of Robert Manning (page 56)
photo of William Whitworth, Mortimer Zuckerman andBruce Gray

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE AMERICAN MISSION

BYLINE: By Kenneth A. Briggs

SECTION: Section 6; Page 29, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 679 words


Like Jesuits in other areas of the world, American members of the order teach
the young, fight injustice and serve the pastoral needs of a wide variety of
Roman Catholics. The 4,616 priests, 437 brothers and 704 scholastics in the
order's 10 provinces in the United States constitute the largest Jesuit
community in the world. Their interests and theology may differ, but they have
generally absorbed the qualities associated with their land.

Ever since 1566, when they first arrived on these shores, Jesuits have been
known as doers and pragmatists, optimists and believers in the principle of due
process, a conviction that has led to conflicts with Rome. Living in a
pluralistic land has made them more tolerant than their fellows elsewhere. ''As
a group,'' says the Rev. Donald R. Campion of the Jesuit Conference in
Washington, ''we are more likely to compromise.''

Nowhere has the Jesuit reputation for scholarly rigor been more evident than in
the United States. All of the top Catholic universities in the nation are run by
Jesuits except the most widely known, the University of Notre Dame. They include
Georgetown University (founded in 1789), perhaps the most scholastically
eminent; Boston College; Holy Cross; Marquette and Fordham. Under the tutelage
of the Jesuits' 28 universities and colleges and 47 secondary schools, the order
has wielded a degree of influence on young Catholics, both in numbers and in
quality, that is unmatched anywhere in the world.

The three members of the New York province shown on the Magazine's cover
illustrate the mixture of tasks undertaken by the order. In addition to pastoral
duties at the Church of the Nativity at 44 Second Avenue on New York City's
Lower East Side, the Rev. Alvaro Corrada del Rio aids his parishioners, most of
whom are poor and Hispanic, in securing better social conditions. Not far away,
the Rev. Jeffrey von Arx divides his time between duties as associate pastor of
St. Francis Xavier Church at 30 West 16th Street and as a chaplain at adjoining
Xavier High School. At the same parish, Brother Daniel Hoey tends to the upkeep
of the church as the sacristan.

Large groups of Jesuits serve as chaplains to prisons, hospitals and schools
while others engage in social activism or go abroad as missionaries.

Until the Second Vatican Council and the social turbulence of the 1960's,
American Jesuits had been models of conformity to Rome's wishes and had largely
remained aloof from social causes. From Vatican II came a stimulus to exercise
freedom of conscience, and from the civil-rights campaigns and Vietnam War
activism came new boldness.

Ameriican Jesuits joined those in Western Europe who were resigning by the
scores as conflicts grew over such issues as mandatory celibacy, sexual ethics
and the church's proper role in the pursuit of social justice. The Rev. Daniel
Berrigan, engaging in numerous acts of civil disobedience, became a stormy
figure in the tensions between Jesuit liberals and conservatives.

''We got through that period to a greater acceptance of differences among us,''
says the Rev. Joseph A. O'Hare, editor of America, a Jesuit periodical. The main
split now, he says, is between social activists and those who confine themselves
to educational and spiritual pursuits.

At the Vatican Council sessions, the contributions of such eminent Jesuit
scholars as the Rev. John Courtney Murray - who drafted a document that
established the basis for a kind of pluralistic religious society - won the
Americans a degree of intellectual respect that enhanced their power within the
order. They joined the European movement of dissent that urged further reforms
within the church. It was a momentous time of fragmentation and debate which
seems likely to continue.  - KENNETH A. BRIGGS.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rev. Francis Canavan

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
WHEEL AND SEA DEALS;
Motorhomes With Extras

BYLINE: By Stanley Carr

SECTION: Section 10; Page 3, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words


Motorhome folks wouldn't wander any other way. They prefer to steer clear of
checking in and out of hotels - and hotel bills - and to keep the family
together under one private and permanent roof as they roll along from landmark
to beauty spot, in and out of cities and across borders.

For these tourists there is a special offer in Italy this year.  Auto Europe,
which claims to have the largest array of motorhomes and campers of any auto
rental company in Europe, is offering some fringe benefits to renters of
motorhomes who use Italy as a base for their European vacation.

The program consists of a room with twin beds for the first and last night of
the trip, five liters (about one and a half gallons) of gasoline or 10 gallons
of diesel fuel for every day of the rental and free transfers by bus between
airport and city. The motorhomes and hotels are available in these cities: Rome,
Milan, Florence, Bologna, Turin, Venice, Palermo and Olbia in Sardinia. The
vehicles may be used thr oughout Europe. The hotel-room offer applies only to
two persons in each party.

A choice of five different motorhomes is available, with prices ranging from
$279 to $719 a week in the off season and $345 to $779 in the high season (June
1 to Sept. 30). The top of the company's line is the Ford Grand Soleil, which
has two double beds, one single bed and a child's bunk. Its equipment includes a
bathroom with shower, flush toilet, refrigerator, three-burner range and
built-in television set. The smallest model, the Fiat Shango, has a double bed
and two fold-down berths suitable for children in the pop top. The kitchen has a
two-burner range; there is no bathroom.

Germany, Britain and Holland were the most popular pickup points for Americans
who rented from Auto Europe last year, says Martin Fleer, a company spokesman.
The average rental was for just under three weeks.

The vehicles must be booked through travel agents but Auto Europe, 21 East 40th
Street, New York, N.Y. 10016 (212-578-4400), can supply information.

An Island Replete With Rum

Christopher Columbus was well aware of the fortifying pleasures of rum when he
sailed to the New World. The spirit had been brought back to Spain from Asia by
Arab sailors. And by 1508 when Ponce de Leon became Governor of Puerto Rico the
cultivation of sugar cane, from which rum is made, and the production of the
drink had become major activities.

Today the island is the world's largest producer of rum, three distilleries
producing enough for six companies to sell it under 12 brand names. For
visitors, it is among Puerto Rico's liquor bargains, and many of them pack a
bottle to take home. They can also take a close look at how the drink is made by
visiting the Bacardi distillery, the largest in the world, which is only a few
minutes from downtown San Juan.

Every weekday (9 to 11 A.M. and 12 to 4 P.M.) and on Saturdays (9 to 11) the
plant offers free half-hour tours that include a description of the processing,
a visit to the distillery's own museum, and free samples. Most major hotels can
arrange transportation to the distillery by group tour (about $3.50 a person) or
taxi, or visitors can make their own way by taking the ferry (10 cents for the
15-minute trip) across San Juan Bay to Catano and a short public bus ride.

Don Q, another famous name in rums, offers visitors a chance to sample the drink
and see a film on its production in an 18th-century townhouse in Old San Juan.
The house was recently restored and is scheduled to be reopened this month for
free weekday tours.

A Thriller Near Manila

The current is swift and the white water surges angrily between a jumble of
giant boulders and walls of rock jutting up from the river's banks. On shore a
tangle of tall trees and dense undergrowth presses to the edge of the water
under the hot sun. To some visitors this wild stretch of river and the cottages
that stand in clearings along the way will evoke the steaming jungles of
Vietnam, but the passengers bobbing about in their simple dugout canoes are on
their way to a dramatic waterfall in the Philippines.

It was here, near a town called Pagsanjan, an hour-and-a-half driv e south f rom
the bustle of Manila, that the movie ''Apocalypse Now'' was fil med. The
cottages, which were built for the film, have been converte d into offices for
the Philippines Tourist Authority.  Others were b lown up for the benefit of the
cameras.

Visitors are taken along the river to the 200-foot-high waterfall, set between
rocky peaks amid a forested area, from a restaurant in Pagsanjan. Each canoe, or
banca, as they called, is manned by two boatmen who maneuver their way through
the rapids with paddles. At the falls the passengers transfer from canoe to raft
to slip through a cave behind the cascade. Tours to Pagsanjan are operated daily
from Manila and cost about $35 a person, including the bus trip to the
restaurant, lunch and the journey on the river.
'Take Your S pouse Free'

In a drive to attract business travelers, the Queen Elizabeth 2 is offering a
''Take Your Spouse Free'' program on its Atlantic crossings. To qualify, a
traveler pays for a single outside stateroom and a one-way British Airways
economy ticket to or from London. In return, he or she gets an outside stateroom
for two and two air tickets. All travel must be completed within 12 days,
including five days on the QE2 - a rule that excludes most vacationers, who take
more time on a trip to Europe.

The limited offer begins April 7 and continues through December. An official of
Cunard, owners of the QE2, said many of the ship's departures are on weekends,
which means that for the bu siness traveler ''little extra time away from the of
fice is sacrificed.''

How does the offer work out in dollars and cents, bearing in mind that fares on
the QE2 and for air transportation vary according to time of year? Most of the
ship's sailings are in what the line calls the intermediate season, during which
a single outside cabin in the least expensive class, trans-Atlantic, would cost
$2,090. To this must be added a one-way air fare, which in shoulder season is
$318, making a total of $2,408. In first class the cabin costs $3,600, plus $318
air fare, for a total of $3,918.  Stanley Carr

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Long Island Journal

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 3, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1520 words


THE Nassau Board of Elections symbolizes the growing rol e of women in politics
and government. With the appointment of A. Pat ricia Moore as the Democratic
commissioner of the bipartisan boa rd, the topleadership of the board is
entirely female.

The Republican commissioner is Isabel Dodd, and the board's chief clerk is Laura
Davis, a Democrat.

Miss Moore succeeded Stanley Harwood, the former Democratic county chairman, in
the board post. Mr. Harwood is now a Supreme Court justice. Martin Mellman, the
new Democratic county leader, appointed Miss Moore, whe had supported his bid
for the county leadership. Mr.  Mellman said he was also influenced by the fact
that Miss Moore was a lawyer, a political activist and a woman.

Miss Moore, 48 years old, was once a social-studies teacher. She is a trustee of
Hempstead Village and ran unsuccessfully for mayor last year. She is also a
Democratic state committeewoman and a zone leader. A lifelong resident of
Hempstead, she holds undergraduate and law degrees from Hofstra University and a
master's degree in history from Columbia University.

She is paid $56,000 for the part-time post, and, typically for the outspoken
Miss Moore, she said that the salary was ''absolutely absurd.''

Usually, Board of Elections commissioners are fairly obscure, not given to
controversy or boat rocking. But Miss Moore is barely settled in office when she
is confronted with a political hot potato -the possible disenfranchisement of
the Nassau Republican chairman, Joseph M. Margiotta, because he was convicted of
a Federal felony.  This involves far more than the right to vote. Mr. Margiotta
has to be a voter to qualify as a party leader.

Orthodox Jews in North Woodmere recently found a solution to a problem, courtesy
of the Long Island Lighting Company. Because of a biblical prohibition against
work on Saturday, these residents could not carry objects outdoors on the
Sabbath, which in effect confined them to their homes - that is, unless they had
an eruv.

An eruv is an enclosure forming a continuous line without any breaks, defining
areas where observant Jews can move about freely on the Sabbath. While
constructing a fence around an entire community is not feasible, according to
religious leaders in the Jewish community, utility poles carrying telephone and
electric lines may be used, which is where Lilco came in.

According to Julian Rossetti, the planning section supervisor of Lilco's new
business department in Hewlett, the utility company has cooperated with nine
Jewish communities on the Island in allowing utility poles to be utilized as
eruvim. Mr. Rossetti said Lilco had aided synagogues in mapping out their eruvs.

''We understood their problems and in some areas guided them,'' he said,
''explaining how and where they could contract to have minor attachments
connected to our facilities.''

Other Lilco-assisted eruvim are in West Hempstead, Great Neck, Patchogue and
Plainview. The Plainview eruv is 6.5 miles long and uses 275 utility poles
situated 125 feet apart.

Supreme Court Justice Howard E. Levitt is a former Army man, but lately he has
been hearing much about the Navy, courtesy of his son Adam, now in his third
year at the United States Naval Academy.

The justice and his wife, Davida, are members of the Naval Academy Parents Club
of Long Island, an organization with an unusually active calendar. On Feb. 28,
when the club next meets, it will have as guest speaker Senator Alfonse M.
D'Amato, who will discuss the future of the military services.

''I find the whole thing fascinating,'' Justice Levitt said. He said that the
Long Island club was one of several that have served as models for similar
parent organizations now springing up throughout the United States.

''The idea of parents' clubs is burgeoning,'' the judge said, ''but, of course,
there's been a general reawakening of interest in the military.'' He said that
the officers who handle recruitment at high schools had noticed a marked
increase in interest by high school students.

''Of course a lot of that is due to the economy, but much of it is due to a
renewed acceptance of the military as well,'' Justice Levitt said.

Asked some of the ways in which the club had helped him and his wife, Justice
Levitt replied, ''Well, like almost all parents of plebes, it taught us how to
handle all those phone calls in that first year, when our sons or daughters
wonder if they're going to make it.''

Drawing on his experiences as a celebrated member of the protest movement
against the Vietnam War, Abbie Hoffman will appear at 2:30 P.M. at the New
Community Cinema today (''alive and in person,'' as he put it) to discuss the
film ''The War at Home.'' Part of the series ''Living Out the 60's,'' the
documentary, which is about how antiwar activities transformed a quiet Middle
Western town into a veritable battlefield, was nominated for an Academy Award.

Mr. Hoffman's reminiscences and the film will cost $7 to attend, or $15 to stay
for a reception. The cinema is at 423 Park Avenue in Huntington.

According to the Rev. Sal Miraglia, assistant pastor of Our Holy Redeemer Roman
Catholic Church in Freeport, the recently opened Bread of Life Nightclub evolved
out of a need expressed to him by a group of young adults who were looking for
an alternative place to meet their contemporaries.

''They wanted to socialize in a different environment from that of a disco or a
bar,'' said Father Miraglia, the group's spiritual adviser.

Since last fall, the club, housed in the auditorium of Our Holy Redeemer School,
has been playing to capacity crowds. Routinely, on the first and third Saturdays
of the month, 200 to 300 people 18 years of age and over, from all over Long
Island, congregate to meet people and be entertained. The music varies from
religious rock groups to secular guitar to country-and-western and folk
offerings.

''The format varies,'' Father Miraglia said, ''as do the people. I would guess
the majority are Catholics, but people of other faiths come. We get Protestants,
Jews; we even get atheists.''

In addition to free entertainment, the coffeehouse feeds another need. The Bread
of Life Committee, headed by Anthony Gagliardo of Dix Hills, which books the
groups, also offers informal counseling.  ''They are available to offer comfort
to anyone who feels a need to unburden himself,'' Father Miraglia said.

Referring to the free-admission policy, he added, ''Miraculously, by the end of
the evening, after we pass a basket, we always seem to make enough to cover
expenses.''

For the first time on the Island, two school districts will share the services
of one lunch director. She is Loretta Young, who has been a director in Lawrence
and has begun doing the same job in the neighboring Hewlett-Woodmere district.

The director in Hewlett-Woodmere died a few months ago, and Lawrence Franklin,
president of the school board, and Joel Rindler, assistant superintendent for
business, decided that costs could be reduced by not hiring a full-time
replacement. Because both districts have been experiencing a decline in
enrollment, the two asked Michael Maina, assistant superintendent for business
in Lawrence, if his district would not mind sharing Mrs. Young with them. The
two boards unanimously approved the arrangement, and Mrs.  Young said she was
doing a daily shuttle program.

A group of 12 young refugees from Vietnam who are living with foster families in
the Five Towns are being helped to integrate themselves into the mainstream of
American life by Lawrence senior high school students who are enrolled in a
leadership course.

Students who take part in this course assist in dealing with community and
social problems, and they have become an extended family for the refugees, who
range in age from 14 to 21 years old and have been accepted as students at
Lawrence Junior and Senior High Schools. They came to this country under the
sponsorship of the Community Bible Church of Lawrence, which has a program for
helping ''boat people'' who have escaped from Communist rule in Southeast Asia.

The students in the leadership force have formed a volleyball team with their
Vietnamese friends and play each Tuesday night at the Five Towns Community
Center. They also bring the Vietnamese into various extracurricular and social
activities. Gladys Singer, who teaches English as a second language to these
students, and Leo Haber, the chairman of the language department, have arranged
to include field trips to the metropolitan area as part of the students' school
curriculum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of A. Patricia Moore

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Connecticut Guide;
HARTFORD BALLET GALA

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 11, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 966 words


The Hartford Ballet has mounted a gala program to celebrate its 10th anniversary
at 8 P.M. Thursday through Saturday in Bushnell Hall. Drawing on the background
of its director, Michael Uthoff, whose parents were members of the Jooss Ballet
in Europe, the company has imported Anna Markard, daughter of Kurt Jooss, to
direct ''The Green Table.'' The ballet was choreographed by her father and
acclaimed as a masterwork at its Paris premiere in 1932.

In addition, Ruth Laredo, the noted pianist, will provide onstage accompaniment
for ''Ballade,'' ''Little Improvisations'' and ''Dejeuner Sur L'Herbe,'' playing
the music of Chopin, Schumann and Scriabin, respectively. Choreography for
''Ballade,'' receiving its world premiere, is by the company's associate
artistic director, Anthony Salatino.

''The Green Table'' is an expressionist ballet in which a conference table is a
symbol of diplomatic stalemate while wars are waged around it. It is
acknowledged to be a prototype of modern balletic storytelling.

The ballet's cabaret-style score by Frederick Cohen will be executed on two
pianos. Costumes and masks were designed by Hein Heckroth. Continuing the family
tradition, Mr. Uthoff has cast his 12-year-old daughter, Michelle, in a
supporting role. She is a student at the School of the Hartford Ballet.

Tickets are $4 to $16 and may be reserved through Ticketron or the Bushnell box
office, 246-6807.
THEMES OF THE GREEKS

The Hartford Stage Company will open its most ambitious production ever this
week. ''The Greeks,'' adapted from the works of Euripides, Aeschylus, Sophocles
and Homer by John Barton and Kenneth Cavander, was first produced by the Royal
Shakespeare Company in London. Mark Lamos will direct.

''The War,'' ''The Murders'' and ''The Gods'' are extrapolations of themes that
run through the ancient Greek epics, and not translations or updates of the
plays themselves. Costumes and sets will be abstract, avoiding national or
period identification.

The three segments will be presented in rotation except for two marathon
performances Feb. 21 and April 4, when all three may be seen in sequence. The
cycle will take almost 12 hours, with individual segments beginning at noon,
4:30 P.M. and 9 P.M.

Previews will be held at 8 P.M. Tuesday through Thursday. Regular performances
begin Friday, running through April 4. Tickets, at $6 to $18, may be reserved by
calling 525-5601.

SCENES OF WAR

War is the theme of the new exhibition at the New Britain Museum of American Art
that opens t oday and continues through March 28. The show has been assembled
from the museum's collection of illustrations , engravings, paintings, sculpture
and posters.

Among the artists represented in scenes of strife dating from classical times to
the Vietnam conflict are John Singleton Copley, Winslow Homer, Frederic
Remington, Howard Pyle, John Steuart Curry, Stevan Dohanos, Jack Levine and
Ernest Shinn.

Models of military aircraft and naval vessels and a collection of toy soldiers
round out the exhibit.  The museum is located at 56 Lexington Street and it is
open fro m 1 P.M. to 5 P.M., Tuesday through Sunday. Condu cted tours will be
offered at 2 P.M. and 3:30 P.M. on Feb. 21 an d 28. For more information call
229-0257.

ROOSEVELT EXHIBITION

Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the controversial 32d President of the United States,
is the subject of an exhibition of books, memorabilia, buttons, ribbons, banners
and leaflets celebrating his 100th birthday in the Mortensen Library of the
University of Hartford.

Books in the exhibitionabout the President and his Administration include
''Looking Forward,'' a 1933 precis of his intended social legislation. ''On Our
Way'' is an assessment of his first 100 days in office, during which programs
for business and agricultural recovery, unemployment relief and the creation of
the Tennessee Valley Authority were enacted.

A payroll deduction notice indicating the beginning of the Social Security
system may be viewed by visitors. Included in paychecks dated Jan. 1, 1937, it
is believed to be one of very few still in existence.

A children's book written by Eleanor Roosevelt, a copy of The New York Herald
Tribune prior to Roosevelt's defeat of Thomas E. Dewey in 1944 and a copy of The
New York Daily News of April 13, 1945, reporting his death, are among the items.

The library is open from 8 A.M. to midnight on weekdays, 10 A.M.  to midnight
Saturday and noon to midnight Sunday. The exhibit will remain on view until Feb.
28.

SHAW IN NEW BRITAIN

New Britain's Hole-in-the-Wall Theater at 121 Smalley Street has based the
visual aspect of its current production of George Bernard Shaw's ''Salome'' on
the widely known illustrations of Aubrey Beardsley.

Written by Oscar Wilde originally in French, the play's original production was
to have had Sarah Bernhardt in the title role. But because censorship at the
time forbade the depiction of biblical characters on the stage, it was not seen
until many years later.

Mr. Wilde is quoted as asserting at the time that ''Salome'' was a mirror in
which audiences would see themselves. ''The dull would find dullness,'' he said,
''the artist, art; the the vulgar, vulgarity.''

Peformances will be given at 8:30 P.M. Friday and Saturday through March 13.
Call 223-9500 for reservations. Admission is by donation.  Eleanor Charles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HAWKING ARMS OVERSEAS

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 12; Special Section Page 22; Page 22, Column 1; International
Economic Survey Desk

LENGTH: 1417 words


AS the costs of sophisticated military hardware escalate, arms manufacturers are
seeking foreign orders more than ever to raise their output and thereby keep
unit prices affordable. This trend, defense strategists and industry analysts
say, raises the disturbing question of whether the industrial powers will be
able to afford to arm themselves in the coming decade without arming the rest of
the world at the same time.

The size of the trade and the many new players in it are increasingly sparking
political and economic interest. The world arms trade was valued at $30 billion
in transactions last year and has been growing by about $5 billion a year since
1975, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, or
Sipri, an independent agency that monitors the international arms bazaar.

But the most striking element of the rise has been in the cost of equipment.
Today's XM1 tank, a heavily armed, 59-ton piece of hardware loaded with infrared
devices and ele ctronic gear that would rival a jetliner's dashboard, costs
about $1. 5 million. By contrast, the United States Army's standard World War I
I tank, a lumbering hulk with relatively simple gear, sold for about $50,000 i n
its day. The upward spiral in weaponry costs during the past 30 yea rs has
beenfed by inflation in raw materials and labor coupled with t he everincreasing
trend toward complexity in military equipme nt.

''At the price we have to pay for some complex weapons systems today, we aren't
going to be able to afford to buy the quantities we need without extending our
production runs with export sales, or further paring down social programs,''
said Tom Gervesi, author of the book ''Arsenal of Democracy II,'' a study of
American military power. ''Same for the Europeans,'' he added.

Take the AWACs radar planes, for example. The Air Force discovered in 1976 that
it could afford to buy only 25 of the 34 AWACs it originally wanted at the
then-price of $65.6 million each, Mr.  Gervasi said. This prompted the Carter
Administration to look for foreign customers as a way to extend the production
run and spread research and development costs over more planes.

Iran agreed in 1978 to buy nine AWACs, which would have helped offset the more
than $3 billion in research and development costs already paid by the United
States Government. But Iran's revolution led to the cancellation of the sale.
Saudi Arabia was then introduced as a buyer for five planes - with all the
controversy that ensued - and additional foreign customers are now being sought,
Mr. Gervesi said.

The planes being sold to the Saudis will cost about $128 million each, said
James Grafton, manager of public relations for Boeing Aerospace, builder of the
AWACs. Of that $128 million, about $60 million from each plane will go to the
United States Treasury as partial repayment of the original research and
development expenditures by the Government.

''It is to the Government's advantage to sell as many planes as possible to
spread out the research costs,'' Mr. Grafton said. ''This is becoming true of
all high-technology military equipment.''

A senior executive at one of America's leading aircraft manufacturing companies,
who asked not to be identified because of the sensitivity of the issue,
contended that when his company designs, produces and prices an aircraft for the
American Government, it does not count on being able to sell the plane in a
foreign market. The United States Air Force, he said, is usually a big enough
customer to justify any production investments.

What happens, however, he said, is that cost overruns, inflation and errors push
up the price, usually forcing the Government to cut back its orders and
compelling the manufacturer to cover its huge fixed costs on the basis of fewer
sales. This in turn drives the price further up. The only way out sometimes is a
foreign buyer.

''The United States arms manufacturers export to pay for their own mistakes,''
the military executive said. ''We have the only defense industry in the world
where if you have a problem, you try to multiply it.''

Another factor that pushs up prices and restrains output, said Morton Langer,
military specialist with Bear, Stearns & Company, is the shortage of capacity.
''Some 100,000 companies perform subcontract work,'' he said. ''When defense
production fell after the Vietnam War, many companies reduced their dependence
on military business, which led to a deterioration of the underlying industrial
base. With the prospect of boom conditions returning, available capacity is low,
costs are rising and lead times on key companies are likely to stretch from
months to years.''

The Reagan Administration has made it clear that it intends to expedite overseas
arms sales, and it has lifted restrictions imposed by President Carter that
greatly limited the extent to which United States embassy personnel could aid
export-minded military contractors.

To be sure, this only puts the United States back on a more even footing with
the French, British and Russians, who have been actively marketing abroad for
years. The French and British, who face domestic markets that are too small to
satisfy the capital requirements of advanced weaponry, particularly aircraft and
tanks, have long depended on foreign sales to help pay for basic defense needs,
industry analysts say. In fact, the French manufacturer Dassault-Breguet will
not even produce its advanced Mirage 4000 jet fighter for France until it has a
certain level of foreign sales.

For the Soviet Union, arms exports began as a means of spreading influence, but
in recent years they have become a prime source of hard currency. Arthur J.
Alexander, a staff economist specializing in defense for the Rand Corporation,
notes that armaments are one of the few products that the Russians make -
besides vodka and caviar - that attract hard currency.

But the major powers are not the onl y manuf acturers in the game.  According to
Sipri, the Stockholm research in stitute, the total military spending of
third-world countries in the past decade has gone to 16 percent of the world's
total from 9 percent. At least 27 th ird-world countries are now producing their
own arms, sa ys Sipri.  India, Israel, Brazil and South Africa are building a
rang e of aircraft, armored vehicles, missiles and warships. Argenti na,
Taiwan,South Korea, the Philippines, Indonesia, Egypt, North Kore a and
Singapore all manufacture a variety of weaponry domestical ly under license from
foreign manufacturers. The trade might be mor e manageable, Sipri contends, if
there were not so many new actors in the game, most notably third-world nations.

If the trend continues, Mr. Alexander said he personally believes arms could be
produced in such large quantities and by so many countries that by 1990 they
would lose their symbolic and political overtones and be viewed as just another
economic commodity, like sugar or copper.

This trend is already evident in the arms advertisements that now proliferate in
arms industry magazines. Manufacturers from all over the world are offering
''good selection,'' ''best terms available'' and ''fast delivery'' for a variety
of weapons.

As the number of countries producing advanced weapons grows, noted Mr.
Alexander, the question of arms control of any sort becomes all the more
unlikely. If the United States will not sell an F-15 jet fighter to a particular
country, Sweden will sell its Viggen fighter. If Sweden will not sell its
Viggen, France will sell its Mirage; if France won't sell its Mirage, then
Israel will sell its Kfir, and if Israel won't sell its Kfir, then India will
sell its HF-25...

The options are multiplying every year.  ''Arms are turning from a symbolic
commodity into an economic commodity,'' Mr. Alexander said. ''The fact that they
kill people is, unfortunately, becoming completely beside the point.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE JESUITS

BYLINE: By Paul Hofmann;
Paul Hofmann, a former correspondent for The New York Times and author of
''Rome: The Sweet Tempestuous Life,'' is working on a book about the Vatican.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5550 words


At the Villa Cavalletti in Frascati, workmen are busily adapting the
18th-century pseudo-Renaissance mansion and adjoining buildings that normally
serve as a spiritual retreat center into the setting for an extraordinary
assembly of provincial superiors of the Society of Jesus. The regional heads
have been summoned to the villa outside Rome not, as would have been customary,
by their Superior General but by order of Pope John Paul II. As the heads of the
Jesuit infrastructure from all over the world prepare for the meeting, which
begins on Feb. 23 and will last at least a week, thousands of others within the
order anxiously speculate about what lies ahead for the largest, most
prestigious and often most controversial organization of priests and brothers in
the Roman Catholic Church.

All are aware of the Pontiff's dissatisfaction with the direction many Jesuits
have taken in recent years and of his determination to bring wavering members in
line with his conservative leadership. How they respond to the explicit
directives the Pope will relay through his personal representative at the
Frascati meeting will have a profound effect on the future of the order, whose
members have for centuries enjoyed positions of exceptional power within the
church.  That the meeting will take place at a time when many Jesuits believe
their influence is being threatened in certain areas by the Sacerdotal Society
of the Holy Cross adds to the anxiety. This group - more commonly known as Opus
Dei (God's Work) - is a fast-growing, highly conservative international lay
organization known to have found special favor with the Pope. But the immediate
disquiet stems most directly from an event that took place one day last October.

None of the passers-by in St. Peter's Square that autumn day could have guessed
that a drama of historic significance was about to be enacted when a slender
churchman emerged from the Vatican's Bronze Doors and walked a few hundred yards
to a cluttered complex of buildings on the Borgo Santo Spirito near the Tiber
embankment.

The ecclesiastic was Agostino Cardinal Casaroli, Secretary of State to Pope John
Paul II. The prelate was calling at the world headquarters of the Jesuits to
deliver a letter from the Pontiff addressed to the Very Rev. Pedro de Arrupe y
Gondra, the order's ailing 74-year-old Superior General, the second most
powerful figure in Roman Catholicism, ''the black pope,'' who in the simple
black cassock of his order commands battalions of Jesuits, always in service to
the man in white, the Pope.

In his letter, John Paul II notified the order that he had appointed what in
another ideological system would be called a commissar, with full powers to
direct the Jesuits. In effect, the Pope was displacing Father Arrupe as
operating head of the order.

The decision, which was without precedent in the 442-year history of the elite
order, reflected the Pope's well-known concern over liberal and left-wing
currents among the 26,622 Jesuits, the greatest number - 5,757 - of whom are in
the United States. (See box on page 29 for detail s on Jesuits in the United
States.)

John Paul II's move was all the more startling since the Society ofJesus is
pledged to particular fealty toward the Pontiff - almost two-thirds of its
members, those eligible for high office within the order, have taken a solemn
vow of special obedience to the head of their church. The present Pope's
concerns echo those of Pope Paul VI, who in 1973 directed Father Arrupe to
''express our desire, indeed our demand, that the Jesuits remain loyal to the
Papacy.''

A demand from a reigning pontiff that the Jesuits express continuing fealty to
the Vatican carries a special note of irony, because the order was founded four
centuries ago for the express purpose of defending the Roman Catholic Church
against the forces of the Reformation initiated by Martin Luther and continued
by subsequent Protestant leaders. Since its founding in 1540 by a Spanish
nobleman and former soldier, St. Ignatius of Loyola, the Society of Jesus has
appeared to the world as an awesomely disciplined formation that invited
military metaphors like ''the company,'' ''the Pope's vanguard'' and ''the long
black line,'' completely obedient to the Papacy and to its own leaders, perinde
ac cadaver (roughly, to have no more will than a corpse). Yet the order always
seemed highly adaptable and gained a reputation for resourcefulness. Over the
centuries, Jesuits have been confessors and confidants of European kings,
proselytizers among Indian tribes in the Americas, builders of triumphant
cathedrals throughout the Western Hemisphere, respected scholars at the courts
of Oriental emperors and proteges of Catherine the Great of Russia.

The dictionary defines ''Jesuit'' as a member of a religious order for men, but
also, in a lingering second meaning that reflects the original derogatory use of
the term by the society's enemies, as "a crafty schemer, cunning
dissembler."Today the order does not appear to outsiders like a phalanx of
militant defenders of the faith or international intriguers, but rather like a
network of diverse groups, yet still managing to operate with a certain sense of
esprit de corps. Primed in the past to halt deviations from the faith, the
Jesuits over the past two decades have increasingly found themselves accused of
espousing views unacceptable to conservative Roman Catholics.

It was the Second Vatican Council (1962-65) that unleashed liberal forces among
the Jesuits, as it did in other church groups and among Roman Catholics in
general. Many Jesuits were deeply involved in the preparations for the Council
from the moment it was conceived by Pope John XXIII, who relied heavily on the
order for counsel. The Jesuits' advanced scholarship was called on often before
and during the Council. Pope John XXIII was particularly impressed by Augustin
Bea, the brilliant German Jesuit, who championed Christian-Jewish dialogue. He
made him a cardinal, in charge of the crucial Secretariat for the Promotion of
Christian Unity, which became a rallying point for liberals and ecumenicists at
the Council.  Throughout Vatican II, such prominent Jesuits as John Courtney
Murray, Henri de Lubac and Gustave Weigel served as advisers and had much
influence as liberal lobbyists. One of the aftereffects of the Council was the
encouragement of experimentation with new forms of liturgy, in which the Jesuits
played a large role.

The intellectual ferment that came into the open at Vatican II has continued
longer within the order than in other church structures.  Jesuits, especially in
the United States and the Netherlands, have caused dismay in the Vatican by
questioning papal pronouncements on birth control, priestly celibacy, the
barring of women from the priesthood and other issues. Other church worries stem
from the sympathies of some Jesuits for guerrilla tactics in left-wing and
pacifist causes. Jesuits are reportedly active in revolutionary movements in
Guatemala and El Salvador. In Nicaragua, they played a role in the Sandinist
revolution. In the Philippines, the Rev. Jose Blanco recently was accused of
plotting to destabilize the regime of President Ferdinand E. Marcos.

In the last 50 years, Jesuit personalities and pursuits have ranged from Pierre
Teilhard de Chardin, the French thinker who sought to conciliate evolutionism
with Christian revelation, to the Rev. Robert Drinan, president of Americans for
Democratic Action, who as a member of the United States Congress opposed the
Vietnam War and urged President Nixon's impeachment, and who later obeyed Pope
John Paul II's blanket order that priests must not hold elective political
office.

Many other Jesuits continue their order's centuries-old tradition as educators
and molders of theological and secular opinion. Some are archeologists, or
astronomers who exchange information with Soviet colleagues, or biblical
scholars attending Jerusalem's Hebrew University, or famous theologians, like
the Rev. Karl Rahner of West Germany, who in 1980 declared: ''We have an
obligation to stand in peace with the Pope, but not everything we do needs
positive approbation from him.''

Still others operate Vatican Radio, which broadcasts religious news in 35
languages around the globe and also offers programs of sacred and classical
music, folk tunes and jazz. As far as the contents of broadcasts ar e concerned,
the Jesuits operating the station are underthe general s upervision of the
Vatican's Secretariat of State, which is believed t o monitor programs very
carefully these days. Typical of the presen t climate in ecclesiastical Rome are
recurren t rumors that Opus Dei, as part of an intricate power play, may tak e
over management of the facility from the Jesuits. A member of O pus Dei, while
saying that there is no plan now to entrust the radi o station to his
organization, nevertheless adds: "Of course, we could handle it, if we were
asked to do it."

Talk about a removal at this stage, however, appears to be just that -talk. "But
even as malevolent gossip, it is a little scary to the Jesuit order right now,"
says a well-connected churchman who, like many in and out of the order, is
reluctant to be identified.  "It may be part of a war of nerves against the
company,'' he suggests. Or it may be that the rumors began because Opus Dei is
reputedly very wealthy and Vatican budget administrators are known to be
interested in having someone else take on the $3 million annual cost of running
the station.

Other Jesuits are theoreticians, or even practitioners, of the ''theology of
liberation'' - that is, the rereading of the Gospels from a Marxist angle. In
one of his rare public statements, Father Arrupe told Italian journalists in
1979 that although ''we cannot accept the commitment of (pro-Marxist) Jesuits
... this should not prevent us from taking a deep interest in Marxism. ... Many
views of the Marxists are mistaken and dangerous, but it is no less true that
they are often inspired by a profound sense of the injustices they want to
combat.''

Yet, many members of the order cling to the old ways. They lament the weakening
cohesion in their ranks and are scandalized by Jesuits in blue jeans who have
abandoned their conventlike residences to live in small urban communes or, worst
of all, who have left the order entirely.

Such ferment and fracturing within the Society of Jesus suggests to conservative
Roman Catholics the disarray in an army whose assault forces suffer sagging
morale, factionalism and desertions. Painful choices are looming. There is talk
in Rome that those Jesuits who feel they are unable to keep the special oath of
obedience to the Pope may soon find it easier to be released from their vows. A
hint at such a possibility, tantamount to a major purge, may be given at the
meeting in Frascati.

''If one-half of all Jesuits might have to leave the order,'' confided a high
churchman who is expected soon to become a cardinal, ''it would be better than
the present confusion and distrust. The Holy Father has made clear who is the
boss; he is the boss also of the Jesuits.''

During much of its history, the Society of Jesus's relationship with the Papacy
has not been markedly different from that of other orders. If it seemed to enjoy
greater latitude in its activities, this was usually a result of its own
enterprise rather than because of any special license from the Vatican. Earlier
popes had also cracked down on Jesuit initiatives. Perhap the most famous
instance is the so-called ''rites controversy'' involving the toleration of some
Confucian ceremonies by Jesuit missionaries in China. After considerable
wrangling, involving other religious orders, Pope Clement XI in 1704 finally
banned the Jesuit-approved rites of Chinese ancestor worship among Chinese
converts to Roman Catholicism.

More recently, Father Jose Maria Diez-Alegria, once a member of the faculty at
the prestigious Pontifical Gregorian University in Rome, irritated Pope Paul VI
by his book - published in 1972 without authorization from his order's superior
- ''I Believe in Hope,'' which displayed left-wing sympathies and criticized the
Vatican's wealth. The Rev. Peter Hebblethwaite, formerly editor of the British
Jesuit magazine, The Month, scathingly criticized an aide to Pope Paul VI and
the Roman Curia in general in a secular newspaper, The Observer. Father Arrupe
personally apologized to the Vatican for the actions of Father Hebblethwaite,
who eventually left the order.

During the last decade, papal admonitions have been repeatedly addressed to the
company. In 1974, Pope Paul VI wrote that in some Jesuit branches he had noted
''certain tendencies of an intellectual and disciplinary nature that, if
encouraged, would introduce very serious and perhaps incurable changes in your
essential structures.''

Paul VI's successor, Pope John Paul I, was preparing another pontifical reproof
when he died within weeks after election.  According to the prepared text,
released after his death, John Paul I planned to put the order on guard against
''secularizing influences'' - worldliness -in its units.

And in 1979, Pope John Paul II moved quickly to establish a firm conservative
mood in the Vatican that many liberal Roman Catholics, both clergy and laity,
felt was directed at halting, and even rolling back, many of the reforms and
experiments set in motion by Vatican II. The Pope sternly told a gathering of
high-ranking Jesuits that a religious crisis in the contemporary world was also
affecting the Society of Jesus, ' 'causing confusion among the Christian people
and anxieties to the church.''

Each Jesuit community subsequently received a picture of the Superior General
kneeling before the Pope. Father Arrupe urged every Jesuit to engage in
self-criticism and help bring about the ''necessary changes .'' But though he
conceded ''the difficulty of new, ambiguous, conflictual situations,'' he
nevertheless asked all Jesuit communities to report to him in writing any member
of the order leading a less-than-austere life, being slack in his religious
duties, seeking independence of his superiors , maintaining ''relations full of
ambiguity with other persons,'' or erring otherwise in the observance of his
vows.

Despite his recent pronouncements and actions, Pope John Paul II is said not to
have any personal animosity toward the order as a whole.  His displeasure,
according to church sources, is aimed only at liberal Jesuits, as it is at all
liberal Catholics, both lay and religious. And they point to John Paul II's
excellent relations with middle-of-the-road and conservative Jesuits.

The Pope's intervention in the running of the Jesuit order did not sit well with
many of its members. In West Germany, 18 Jesuits, including Father Rahner,
declared in a letter addressed to the Pope - later unofficially disclosed - that
they could not recognize ''the finger of God in this administrative measure'' of
suspending their order's constitution.

Liberal Jesuits throughout the world were outraged by the Pope's treatment of
their ailing leader, who had earlier announced his intention to prepare to step
down, although all his predecessors had remained in the post until their deaths.

After he was stricken last August with a brain hemorrhage that left him
temporarily unable to speak and paralyzed his right side, Father Arrupe had
indicated that one of his four general assistants, an American, the Rev. Vincent
T. O'Keefe, should serve as Vicar General, or interim head of the order. Many
Jesuits had thought that the genial 62-year-old Father O'Keefe, a former
president of Fordham University and a sometime religious-affairs commentator on
American network television, might some day succeed Father Arrupe.

The newly appointed Personal Delegate of the Holy Father for the Society of
Jesus, who has been given full powers to fulfill the duties of the Superior
General, is the Rev. Paolo Dezza, an 80-yearold, partially blind Italian
scholar. A former rector of the Gregorian University, an important position held
by Jesuits in Rome, he had been father confessor to Popes Paul VI and John Paul
I. The Rev. Giuseppe Pittau, a 53-year-old Italian and a friend of Pope John
Paul II who has been Jesuit provincial superior in Japan for the past 17 years,
was named Father Dezza's deputy. Father O'Keefe remains in Rome as an adviser to
the new team.

The appointment of Father Dezza was perceived by many Jesuits to be a stinging
rejection of Father O'Keefe by the Pope, who is thought to be toomedia-conscious
by the Pontiff. Father Dezza more directly epitomizes the traditional Vatican
Jesuit, very much at home in the Curia, the church's central administrative
machinery. The Pope's letter indicated, however, that Father Dezza would not be
the next Superior General, but it did stipulate that should he die before the
order elects a new leader, Father Pittau would replace him as Vicar General.

In an interview published last month in Famiglia Cristiana, an Italian church
weekly, Father Dezza stated that he had been directed by the Pope ''not to
convene a General Congregation for the time being, but to promote more careful
preparation according to the directives from the Holy Father.'' This is widely
understood to mean that the Vatican wants first to vet the electors of the next
Superior General and to sift likely candidates for this crucial job.

The government of the Society of Jesus is monarchical and highly centralized,
with the Superior General as the key figure. Its only legislative body is the
General Congregation, which has met only 32 times in more than 400 years. In
addition to four general assistants, the Superior General's immediate staff
includes 12 regional assistants. Each Jesuit region, or assistancy, is split
into provinces, whose heads are also named by the Superior General, as are the
local superiors for each Jesuit house or community.

Like all other orders, the Jesuits report continually to the Vatican - directly
to the Pope via the Superior General or to the Pope's Secretariat of State on
important matters; on routine business, to the Vatican's Sacred Congregation for
the Religious and the Secular Institutes, the Curia department dealing with
religious orders.

When the provincial superiors gather at Frascati a week from next Tuesday,
Father Dezza will, after mass and prayers said in common, ''clearly present''
the Pope's thoughts about the present state of the order and tell the Jesuits
what the Pontiff wants them to do about it.

Officials at Jesuit headquarters in Rome refuse to anticipate what will happen
at Frascati, except to s ay that there will be thorough discussion of the papal
directives and that no decisions will be made. The hea ds of one or more of the
10 provinces in the United States and so me of those from Central and South
America are expected to speak on b ehalf of the order's liberal wing, asking for
understanding of their ways in a multi-ethnic, multicultured society,but they
are not expected to force an open rupture of any kind.

A Basque, as was St. Ignatius, Father Arrupe is an uncommon churchman with
uncommon achievements and experiences. His 27 years in Japan earned him the name
of ''the Shinto Jesuit.'' When American planes dropped an atomic bomb on
Hiroshima, he was at the order's novitiate at Nagatsuka on the outskirts of the
devastated city. He and his fellow Jesuits are credited with saving many lives
by treating survivors of the blast at their institution, which was also damaged.

By the time he was elected head of the Jesuits in 1965, the sharpfeatured Father
Arrupe had earned a reputation for being something of a liberal. As Superior
General, he repeatedly called on the company to step up its work among the poor
and underprivileged and to phase out activities that seemed to identify it with
the well-to-do. He wanted his order's educators to go into the ghettos to teach
the disadvantaged. In India, now the order's second strongest assistancy, Jesuit
institutions have moved from the cool, isolated places in the hills to the
teeming and impoverished areas of New Delhi and Madras.

As Father Arrupe exhorted his order to strengthen its social commitment
worldwide, he himself became the target of criticism from conservatives within
the church who charged him with permissiveness and with a lack of administrative
efficiency. His predecessor, the Very Rev. Jean B. Janssens, a Flemish Belgian
who headed the order from 1946 to 1964, had seldom left his headquarters in
Rome. Father Arrupe visited almost every country in the world, including the
United States - the first time a Jesuit leader had done so - to maintain
personal contact with members of the company in the field.  Many with whom he
talked wanted to be released from their vows, and his response was often
sympathetic. He also showed understanding for the Rev. Daniel Berrigan by
visiting the antiwar Jesuit in the Federal prison in which he was serving his
sentence for participating in the destruction of draft-board records.

Whether authorized to do so or not, hundreds of Jesuits have been abandoning the
order every year. From a peak of 36,000 in 1965, the society's strength has
declined to 26,000, close to 20,000 of whom are priests, the rest being
''scholastics'' (Jesuits in training) and brothers. Despite defections, about
one out of every 20 Roman Catholic priests, not all of whom belong to orders, is
a Jesuit.

Jesuits who have dropped out sometimes manage to stay in fields they pursued
while in the order. In the Netherlands, with the support of liberal bishops,
some educators taught for a while on seminary faculties until the Vatican called
a halt to the practice.  Other dropouts have become marriage counselors, welfare
workers, authors and publishing assistants.

For some years, the number of new society members had been falling off sharply,
especially in Europe, but Jesuit headquarters now reports an influx of novices -
1,000 at present -particularly in Latin America and India, but also in the
United States.

Why do young men who feel a vocation for the priesthood enter a Jesuit
novitiate? ''Individual motivations vary,'' a senior member of the order says.
''Some novices view the company as the best framework for their scholarly
interests; others are attracted by its worldwide scope.''

A candidate for the order spends two years as a novice, taking his first vows of
poverty, chastity and obedience at the end of this period. After ordination to
the priesthood, Jesuits do postgraduate work in philosophy and theology and are
encouraged to engage in specialized studies. When this training has been
completed, a Jesuit reconfirms his earlier three vows and is considered a
''spiritual coadjutor.''

Members of the order who are admitted - after at least 10 years, sometimes as
many as 17 - to the top class of ''professed'' Jesuits take again the three vows
of poverty, chastity and obedience and a fourth solemn vow of obedience to the
Pope which other Jesuits do not take. The solemnity of this final vow makes it
very difficult to obtain release.

Younger Jesuits, long critical of the two-tier system, suggested several years
ago that everyone in the order be allowed to take the fourth oath and thus
become eligible for leadership positions. But in 1975 Pope Paul VI forbade such
a change, apparently fearful that liberal currents within the order would gain
further ground.

Despite all the dissatisfaction and turmoil, the order is still well
represented, with hundreds of members in key positions in the ecclesiastical
establishment in Rome. At present, three Jesuits - an Ecuadorean, an Indian and
a Malagasy - are included in the 124-member College of Cardinals, with one more
to come after the expected elevation so on of Archbishop Carlo Martini, a former
rector of the Gregorian University. (Canon law does not call for any quota
system for cardinals , but traditionally, one red hat has always been reserved
for a Jesuit.)

And Strasbourg, France, a city that is host to the European Parliament and a
site of ecumenical contacts between Roman Catholics and Protestants, now has as
its bishop a former Jesuit, Roger Heckel. (After elevation to all ranks above
bishop, priests, officially, if not always emotionally, separate themselves from
their orders.)

Jesuits also publish the authoritative semimonthly magazine La Civilta Cattolica
(whose galley proofs are routinely submitted to the Vatican's Secretary of
State). They also operate 92 universities and colleges, 70 high schools and 70
theological centers for men going on to the priesthood, and administer the
Pontifical Biblical Institute and the Pontifical Oriental Institute in Rome.

Members of the company say privately that the present Pontiff's reassertion of
supreme authority over the Society of Jesus recalls the disbandment of the order
by Pope Clement XIV in 1773, on the ground that the peace of Christendom
demanded it since Jesuits had caused much dissension by meddling in affairs of
the secular powers.

For 41 years, the order survived openly in parts of the Russian Empire, where
the papal ban was ignored, and under disguise in scattered communities
elsewhere. When Pope Pius VII restored the order in 1814, there were, therefore,
enough trained Jesuits for a new corporate start.

Before and after the papal suppression, the order was expelled from a number of
countries. It has faced such formidable adversaries as Bismarck, who drove it
out of his new German Reich. In Switzerland, a century-old constitutional
prohibition of Jesuit activities within the confederation was repealed only in
1973.

Although the resilient Jesuits have made many comebacks, they have never
forgotten the dire times 209 years ago when a pontiff left them naked to their
enemies. To this day, few members of the order ever enter the Church of the Most
Holy Apostles, which contains a monument to Pope Clement XIV.

Nobody in Rome even remotely thinks that John Paul II might follow the example
of Clement XIV and suppress the company. But the fact that some Jesuits cite the
historical precedent at all betrays their bitterness.

The present predicament of the company is deepened by Pope John Paul II's
interest in Opus Dei, founded in 1928 by Father Jose Maria Escriva de Balaguer,
a young priest from Madrid, who was apparently motivated by a need to counteract
anticlerical trends in Spanish society.

One of the reasons for the thinly disguised enmity between Jesuits and Opus Dei
members is intellectual: Prominent Jesuits are now in the avant-garde of Roman
Catholic thinking, whereas Opus Dei represents bedrock orthodoxy. In private,
the two groups frequently offer trenchant judgments about each other's
activities and conduct.  Their publicly muted antagonism stems in part from the
specific conditions in Spain during the 1950's and 60's, when several members of
Opus Dei played prominent roles in the regime of Generalissimo Francisco Franco,
which the Jesuits opposed. By 1957, four members of the Spanish Cabinet were
either members of, or very closely allied with, Opus Dei; in 1969, they numbered
10 out of 19.

While there has never been any suggestion that Franco himself was an Opus Dei
member, his wife, Carmen, was said to sympathize with the movement. Stories that
Juan Carlos as heir-designate to Franco had an Opus Dei confessor and now as
King of Spain is still surrounded by members of that organization have been
current for some time in rumor-happy Madrid, but these reports cannot be
substantiated.

One of the areas where Opus Dei has encroached on the traditional turf of the
Jesuits is in establishing educational and social centers in various countries,
including a university in Pamplona, Spain, and vocational schools and
international students' residences, including six in the United States.

It would appear that Opus Dei is filling a vacuum in the church because lay
forces that flourished in the past have lately dried up.  This is particularly
true of Catholic Action, a formerly militant lay organization now only a shadow
movement in many countries. Some new Roman Catholic youth and lay movements,
like Focolare, Community and Liberation, are said to be friendly toward Opus
Dei. Thus, a Roman Catholic fundamentalist lay front may be coalescing, one
evidently welcomed by the Pope.

Many of the ominous things said in the past about the Jesuits are now being said
about Opus Dei. It is called a ''church within the church,'' ''the holy mafia,''
or ''Octopus Dei'' -labels suggesting intrigue, infiltration and plots.

But Opus Dei describes itself simply as an international association of Roman
Catholics committed to practicing the Christian virtues in both private and
professional life. While it has taken over some features of monastic discipline,
it disclaims it is an order, although diocesan priests account for about 3
percent of its membership, and several influential cardinals are known to be
supporters, though not members.

The movement stresses full acceptance of church dogma and traditional forms of
worship. Like other religious groups, it encourages the ''discipline of
mortification.'' The Times of London in a controversial article last year on
alleged Opus Dei practices in England - based on material supplied by a former
Opus Dei member, Dr. John Roche of Oxford University - published p ictures
purporting to show ''instruments of mortification'' said to be used by some
members. While Opus Dei denied many of the charges in the article, it did not
deny the practice of self-inflicted pain as a way of mortification.

Although Opus Dei sometimes claims that it is a ''disorganized organization,''
informants, including expelled members, say that it is rigidly structured with
places at the top reserved for intellectuals having university doctorate degrees
and the lowest rung for blue-collar workers and peasants who, by giving the
association numerical strength, help refute troublesome allegations of elitism.
A 36,000-member women's branch, set up in 1930, operates on a separate-but-equal
basis from the male branch.

Overseeing the operation of the organization at Opus Dei headquarters in Rome is
a General Council comprising appointed delegates from various world regions.
Total membership is currently 72,000, representing 80 different nationalities,
some of them migrants or exiles. The organization's 4,000 members in the United
States are represented in Rome by David Sperling and Daryl Glick, who constantly
shuttle between Rome and their organization's headquarters in New Rochelle, N.Y.

Some lay members live in Opus Dei residences, others at home with their
families. The vast majority of members work, and often excel, in a wide variety
of civilian professions and businesses. Some of the substantial monetary
contributions to the movement are said to come from non-Catholic
''cooperators,'' or sympathizers.

A steady trickle of devotees is attracted to the marble tomb - in the chapel of
Opus Dei headquarters on the Viale Bruno Buozzi in Rome - of the order's
founder, who died in 1975. Formal proceedings, backed by 1,300 bishops, to have
Monsignor Escriva proclaimed ''blessed'' - a step on the road to sainthood -
were opened last year.

A photograph in the office of the present head of Opus Dei, the Very Rev. Alvaro
del Portillo y Diez de Sollano, shows him with Pope John Paul II, who has
inscribed it in his own hand: ''With the most affectionate apostolic blessing.''
In Rome's clerical society, where every word of the Pontiff is carefully
weighed, the adjective affezionatissima in the Italian text is interpreted as a
sign of particular favor.

John Paul II first came to know of Opus Dei during his many trips to Rome and to
other parts of the world when he was still Archbishop of Cracow. He probably was
attracted by the association's orthodoxy and its ways of getting things done.
Since becoming Pope, he has told the association's leaders that he would like
Opus Dei -which has so far kept out of Communist-governed countries - to become
active in his homeland, Poland.

Whatever larger role the Vatican might be considering for Opus Dei, the
immediate task of the Vatican is to re-establish its authority over the Society
of Jesus by tightening control over its members.  Just how far the Pope is
prepared to go to enforce his will was evident last New Year's Eve.

Soon after he was elevated to the Papacy, John Paul II revived the ancient
tradition of a papal year-end Te Deum in the world's principal Jesuit church.
Before the service last year at the Church of the Gesu, in Rome which holds the
tomb of St. Ignatius, he let it be known, pointedly, that he did not want to see
any Jesuits in civilian clothes at the ceremony. Nor did he.

After the service, the Pope went on to the Jesuit general house to
affectionately greet Father Arrupe, by then able to talk and get around a bit.
Then the Pontiff shared dinner in the order's refectory with Fathers Dezza and
Pittau and the members of the headquarters staff.

''The Holy Father was very kind, but also very guarded, in his remarks,'' a
Jesuit who was present said afterward. ''He gave us no hint about the future of
the company.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rev. Robert Drinan (page 34) photo of Jesuit
with El Salvador refugees (page 32) photo of lay worker teaching Hispanic
students (page 3) photo of Jesuit priest hearing confession (page 28) photo of
priesthood students (page 27) photo of studio at Vatican Radio (page 27) photo
of priest walking in Vatican City garden (page 27)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

China Warns U.S. May Face 'Another Vietnam' in Salvador

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 135 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 14


China criticized President Reagan's policy on El Salvador today, accusing United
States-backed troops of ''slaughtering'' civilians and warning that the
Americans could face ''another Vietnam.''

It issued two stinging press commentaries condemning Washington's attempt to
repress ''national liberation movements'' in Central America. In a third
statement, it said the United States had ''lost control'' over the United
Nations and could no longer ''order other countries about at the wave of a
hand.''

China has been tilting away from Washington in recent weeks on foreign policy
questions, in what appears to be an attempt to persuade the Reagan
Administration to refrain from selling weapons to Taiwan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE VIETNAM BURDEN OF U.S.  MILITARY CHIEFS

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 299 words


To the Editor:

Drew Middleton was, as usual, on target with his precis of ''On Strategy,'' my
strategic analysis of the Vietnam War (''Colonel Cites Key Mistakes Over
Vietnam,'' Feb. 7).

However, in my discussion of the strategic failing to mobilize the national
will, I evidently created the wrong impression. Mr.  Middleton concluded, ''If
he has a scapegoat, it is President Lyndon B. Johnson,'' but that was certainly
not my intent, and later in the book (page 74) I categorically refute such an
easy way out:

''Because they made the cardinal military error of underestimating the enemy,
our military leaders failed in their role as 'the principal military advisors to
the President.'

''There are some who have yielded to the temptation to blame everything on the
Commander-in-Chief, President Johnson. But even his severest critics would have
to acknowledge ... that he certainly did not set out to put the nation in
turmoil, ruin his political career, and lose the Vietnam war. It was the duty
and responsibility of his military advisors to warn him of the consequences of
his action (and) to recommend alternatives... In failing to press their military
advice they allowed the United States to pursue a strategic policy that was
faulted from the start.''

The problem with scapegoats is that they don't really help us very much. At this
remove, there is little that can be done about the strategic wisdom of our
civilian and military leaders during the 1960's. But we can attempt to ensure
that our present military leaders understand the nature of war and have a grasp
of how to apply military means to assist in achieving the political goals of the
United States.

That is precisely why the book was written..
(Col.) HARRY G. SUMMERS JR., Carlisle Barracks, Pa., Feb. 8, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VC RECOVERY

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 80 words


To the Editor:

In his letter of Feb. 7, W. W. Rostow criticizes you and CBS for offering
''distorted renditions of what happened'' during the United States involvement
in Vietnam.

In the same letter, he says the Tet offensive ''resulted in a disaster from
which the VC (and their political cadres) never recovered.''

In case it escaped Mr. Rostow's attention, I would like to point out that Saigon
is now known as Ho Chi Minh City.
ED MARKS, Mendham, N.J., Feb. 8, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 16, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BEHIND THE BRINK'S CASE: RETURN OF THE RADICAL LEFT

BYLINE: By M.A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 4838 words


Four months after the slayings of a Brink's guard and two policemen in an
armored-car robbery in Rockland County, a complex story has begun to emerge of a
subterranean culture sustained by a small network of people who view themselves
as warriors in a global revolution.

It is a group of single-minded people leading double lives, often under multiple
aliases, of former Black Panthers and Weather Underground leaders, now in their
middle 30's, who returned suddenly and dramatically to public attention after a
decade in which their names had been largely forgotten.

Within an hour of the shootings on Oct. 20, three of them were arrested when
their speeding car containing bulletproof vests, ski masks and canvas bank
moneybags smashed to a halt against a concrete retaining wall in Nyack, N.Y.
Those arrests, and others that followed, revived an atmosphere of radical
leftism surviving from the years of antiwar protest and civil-rights activity.

Why these men and women were in Rockland County, as at least some of them were,
is only now coming out in interviews with lawenforcement authorities, defense
attorneys, friends of the accused and some of the defendants themselves.

Quiet Lives in the 70's

For many of those accused, the late 1970's now appear to have been a time of
living quietly, having children, selling jewelry or fighting for tenants in
housing disputes, earning modest incomes moving potatoes and carrots from Hunts
Point to Rockefeller Center at 4 A.M. or collecting welfare while picking up
tips serving chicken and ice cream to the crowds at the U.S. Open tennis
tournament.

But it was also a time, law-enforcement officials say, when an unusual alliance
was forged between white socialists such as Judith A. Clark, Katharine Boudin
and David J. Gilbert, who had been prominent figures in the domestic upheavals
of the Vietnam War era, and black nationalists who had moved on to an amorphous
organization called the Black Liberation Army.

Law-enforcement officials, who portray the defendants as ''executioners,'' say
they believe that the $1.6 million recovered after the holdup would have
financed guns and ammunition, clandestine travel, and ''safe houses'' for hiding
and planning future crimes.  They also say that the robbery in Nanuet, N.Y., was
the latest such action by a network of ''terrorists,'' many of them with long
criminal records, who have been holding up armored cars in the New York area for
at least two years.

For example, according to police sources, Mr. Gilbert has been recently linked
by fingerprint or handwriting analysis to the rental of vehicles used in three
armored car holdups that preceded Nanuet and to the prison escape in 1979 of
Joanne Chesimard, a reputed Black Liberation Army leader who was serving a life
term for the murder of a New Jersey state trooper in 1973.

And in two of the armored car robberies, in early 1980, the police are studying
an apparent connection between the rental of the vehicles and personal
identification supplied several months earlier by unsuspecting customers at
Broadway Baby, an Upper West Side children's wear shop that was managed by
Bernadine Dohrn, a former Weather Underground leader. Miss Dohrn has not been
publicly linked to the Brink's case or any of the other robberies.

Miss Dohrn, who surrendered to authorities in late 1980 and was placed on
probation for an 11-year-old assault charge, is now caring for Miss Boudin's
16-month-old son, Chesa, whose father is Mr.  Gilbert.

To their supporters and advisers in such groups as the May 19th Communist
Organization and the Republic of New Afrika, which seeks to carve out a black
nation from five Southern states, the accused are ''heroes'' who were engaged in
an ''expropriation'' of funds that would have been used to improve conditions
for the poor.

And many of these figures, according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
their own statements, had come to regard violence as inevitable.

''There has always been an aspect of armed struggle in every movement for social
change,'' Miss Clark said in an interview at the state prison in Woodbourne,
N.Y. Miss Clark, who was removed from the wrecked car in Nyack on Oct. 20
wearing a wig and carrying an ammunition clip in her pocketbook, has refused to
enter a plea to murder and robbery charges stemming from the holdup of the
Brink's truck earlier that day outside a bank at the Nanuet Mall.

Although the violence in Rockland County, 25 miles north of New York City, has
been widely condemned by liberals and others who were sympathetic to the
protests of student radicals and blacks in the 1960's, Nathaniel Burns, another
of the eight Rockland defendants, stressed that the incident was ''no attack on
the oppressed.''

''That was no candy store up there,'' the 35-year-old former leader of the Black
Panther Party said in an interview in the prison ward of Kings County Hospital,
where he was being watched over by policemen toting machine guns. Mr. Burns was
recovering from an abdominal ailment. Like most of his co-de@fendants, he denied
planning or taking part in the Rockland crime. But he said he supported ''people
struggling for their freedom against an illegal, fascist, racist government''
and that, regrettably, blacks never achieved as much as when they threatened
violence.

''Look at the period from 1963 to 1971,'' he remarked. ''People said, 'Burn,
baby, burn,' and we got more done than ever.'' Of all the defendants, the best
known is Miss Boudin, who was arrested while fleeing on foot from the melee that
accompanied the shooting of the two policemen at a roadblock. She is at the
Woodbourne prison with Mr. Gilbert, Miss Clark and Samuel Brown, the three other
persons who were captured in Rockland County on Oct. 20.  Three other
defendants, including Mr. Burns, were later seized here and in Philadelphia; an
eighth suspect, Marilyn Jean Buck, is still being sought.

Miss Boudin, whose father, Leonard, is a noted constitutional lawyer, was one of
two women in the Weather Underground who escaped an explosion in 1970 at a
Greenwich Village town house that had been converted into a bomb factory. In
1975 she was one of five fugitives who were seen in a film made to garner
support for a cause that was on the wane.

PICK UP TAKE 2

''Underground on the West Side''

Underground on the West Side

By the late 1970's the Weather Underground's base of support among the young had
seriously eroded and the organization, which had dwindled from perhaps 300 to 50
members, ceased its symbolic bombings of public buildings, in which no lives had
been lost. Divided over questions of ideology and tactics, and hampered by
personal quarrels, the Weather Underground dissolved and some of its leaders,
including Miss Dohrn, Mark Rudd and Cathlyn P. Wilkerson (who also had escaped
from the town house), prepared to give themselves up to the authorities on
assault and other charges, generally stemming from demonstrations a decade
earlier. Not so Miss Boudin or Mr. Gilbert.

Mr. Gilbert, who has long argued that communism and ''Third World revolution''
carried out through a ''people's war'' were the only paths to equal justice,
spent the early 1970's in the Denver area, where he was once arrested on charges
of arson and assaulting a policeman. He fled from those charges and apparently
went to California. Friends recall the 37-year-old Rockland defendant as having
said that he worked among Mexican-American laborers in Colorado and later for a
moving company in San Francisco.

Like Miss Boudin, who by one account worked in the early 1970's as a nurse's
aide in a Boston hospital, Mr. Gilbert ultimately returned to New York and to
the neighborhood around Columbia University, where he had been active in
Students for a Democratic Society in the mid-1960's. Using a false Social
Security number and the alias Lou Wasser, he went to work around 1980 for an
Upper West Side moving company, hauling furniture and vegetables. On his job
application, which was never checked, he said he had worked as a warehouseman
for the Itkin Brothers office furniture company and as a stock clerk for B.
Dalton booksellers.

'A Political Person'

''Lou was a decent, sensitive, fully emotional human being,'' said Dan Schnaidt,
one of his co-workers at the moving company. ''He was a hard worker and you
could tell he was a political person, concerned about issues like feminism. He
used to give the guys on the trucks a hard time when they made remarks about
women on the streets.''

At the moving company, Mr. Schnaidt said, ''Lou found the perfect cover, though
we didn't know it. He was so good at not being evasive. He said that he was
really a writer and, of course, most of us working here are writers or musicians
or actors or painters.'' Mr.  Gilbert was also remembered at the moving company
for his frugality - ''He brown-bagged his lunch, health foods mostly, and he
never had any money,'' said the office manager. ''I recall him once scratching
around for eight more dollars to pay his rent.''

Mr. Gilbert discussed politics with a few of his fellow employees, deploring the
conditions under which people lived in South and Central America, condemning the
''lies'' surrounding such measures as the Gulf of Tonkin resolution during the
Vietnam War.

''Basically Lou was a humanitarian who was outraged at what people could do to
one another,'' one of his co-workers said. ''I got a letter from him after his
arrest and he sees himself as having a small but necessary part in history; a
long history, something beyond even the third world revolution.''

Mr. Gilbert never invited his co-workers home, and, while he gave the moving
company his correct phone number, he gave them a home address that is, in fact,
a church cemetery. He actually lived in a $109-a-month room in the apartment of
an elderly man in Washington Heights who knew him, not as Lou Wasser, but as Lou
Grossman. To that room, with its wall posters demanding equal rights for blacks,
Mr. Gilbert often brought Chesa and Lynn Adams, as Miss Boudin called herself.

Roommates Near Columbia

Miss Boudin, who is 38, preferred to live apart from Mr. Gilbert.  Several years
ago she moved into a five-room cooperative apartment at 50 Morningside Drive,
near Columbia, where she shared quarters with the apartment's owner, Rita
Jensen, then a reporter for The Advocate of Stamford, Conn., and Miss Jensen's
two young children.

In the immediate aftermath of the Nanuet holdup, Miss Jensen described Miss
Boudin, a graduate of Bryn Mawr College, as a considerate, intelligent person
with ''a sense of principle''; as a woman, who as her mother had once wanted her
to, was thinking about applying to medical school.

Miss Boudin was also known as Lynn at the Children's Free School, at 560 West
113th Street, a parents' cooperative attended by Miss Jensen's children. Because
parents were required to contribute time to the school, and Miss Jensen was
working in Connecticut, Miss Boudin often substituted for her.

Besides collecting a welfare check every two weeks for $177.75 under the name
Lydia Adams, Miss Boudin worked, from time to time, as a waitress. In the
summers of 1978, 1979 and 1981, for example, she was employed by a catering
concern to serve fast foods to fans at the U.S. Open tennis tournament in
Flushing Meadows. Miss Boudin told her employer that her name was Elizabeth
Hartwell and that she lived at the Hotel Empire near Lincoln Center. Just as she
had a Social Security card in the name of Lydia Adams, she had one in the
Hartwell name.

''She was very sociable,'' said Michael Vavarro, an official of the catering
concern. ''Last summer she showed us pictures of the baby; I remember there was
something like a log cabin in the photos and she said they had been taken in
California or Canada. Last October, just before this thing happened, she called
me, looking for more work.''

David Gilbert was also looking for work at that time. He had stayed away from
the moving company for months, saying he was working on a historical novel under
a grant from a ''writers' foundation.'' But shortly before the Rockland
shootout, he let the company know he would be ready for odd jobs by November.

PICK UP TAKE 3

''From Broadway Baby to Nanuet Mall''
From Broadway Baby to Nanuet Mall

Law-enforcement officials say that Mr. Gilbert's main occupation had nothing to
do with furniture or books, and that they nearly caught up with him before he
got to the Nanuet Mall.

Their account begins on Dec. 27, 1979, when a young woman who lived on Riverside
Drive strolled into Broadway Baby, at 2244 Broadway, near 80th Street, to buy
clothing for her infant. The woman paid by check, showing her driver's license
for identification. The next day someone posing as that woman walked into a
State Department of Motor Vehicles office in the Bronx. She said she had lost
her license and needed a replacement. After completing an application with the
correct personal data about the Riverside Drive woman, the impostor was given
the duplicate license. That same day an impostor in Yonkers got a duplicate
license in the name of a physician's wife who had also shopped at Broadway Baby
in December 1979.

On Feb. 20, 1980, officials now say, the duplicate license of the physician's
wife was used to rent a van on Long Island that figured in an aborted armored
car holdup in Greenburgh, N.Y., in Westchester County. The woman renting the
van, which was abandoned near the scene of the robbery, said she was a waitress
at the Blarney Castle restaurant at 103 West 72d Street. In that case, a
longtime criminal named Eugene Covington, who had once been convicted of a
triple homicide, pleaded guilty. His accomplices, evidently two men and a woman,
escaped.

$500,000 Armored Car Robbery

On March 22, 1980, according to the officials, the duplicate license of the
woman from Riverside Drive was used to rent a van in White Plains that figured
in an armored car robbery in Inwood, L.I., where five bandits made off with
$500,000. Again, the woman told the rental agency that she was a waitress at the
Blarney Castle. Renting from the same agency that day was a white man, who,
impersonating a real Manhattan resident named Schatzkin, had obtained a
duplicate license on Dec. 27, 1979. Moreover, the day before the robbery a woman
in Inwood whose home had recently been burglarized took down the license number
of a car cruising the area. The plate, officials say, was traced to a friend of
Nathaniel Burns.

On March 28, 1981, a man who had impersonated a real Manhattan resident named
Hersh and obtained a duplicate license rented a van in Connecticut that was used
in an aborted armored car robbery in Danbury, Conn., in which one of several
bandits fired a high-powered weapon at the windshield of the armored car. The
driver, who escaped injury, sped off. On June 2, 1981, at least four robbers
made off with $292,000 after ambushing an armored car in the north Bronx, and
shooting to death one of the guards. Officials say the van was rented by a man
who had obtained a duplicate license by impersonating a real Manhattan resident
named Barranco.

While investigating the June 2 robbery last summer, and trying to determine
whether any of the previous holdups were related, Bronx detectives found only
one connection between the woman from Riverside Drive and the physician's wife -
their having shopped at Broadway Baby. And when they discovered that Miss Dohrn
had been the manager of the boutique between September 1979 and February 1980,
and had apparently waited on the Riverside Drive woman and perhaps the
physician's wife as well, they sensed a ''political'' element to the case.

Senior police officials were alerted to the development, and flyers bearing the
physical descriptions of the two renters in the earlier holdups and the various
names they had used were distributed to 300 car-rental locations in the New York
area. One of those was a small National Car Rental agency on Smith Street in
Brooklyn, where, at 9:05 A.M. on Oct. 20, a woman using the alias Judith
Schneider - a woman who had previously rented at that agency on Oct. 12 -rented
a red Chevrolet van. Seven hours later the van figured in the holdup in Rockland
County.

Fingerprint on Application

Soon after the Nanuet shootout, officials say, they found David Gilbert's
fingerprint on the application for the Barranco duplicate license used to rent
the van in the June 2 Bronx robbery. Government handwriting experts, they say,
have also concluded that the same person - Mr. Gilbert - filled out the Hersh
and Schatzkin applications, too. And the handwriting on the Barranco
application, they add, is the same handwriting as on a counterfeit Pennsylvania
license that was used to rent a van used in the escape of Miss Chesimard from a
prison in Clinton, N.J., on Nov. 2, 1979. Miss Chesimard is still at large.

The identity of the woman who impersonated the two Broadway Baby patrons, and
who may also have used the alias Judith Schneider last October, has not been
established. Eve Rosahn, a supporter of the May 19th Communist Organization
whose borrowed Honda was used in the Rockland incident, was at first accused of
being the Schneider woman but was later exonerated. Miss Boudin and Miss Clark
have resisted an effort by law enforcement officials to get samples of their
handwriting and hair. According to the police, a copy of the Oct. 12 Brooklyn
rental agreement was found in Miss Boudin's apartment.

PICK UP TAKE 4

''The View From Behind Prison Bars''

The View From Behind Prison Bars

Miss Dohrn, who law-enforcement officials believe was in contact with Miss
Boudin in recent years, left Broadway Baby, which is now out of business, just
before giving birth to her second child. Now 40, she occasionally lectures and
writes articles and may have resumed working as a waitress here. She did not
respond to requests for comment through her lawyer and several friends.

Miss Clark declined, in the interview at Woodbourne prison, to say whether she
had kept in touch over the years with any of her present co-defendants, although
she had known Mr. Gilbert for more than a decade and, according to the
superintendent of the Upper West Side apartment building where Miss Clark had
lived with two women since 1978, a man resembling Mr. Gilbert visited her
occasionally. Miss Clark would also not discuss the specifics of her involvement
in the Rockland holdup.

A diminutive woman with an angular face and hands that seemed always in motion,
Miss Clark, 32, traced her political education back to junior high school in
Brooklyn in the early 1960's, when she first came to believe that black children
were getting a ''destructive'' education.From that time, Miss Clark said,
''there has been a certain continuity to my political involvement.''

Miss Clark, who was expelled from the University of Chicago in 1969 for her part
in a student demonstration, and who later served seven months in a Chicago jail
for her role in the Weathermen ''Days of Rage'' street disorders, has been
''above ground'' since 1971. While employed here as a word processor or a legal
secretary, she spent much of the 1970's raising support for the defense of
''political prisoners'' and helping to put out a prisoners' newspaper.

In 1978 Miss Clark became spokesman for the May 19th Communist Organization, a
new Marxist-Leninist group that had been the East Coast faction of the Weather
Underground's successor, the Prairie Fire Organizing Committee. The May 19th
group, named after the joint birthday of Malcolm X and Ho Chi Minh, has an
all-white membership, including some ''radical feminists.''

With headquarters in a downtown Brooklyn tenement, and with ''strategic
leadership from the Black Revolutionary Nationalist movement in Amerika,'' the
organization proselytizes through pamphlets and demonstrations for
''self-determination'' for victims of ''u.s. imperialism.''

'Racist White Feminists'

Not all their efforts, however, are appreciated by black militants. As recently
as several months ago a group of well-known ''B.L.A.-POW's'' in prison here
criticized the ''opportunism'' of ''May 19th racist white feminists'' and also
deplored the leadership of the 13-year-old Republic of New Afrika. The black
prisoners said, among other things, that the Afrika group had failed to keep a
promise to buy a home computer to analyze documents in suits against the Federal
Government, such as one in which Miss Clark, who was the subject of illegal
F.B.I. surveillance in the early 1970's, is the lead plaintiff.

Miss Clark, who represented her group at a Palestine Liberation Organization
conference in Beirut a month before the Nanuet shootout, said the other day that
her political thinking had been transformed by the speeches and writings of
Malcolm X.

''I was just rereading Malcolm,'' the prisoner added with a smile.  ''I have the
book here.'' Miss Clark said that working within the American political system
was a contradiction in terms. ''You can't expect justice from an unjust system.
Look what's happening today, with the Klan on the rise and Reaganomics and this
whole idea of 'the new Federalism' that will only mean starvation and
lower-quality medical care for the poor. The system is in crisis.''

Miss Clark, peering out a barred window at the snow-covered Catskill Mountains,
dismissed the idea that she had endangered the well-being of her daughter,
Harriet, who was born last spring and who she said was now being cared for by
''comrades.''

''I don't want my child to grow up in a corrupt society,'' she said, noting that
her parents had taught her that all people have ''fundamental rights.'' Miss
Clark's father, Joseph, was Moscow correspondent of The Daily Worker before he
broke with the Communist Party in 1957. He later was director of press relations
for the American Cancer Society, and is now retired. The defendant's mother,
Ruth, is an executive of Yankelovich, Skelly and White, the polling concern.

Asked about the ''rights'' of the people slain in the Rockland incident, Miss
Clark again invoked Malcolm X. ''As Malcolm said, the government makes the
criminals the victims and the victims the criminals.''

Among the ''political prisoners'' whom Miss Clark supported in the 1970's was
Marilyn Buck, now one of Miss Clark's co-defendants in the Rockland case. Miss
Buck, 34, who has been described by law enforcement officials as the only white
member of the Black Liberation Army, was imprisoned on a weapons conviction
between 1974 and 1977 at a Federal institution in Alderson, W. Va., where she
was visited by Miss Clark and Susan V. Tipograph, a young New York lawyer who
was then representing Miss Buck and is now representing Miss Clark. On July 1,
1977, while Miss Buck was on a furlough in connection with a legal appeal, she
absconded from Miss Tipograph's apartment on West 14th Street, and has not been
captured.

A String of Aliases

According to Kenneth Gribetz, the Rockland County District Attorney, Miss Buck's
white Oldsmobile was used in the escape from Nanuet; the blood-soaked car was
found later that day in Westchester County. Under a string of aliases, he said,
Miss Buck had earlier rented a number of apartments in the New York area that
were used as ''safe houses,'' including one in Mount Vernon that was hurriedly
emptied on the afternoon of Oct. 20 by Miss Buck and others who were later
indicted.

Mr. Burns, in the interview at Kings County Hospital, said he thought he had met
Miss Buck in Algeria, where he fled just before being charged in 1969 with
plotting to kill police officers and blow up department stores in Manhattan. In
that case, known as the ''Panther 21'' case, the defendants were acquitted. Mr.
Burns, who is also known as Sekou Odinga, secretly returned to this country in
the 1970's and, using various aliases, began selling African imports and
jewelry. All the while, he said, he ''worked in local struggles to improve
schools, feed the hungry and expose police brutality; I've worked all my dog
life.''

Mr. Burns said he had ''often heard people say the time is not right for action
- I know black people don't like taking to the streets and getting their heads
beat in.''

''But the causes that made people take to the streets before are still with
us,'' he said. ''The struggle is necessary.'' The defendant said the Brink's
company stood for the ''very system that is fighting blacks,'' and, while he
regretted the fact that one of the policemen slain at the Nyack roadblock was
black, ''the color of a lion that attacks me @doesn't matter.''

Although Mr. Burns said he played no part in the Rockland incident, law
enforcement officials said he had been identified from photographs by a number
of witnesses. Photographic identification and, in some instances, fingerprints
in the ''safe houses'' form much of the basis for the indictments of the four
defendants who were not captured in Rockland.

These defendants include two men -Donald Weems and Anthony LaBorde -whom Mr.
Burns has known since high school in Queens and who have extensive criminal
records. The men, like Samuel Smith, who was killed in a shootout with the
police in Queens Oct. 23, are believed to have engaged in community organizing
and other work in the Ocean Hill-Brownsville section of Brooklyn, in Harlem and
in the South Bronx.

Mr. Smith was shot after a wild car chase in which Mr. Burns was captured. Both
of them were wearing bulletproof vests and, in Mr.  Smith's pocket, the police
found a flattened .38-caliber slug that was traced to a weapon used in Nyack by
one of the slain officers.

Suspects in Prison Escape

Mr. Weems and Mr. LaBorde are suspects in the prison escape of Miss Chesimard.
Mr. Weems escaped twice from New Jersey prisons in the 1970's, where he was
serving a sentence for bank robbery. He had previously pleaded guilty to a
charge of shooting at policemen, a charge in which Mr. Burns, by then a
fugitive, was also implicated by law-enforcement officials.

Another defendant, Samuel Brown, has been described by Chokwe Lumumba, one of
the defense lawyers in the Rockland case, as ''the kind of street brother who
provides the backbone to the movement.'' Mr. Brown - who like several of the
other defendants has charged the police with physical brutality - was arrested
last May, police said, carrying a loaded 9-millimeter pistol, in what they said
was an attempt to steal a car.

Mr. LaBorde, who was wanted for the ambush-slaying of Police Officer John
Scarangello in Queens last April 16, was, in recent years, a paralegal aide at
Bronx Legal Services, a federally financed antipoverty program. Mr. LaBorde
worked on tenants' rights matters. ''To portray LaBorde as just a terrorist
going around killing people would be a mistake,'' said Stephen M. Latimer, a
former lawyer with the program. ''I know him. And if he got to that point, it
was based on a political conclusion that his people were being betrayed and that
the system ain't changing.''

Mr. Gribetz, the Rockland County prosecutor, says he is eager to avoid a trial
that attempts to put ''the system'' in the dock or that turns on the politics of
the defendants, who, apart from the charges of robbery against them, face
25-year-to-life terms if convicted of second-degree murder.

Miss Boudin, of all the accused, seems to be under the most pressure in prison.
According to several people who have seen her in recent weeks, she is desperate
to avoid long incarceration. One visitor recalled overhearing a conversation at
Woodbourne in which Miss Boudin, in tears, implored Mr. Gilbert to help her.

I've got to get out of here, she was said to have pleaded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Nathaniel Burns (page B4) photo of Donald Weems
(page B4) photo of David J. Gilbert (page B4) photo of Anthony LaBorde (page B4)
photo of Katharine Boudin (page B4) photo of Judith A Clark (page B4)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 16, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET PREMIER HINTS AT OVERTURE TO IMPROVE RELATIONS WITH CHINA

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 847 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 15


Prime Minister Nikolai A. Tikhonov said in an interview published here on Sunday
that the Soviet Union is ''not going to keep from concrete steps'' toward
improved relations with China, but that the process ''must not be one-sided.''

Mr. Tikhonov did not elaborate on the steps he had in mind. But his remark, in
prepared answers to questions submitted by the Japanese newspaper Asahi,
appeared to be the most positive signal from Moscow in several years on the
frosty relationship with Peking.

Diplomats said it was not clear whether Mr. Tikhonov was giving an advance
signal of a breakthrough or was summoning up the possibility of a rapprochement
as a lever in the Soviet bid for improved relations with the United States.
Since Washington and Peking began normalizing relations in 1971, all three
capitals have engaged in feints and maneuvers of this kind.

The Soviet Prime Minister coupled his comments on China with a review of
Soviet-American relations and the situation in Poland. He urged the United
States to abandon the ''language of power and diktat'' and to accept a
''smoothing'' of relations, and he said that it was ''staggering how reckless''
the United States and its allies were being in using the Polish situation to
sour international relations.

But it was his comments on China that seemed to strike a fresh note.  The
75-year-old Prime Minister balanced his overture to Peking by saying that ''the
Chinese leaders, as is known, persistently follow in international affairs a
course of animosity toward the Soviet Union, its allies and its friends.'' But
even this formulation was milder than most that Soviet leaders have used in the
two decades since the two nations fell into a rancorous dispute over ideology,
territory and other issues.

'All This Cannot Be Ignored'

Mr. Tikhonov also alluded to the role that the closer relations between the
United States and China have played in the equation by saying that ''there exist
also other forces in the world that are pressing in every way for a further
worsening of Soviet-Chinese relations.''

But it was his reference to possible improvement in the relationship that caught
the eye of diplomats. Embassies here and in Peking have been alert to the
possibility of a thaw since Moscow approached Peking last fall with a proposal
that they revive talks about a new relationship that were broken off after the
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan in late 1979.

''We have proceeded and continue to proceed from the view that there are no
problems in Soviet-Chinese relations that could not be decided on the basis of
equality and in the spirit of mutual understanding,'' Mr. Tikhonov said. ''We
are not going to keep from concrete steps that would meet vital aspirations and
interests of the Soviet and Chinese peoples.''

''But this process must not be one-sided,'' he said.  Any move to improve
relations is likely to confront obstacles.  Among them are the border dispute
that led to armed clashes in 1969 and the Soviet role as the principal backer of
Vietnam, which is in a state of tension with China over the Vietnamese
occupation of Cambodia and other matters. In recent years the Kremlin has made a
number of approaches to Peking seeking better ties, but the initiatives
foundered each time.

'Scaring Themselves Stiff'

An indication of the Kremlin's perspective came in an article two weeks ago in
the Government newspaper Izvestia, in which a commentator, Aleksandr Bovin,
pointed to recent strains between Washington and Peking and predicted that the
relationship would ultimately founder on differences in ideology and global
interests.  In the meantime, he said, ''as long as Americans are scaring
themselves stiff with the 'Soviet threat,' they will always be haunted by the
nightmare of normalization in Soviet-Chinese relations.''

Mr. Tikhonov's remarks on relations with the United States broke no fresh ground
but were notable for continued stress on the need for the ''constructive
dialogue'' that the Prime Minister advocated in a speech three weeks ago. Since
then, Secretary of State Alexander M.  Haig Jr. and Foreign Minister Andrei A.
Gromyko met in Geneva for talks that produced no breakthroughs on arms control,
Poland and other issues.

Mr. Tikhonov said ''a smoothing of Soviet-American relations'' would lessen
international tensions and the risk of war, but added, ''Regrettably, there are
so far no signs that things are moving in a favorable direction.''

Mr. Tikhonov also said that the American military buildup was futile.
''Washington will not gain anything either by striving to introduce in diplomacy
the language of power and diktat,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 16, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTHEAST ASIANS SEE SOVIET THREAT

BYLINE: By ROBERT TRUMBULL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, Feb. 15


Southeast Asian officials and defense analysts, in a private conference with
political and military officials and civilian specialists from the United States
and other countries, have identified Soviet influence in Vietnam as a principal
threat to the non-Communist nations of the region.

However, the delegates from member countries of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations - Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines -
were divided as to whether Moscow or Peking represented the more immediate
menace in the area. They agreed on the importance of an American military
presence in the region, and generally favored a strengthened, if still limited,
defense capacity for Japan.

The Southeast Asians asserted that the booming economies of the five-nation
grouping and the occupation of Cambodia and Laos by pro-Soviet Vietnamese forces
had hampered the activities of Chinesesupported domestic Communist parties. They
maintained, however, that a heavily armed and aggressive Vietnam posed a new
danger for the future.

For example, a Thai security official said that the Vietnamese hold on Cambodia
''threatens the northeastern provinces of Thailand.''

Strong U.S. Economy Held Vital

Several speakers linked their fears to the negative effects on Southeast Asian
well-being of economic disarray in the United States. ''We can do nothing
without a strong U.S. economy,'' a Thai declared.

Other countries represented at the unofficial meeting, held behind closed doors
at a secluded resort hotel on the island of Hawaii, were Japan, South Korea,
Australia and France, besides the United States.  The three-day conference,
which ended Feb. 8, was organized by the Pacific Forum, a Honolulu-based Asian
and Pacific affairs study group headed by a retired American rear admiral, Lloyd
R. Vasey.

American participants in the discussions included Richard G.  Stilwell, Deputy
Under Secretary of Defense; Thomas P. Shoesmith, Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Asian and Pacific Affairs; Philip C. Habib, former Under Secretary of
State, and Richard L.  Sneider, former Ambassador to South Korea. The Asian
delegates included the Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand, Thanat Khoman, among
other officials and defense specialists.

Southeast Asian speakers expressed concern over possible United States military
and technological aid to the Peking regime, which was described by a Malaysian
as ''the greatest threat'' to his country.  An Indonesian said that his
Government ''wants the United States to normalize relations with Vietnam,'' to
dilute that nation's reliance on the Soviet Union.

Habib Rejects Any Hanoi Ties

Mr. Habib, who represented the United States in fruitless negotiations with
North Vietnamese officials during the later stages of the Vietnam War, sharply
rebuffed the suggestion that Washington should warm up to Hanoi, and even
furnish economic aid to that regime.

American aid to Hanoi is ''in the world of dreams,'' the veteran diplomat
declared, adding that ''there is no logical reason for United States policy to
change in the near future'' in regard to Vietnam.

An Indonesian, who said that his country was ''very concerned'' about Soviet
expansionism but did not see the Russian presence in Vietnam as an ''immediate
threat,'' called upon the United States to cooperate in a program to enable the
Southeast Asian allies to standardize their armaments.

Mr. Shoesmith declared that the focus of relations between the United States and
friendly Asian countries ''should be on what we can do together,'' rather than
on how one party can help another.

Mr. Thanat, the Thai Deputy Prime Minister, declared that ''it is time for Japan
to do more than rely on the U.S. umbrella'' for security. If Japan ''only
defended the immediate area,'' he declared, Soviet forces deployed in Asia would
be ''tied down instead of prowling the Pacific and Indian Oceans.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 16, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Talking Business with Salim B. Lewis of S. B. Lewis

The Outlook For Mergers

BYLINE: KAREN W. ARENSON

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


After a 10-year hot streak, mergers and acquisitions appear to have slowed
considerably. Salim B. Lewis, an arbitrageur and investment banker who manages
his own small Wall Street firm, S. B. Lewis & Company, put together one of last
year's biggest mergers - American Express and Shearson Loeb Rhoades.

Recently, Mr. Lewis discussed the state of the merger business, and how
President Reagan's economic program has affected it. He expressed ''cautious
optimism'' that the Reagan program, though it has adversely affected the
financial markets, will eventually succeed in ridding the economy of inflation.
And he predicted a gradual return to healthier markets.

Q. What has slowed the pace of mergers and acquisitions? A. There has been a
decline recently because of high interest rates and uncertainty about the
economy. We have had high rates before, which have not curtailed mergers to the
same extent. But we have not had this degree of uncertainty. People don't have
any conviction about whether there is going to be renewed inflation,
''stagflation'' or deflation. After 10 years of living with inflation and
learning to adjust to it, now the corporate manager has to question what the
Reagan program really means. If there were deflation - an actual decrease in
prices - it would be much more difficult for business to deal with.

Q. What do you think is the outlook for mergers and acquisitions?  A. We may
have a period where things are a little slow. But I think we will find we still
have a decent level of business, although not as substantial as it has been.
Last year at this time, I thought the year would be relatively poor, and I was
wrong. But I feel the same way now.

Q. Are you adopting any new strategies in your own business in this period of
great economic and financial volatility? A. By far the largest portion of our
investment portfolio is still merger deals.  But I'm thinking of going into some
bond trading. Inflation is down considerably from a year ago, although the bond
market, especially, is skeptical. With the high real rates of return, I think
this is a period for betting on interest rates. I would not altogether discount
the possibility that the markets may just finally come to believe in Reagan.

Q. The markets seem to have a notable lack of confidence now. What do you think
would bring them around? A. Reagan has not won on the credibility front yet, but
at least now everyone is focused on the right issues. The country has learned
its lesson, and people are very unhappy with continued inflation. I take some
comfort in that fact.

In the late 1960's, it was ony after the country finally began to focus on
Vietnam that the problem was resolved. The President has done this country a
service by getting everyone to focus on the problem of inflation. There is no
longer any disagreement on whether it should be a concern. The disagreement now
is on how severe the pain is going to be in curing that inflation. Maybe the
pendulum will swing too far in the other direction. But I believe that will
selfcorrect.

Q. Many other financial executives have expressed alarm over the large budget
deficits that have been projected. They do not seem to bother you as much. Why?
A. I am bothered by the deficits, and I think they may get worse. But I think
they are a necessary evil to our system right now. I don't view them either as a
national death wish or as the beginning of the end of the world. The much
greater concern is whether the country has begun to show a desire to deal with
the nation's credit-worthiness, and whether we want to protect our savings by
licking inflation.

The question I can't answer is whether this country will have the
stick-to-it-iveness to remain on course, whether the Federal Reserve will
continue to be consistent and not monetize the debt. I have the feeling that
this time our effort is more real, and that inflation will continue to come
down. Then all of this hollering will disappear.It always takes a long time for
these things to shift around.

Q. For the present, however, the bond markets are not the only ones suffering.
The stock market also has looked pretty sickly. What do you think is the outlook
for that? A. Everyone has a favorite hunch.  I wouldn't be surprised to see it
come back in the second half of this year. I think it will be more interesting
than the first half.

Q. Inflation has been a key factor behind the active merger business of the past
decade. The absence of any prolonged rise in stock prices meant that for many
corporations the only way to cash in on their underlying values was to merge. If
inflation does continue to moderate, will merger activity also abate? A. No.
There is a type of merger deal that has come to be associated with inflation.
That is the natural resource type purchase, mergers of companies with oil or
minerals. But other types of transactions also occur as corporate chiefs look at
their assets and their ability to manage them and decide to sell some that
aren't working well and buy others that might fit better.

But the high activity of recent years will be helpful. Today it is easier to get
a corporate board to sit down and consider why this divestiture or that
acquisition should be considered. To a certain extent, executives are simply
more familiar with the process.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 17, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MRS. REAGAN DEPLORES A DRUG 'EPIDEMIC'

BYLINE: By ENID NEMY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Feb. 16


The narcotics problem among young Americans has reached epidemic proportions,
Nancy Reagan said at an informal news conference today aboard the Air Force
plane carrying her to Texas from St. Petersburg, Fla.

''It certainly crosses all lines,'' said Mrs. Reagan, who is on the second and
final day of her first major trip involved with social issues. ''It is the most
democratic of diseases.''

The First Lady, who visited an elementary-school prevention project and
narcotics-rehabilitation facility in Florida on Monday, attended a lunch here
today with representatives of the Texans' War on Drugs Committee. Before
returning to Washington she also visited Richardson Families in Action, a parent
group dedicated to removing narcotics from Richardson, a suburb north of Dallas.

Answering a question during the flight, Mrs. Reagan said that she planned to
make similar trips as often as she could. Asked if she felt like a crusader, she
replied: ''Yes, I do, because we are in danger of losing a whole generation.''

Then, smiling, she added, apparently in allusion to mothers trying to combat the
narcotics problem among their children but without elaboration: ''There's a
saying that a woman is like a teabag. You don't know her strengths until she is
in hot water.''

She conceded that she was ''sort of worn out'' last night at the conclusion of a
two-and-a-half-hour meeting of Straight Inc. in St.  Petersburg. The meeting,
with 350 young people and 650 parents involved in a rehabilitation program, left
her wiping away tears.

''I feel so sorry for those kids and those parents,'' she said.  ''When they
were talking about the things they were on - horrible concoctions, a lot of them
I never heard of. Who would think of D-Con and leaves ground up with something
else?''

She shook her head when queried about Federal funding for programs to combat
addiction. ''That's not my area,'' she said. Three of the four programs visited
are privately funded and the fourth is partly funded by Florida. No visits were
scheduled to facilities primarily for minorities; ''I'm seeing as much as I
can,'' Mrs. Reagan said.

She shook her head again when asked if she agreed with her husband that she had
received a ''bum rap.'' The question referred to criticism of such things as the
White House redecoration, the purchase of a $209,000 set of china for formal
White House occasions and the designer clothes, some of them gifts from the
makers, that she favors. ''I just want to talk about children and drugs,'' she
said.

On another subject during the news conference on her flight, she alluded to the
attempted assassination of the President: ''Last year was a lost year. It was
not exactly the happiest year of my whole life.''

On arriving at the Dallas hotel where she had lunch, she was greeted by about a
dozen men and women carrying yellow placards. One in the group, Helen Derden, a
Dallas homemaker, said the demonstration was organized to inform Mrs. Reagan of
the what the group contends is lead contamination hazardous to children. ''We
thought we could interest her in it,'' she said. Mrs. Reagan did not talk with
the group.

Mrs. Reagan assured the meeting held by the Texans' War on Drugs Committee of
her long-term commitment to the narcotics issue. ''This will be a continuing
interest,'' she told the gathering, which included Gov. William P. Clements Jr.,
who established the committee in 1979, and H. Ross Perot, the industrialist, who
is its chairman.

Governor Clements suggested to Mrs. Reagan that, as a first step, she work
through governors' offices.  ''The resources are available there,'' he said.
''There has to be some real conscious endorsement and interest from governors'
offices because ultimately this will end up before legislatures.'' Texas has
adopted strong laws to counteract narcotics addiction, including action to
outlaw so-called head shops and the paraphernalia they sell. The stores are
contesting the ban in the courts.

Mrs. Reagan mentioned that she would be lunching with governors' wives at the
White House next week and that she intended to bring up the subject.

Mr. Perot observed that he had seen evidence of Mrs. Reagan's organizational
ability and effectiveness during her husband's governorship of California, when
she gave both time and money to helping prisoners of the Vietnam war and their
families ''in a very private way.''

''Once you sink your teeth into something and decide it's important, we would
like to have you on our side,'' he told her. ''No one in the world can focus
attention on the problem of children and drugs in this country better than the
First Lady. If you provide sparks, people around the country will give time,
energy and money.''

Mrs. Reagan said of the national narcotics problem: ''People out there are
waiting to be directed. Concern is too weak a word. They are frightened, they
are scared. It's a matter of desperation.''

The session of the Richardson Families in Action was held at a private home in
the University Park, a well-to-do section of Dallas.  Seven members of the group
attended. The president and host, Linda Lytle, had azaleas planted on the front
lawn just this morning for the occasion.

Al Jensen, an American Airlines pilot who often speaks for the group, told the
First Lady, who had asked how she could be of help: ''You have access on the
national level to the medical profession. We have found that many time doctors
don't diagnose drug problems, that they don't treat the problems.''

When Mrs. Lytle commented that a number of people had reported that they were
unaware of the narcotics problems among younger people, Mrs. Reagan said: ''It
seems incredible to me that anyone would not know there is a drug problem.
Somebody is making an awful lot of money out of our kids, but we're going to
lick this problem yet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Nancy Reagan and William P. Clements Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WAS NEVER IN ARMY, CAPUTO SAYS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 889 words


Former Representative Bruce F. Caputo, a Republican candidate for United States
Senator from New York, has described himself as a Vietnam-era ''draftee'' and an
Army lieutenant although he was neither.

Mr. Caputo, reached yesterday in Texas where he was on a fundraising trip,
acknowledged that he had not actually served in the Army and had taken a
civilian job in the Defense Department to avoid being drafted.

Mr. Caputo, who is 38 years old, said he had never tried to misrepresent
himself. He suggested that people might have misunderstood him when he described
the civilian job he had held in the Pentagon.

Who's Who in American Politics describes Mr. Caputo as having entered the Army
as a second lieutenant in 1967. The editor of the book, Renee Lauterbach, said
the information could not have come from anyone but Mr. Caputo.

She said the reference first appeared in the 1973 edition and had appeared in
each edition since.  Mr. Caputo said that he could not remember exactly what
information had been provided for the book, but that if he or someone on his
staff had made a reference to the Army, it was an error.

Several newspaper interviews with Mr. Caputo also described him as having been
drafted into the Army. Last September, shortly after announcing his candidacy
for the Republican nomination for the Senate, Mr. Caputo, during an appearance
in Westbury, L.I., described himself as a ''draftee.''

Just last week, Mr. Caputo, according to a reporter who had lunch with him in
Washington, said: ''I was a lieutenant. I had a two-anda-half-year hitch.'' The
reporter, Martin Wald of The Associated Press, said Mr. Caputo had volunteered
the information.

Mr. Caputo is the only declared candidate for the Republican nomination for
Senator and has been generally described by party leaders as likely to win both
the Republican and Conservative Party endorsements.

''I certainly never intended to mislead anyone,'' Mr. Caputo said.  ''Either
they didn't listen carefully or I didn't express myself clearly. To the extent
that I or somebody on my staff was less than careful, we made a mistake.''

Mr. Caputo said that the issue had been called to the attention of some
reporters by the staff of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the Democrat who Mr.
Caputo hopes to unseat in the election this November.

A spokesman for Mr. Moynihan said the Senator's office had, in fact, called
attention to what appeared to be inconsistencies in Mr.  Caputo's description of
his military record. But the spokesman, Timothy Russert, said this had been done
only with reporters who had first called to seek a response to recent attacks by
Mr. Caputo on Senator Moynihan.

Mr. Russert also released this statement from the Senator, ''This is a startling
revelation and I ought not to comment on it just now.''

Mr. Caputo said: ''I've had more interest in this than in any of the issues I've
tried to raise. The issue is why Moynihan voted against capital punishment, why
he voted for school busing and for every Jimmy Carter tax increase. Those are
the issues, not the length of time I was in the Pentagon, or the way I got
there.''

Mr. Caputo worked in the Office of the Secretary of Defense from 1967 to 1969.

Explains Draft Status

He said yesterday that he had taken the position after graduating in 1967 from
the Harvard Business School because he would otherwise have been drafted. His
draft status upon graduation from school, where he had a student deferment, was
being upgraded to 1-A, he said.

Inititally, he said, the Defense Department post was to have been accompanied by
a commission as a lieutenant. But when he arrived, Mr. Caputo said, he was told
that the department preferred that he maintain his civilian status. His draft
board gave special permission for this, he said.

In the post, he said, he worked on the analysis of military problems, including
the air war over North Vietnam and plans to withdraw American forces, Many of
the people he worked with were lieutenants, Mr. Caputo said, and he thought of
himself as ''the equivalent'' of a lieutenant.

He said that his descriptions of this might have confused some people. But he
was neither commissioned as an officer nor sworn into the Army, he said.

In the interview, Mr. Caputo never acknowledged that he had claimed to have been
in the Army. But he said several times that if he had made such a claim, ''I
misspoke.''

Differing Accounts

Mr. Caputo has not consistently said he was in the Army. For example, the
biography released by Mr. Caputo in 1977 - during his one term in Congress
representing the 23d District in Westchester County - says he ''served two years
as an assistant to former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.''

Similiarly, in 1973, when Mr. Caputo was a New York State Assemblyman, the New
York Red Book, described him as serving on the staff of the Secretary of
Defense.

But in the same year, Who's Who in American Politics ran its first reference to
Mr. Caputo as having been a lieutenant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 924 words


International
A two-day police sweep in Poland found 145,000 people to have been violating
martial-law regulations, the authorities announced. As punishment, they said,
128,000 people were issued warnings, 3,500 were detained for questioning, 7,000
were fined a total of $ 29,000 and 4,000 were given court summonses. (Page A1,
Column 6.)
Zimbabwe's unity regime broke apart as Prime Minister Robert Mugabe dismissed
his partner, Joshua Nkomo, from the Cabinet and accused him of plotting to
overthrow the Government by force. The dismissal of Mr. Nkomo and three members
of his party effectively ended the coalition that was established 22 months ago
when Rhodesia became independent. (A1:5.)
Concern over nuclear proliferation was expressed by Hans Blix, the new chief of
the International Atomic Energy Agency. He warned that nuclear weapons could
soon be acquired by India, Pakistan, South Africa and Israel but said there was
little the agency could do to stop them that it is not already doing. (A4:3-6.)
The ability to become pregnant apparently decreases sharply from the age of 31
to that of 35, according to a major study of female fertility. The research,
conducted among 2,193 women, shows the decline to be earlier and more
precipitious than had generally been thought. (A1:3-4.)
National
Some flexibility on budget cuts, including military items, was reflected by
David A. Stockman, the budget director, in a five-hour appearance before the
Democratic-controlled House Budget Committee.  (A1:2-3.)
The threat of a global depression within two years was cited by Chancellor
Helmut Schmidt. In an interview, the West German leader said that the United
States does not fully understand that if the projected American budget deficits
materialize, they are likely to lead to still higher interest rates and to
worldwide political and social destabilization. (A1:4.)
A Ford-labor agreement advanced as local leaders of the United Automobile
Workers voted 144 to 12 to accept a tentative accord with the auto company that
calls for wage and benefit concessions and new assurances on job security. A
ratification vote by the 150,000 union members is to be completed by Feb. 28.
(B8:1-2.)
A family of seven was slain by shotgun blasts at their rural home outside
Farwell, Mich. The police said they had a ''very weak suspect,'' but knew of no
motive for the slaying of the family headed by a mail carrier who was also a
school board official. (A10:1.)
Lee Strasberg died of a heart attack in Manhattan at the age of 80.  Mr.
Strasberg, father of Method acting in the United States, was a master teacher,
artistic director of the Actors Studio, a stage director, film actor and a major
figure in world theater. (D20:1-3.)
Thelonious Monk died at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital, at the age of 64, l2 days
after he suffered a stroke. The wry melodies and unusual harmonic progressions
of the celebrated painist and composer are considered to be among the most
striking contributions to the jazz repertory. (D20:3-6.)
Metropolitan
A dour view of New York City finances was expressed in a report by the staff of
New York State's Financial Control Board. The principal watchdog agency warned
that the city's financial condition was the most perilous since the financial
crisis of the mid-1970's and said that the Koch administration's plan to balance
the budget for the coming year was marked by ''unusual uncertainty.'' (A1:1.)
A shift in financing education to provide increased aid for poorer school
districts in New York State was proposed by Governor Carey. He asked the
Legislature to approve an increase of one percentage point in the state sales
tax, making it 5 percent, to provide $ 8.6 billion in additional education aid
over five years. (B1:5-6.)
Assertions of military service involving former Representative Bruce F. Caputo,
a Republican candidate for Senator from New York, created a stir. Mr. Caputo has
described himself as a Vietnam-era ''draftee'' and an Army lieutenant, though he
was neither. He acknowledged he had not served in the Army and had taken a
civilian job in the Pentagon to avoid being drafted. (A1:1-2.)
A Koch campaign for Governor is said to be likely. Most of the Mayor's closest
friends and advisers said they believed that he should, and would, seek the
Democratic nomination, but none was certain of his decision. Mr. Koch is
expected to announce his plans within a week. (B1:1-2.)
A denial on misuse of school funds was issued by Jerry Evans, the chairman of
Community School Board 3 on Manhattan's Upper West Side.  Other members of the
board have asserted that Mr. Evans spent about $ 1,000 of the board's funds for
such items as liquor and limousine rental. He said the assertions were
''politically motivated'' and promised to pay for any expenses deemed
unacceptable. (B3:1.)
College research for industry, a growing and controversial field, gained an
adherent. Yale University announced that it had signed a three-year, $ 1.1
million contract with the Celanese Corporation to conduct research in the
substance and synthesis of enzymes. Celanese will pay for the research and
provide the salaries of four postdoctoral students, and Yale will hold the
patent for any inventions. (B1:1-3.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LABOR'S NEW VIEW: MILITARY NOW IN CRITICAL FOCUS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words

DATELINE: BAL HARBOUR, Fla., Feb. 17


The A.F.L.-C.I.O. leaders' challenge to the Reagan Administration's military
spending policies represents a clear departure from the federation's past
policies.  But, some union officials acknowledged here today, it also
demonstrates the glacial slowness with which change often comes to the labor
movement.

For years the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
Organizations has been an almost unquestioning supporter of strong military
spending and the nation's military actions abroad, including, for the most part,
the Vietnam War. Most American labor leaders have historically been strongly
anti-Communist, and this at least in part has helped bring about strong union
support for military programs. At the same time, the jobs of many union members
depend upon military-related contracts.

But on Monday the federation's 35-member executive council voted unanimously to
create an eight-member committee to conduct a longrange study of military
expenditures. The council also called for establishing a surtax on individuals
and corporations equivalent to the amount of military expenditure increases that
Congress found to be prudent. Council members said that if Congress accepted the
Administration's proposal of $33 billion increase in military expenditures,
taxes should be increased accordingly.

On Tuesday, Vice President Bush, who appeared before the winter meeting of the
council for about an hour, was sharply questioned about Administration military
expenditures, council members said.

Bush Grilled by Council

Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers, said council
members had asked Mr. Bush at the private meeting how the Administration could
justify its arguments that throwing money on social programs would not solve
social problems but was unwilling, in the view of Mr. Shanker, a council member,
to apply the same scrutiny to military spending.

Mr. Bush was also asked, Mr. Shanker said, how the Administration could expect
the United States to have a strong military construction program if the nation's
basic industries were allowed to run down.

Mr. Bush answered only the last question, Mr. Shanker reported, saying the
Administration's tax program would bring about a reinvigoration of heavy
industry.

In the past, defenders of heavy military spending, even in a Republican
Administration, could generally expect a warm-hearted reception at an
A.F.L.-C.I.O. executive council meeting, not an interrogation.

Kirkland Assails Fiscal Plan

On Tuesday, after Mr. Bush's appearance, Lane Kirkland, the federation
president, criticized, as he had Monday, what he believes is a military spending
program that will be paid for largely by poor and middle-class Americans.

Mr. Kirkland also, in part, likened the proposed military spending increases of
the Reagan Administration to those that occurred in the Johnson Administration
as the nation built up its commitment in the Vietnam War. If the Johnson
military spending programs were inflationary, he said, the Reagan military
proposals could have an even more injurious effect on the American economy.

Mr. Kirkland said the Reagan expenditures ''are not only unaccompanied by tax
increases but are accompanied by the most irresponsible fiscal act of any
government in my memory: the $750 billion rich man's tax giveaway bill.'' Mr.
Kirkland was referring to the Administration's 1981 tax-cutting program, which
he and many other union officials say unfairly benefits wealthy people and
institutions.

Mr. Kirkland, in a statement that also demonstrated the commitment that most
labor leaders have had to military programs, asserted that Mr. Reagan's military
spending plan ''splits the country over the defense issue.'' He said, ''He has
destroyed the element of consensus that had been slowly built up behind the idea
that we ought to do something to enhance our defenses.''

Skepticism About Military

Mr. Shanker, who refers to himself as a ''certified hawk,'' said he and Mr.
Kirkland and perhaps other labor leaders were concerned that huge amounts of
money being budgeted for military purposes without, in his view, proper
investigation to see how military money should be spent and where waste might
be.

He said that he and, in his view, Mr. Kirkland, were coming to the view that
Reagan military strategists ''might not know what they are doing.''

Yet, while the federation council's challenge to the Reagan military spending
marked a pronounced departure from its past policies, some people at the council
meeting cautioned that it was too early to say whether the study committee would
present a meaningful examination of military policies or whether the information
it provided would result in changes of federation policies.

The council has traditionally issued resolutions and statements on an extremely
wide-ranging list of domestic and foreign topics, but these positions were often
soon forgotten, union officials here privately concede.

The military study committee will be headed by John H. Lyons, president of the
International Association of Bridge and Structural Iron Workers.

Two Camps on Issue

For the most part, the committee seemed divided between staunch supporters of
military policies and those who have in the past questioned military spending.

Yet, if it is too early to say whether the federation's statements on military
programs represent the beginning of views that would not have been countenanced
in the past, particularly under the leadership of George Meany, Mr. Kirkland's
predecessor, the statements and the establishment of the committee do appear
extremely important.

Mr. Kirkland has said the union movement does not link its support of military
programs to the fact that these programs often mean substantial numbers of jobs
for union members. Yet many union members benefit substantially from military
spending.

Some leaders here said it was possible that, by establishing a committee and
giving it at least until the end of the year, perhaps longer, to submit a
report, the federation would effectively remove itself from debate over military
programs. But others speculated that the very process of studying military
spending might make the federation receptive to new approaches to the question.

Mr. Kirkland himself said he did not believe the committee would provide
information useful in military debate this year.  Yet, it is clear that the
unanimous agreement by the council to study military expenditures means, at the
least, that stirrings are occurring within this old and generally moderate
institution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: GUNTON BACK IN 'HOW I GOT THAT STORY'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words


TO see Bob Gunton in Amlin Gray's ''How I Got That Story'' is to be reminded
that some actors really can do anything - or everything.  Mr. Gray's harrowing
black comedy about Vietnam, which opened at the Westside Arts Theater last
night, asks that Mr. Gunton play an entire war-torn society all by himself. Not
only must the actor impersonate more than 20 characters - characters of 2 sexes,
2 nationalities and all social strata - but he also must provide the sounds of
Vietnam's gunfire, its bombing runs, its incessant background rock music. And
Mr. Gunton does it all - without makeup, without elaborate costumes, without
letup. Through sheer actor's magic, he transforms himself into a one-man
''Apocalypse Now.''

There is more than mimicry involved. To be sure, Mr. Gunton has all the accents
and gestures down pat. We instantly believe him as a ferocious American officer
commanding his troops, as a redneck G.I.  prowling Saigon's bars, as a petulant
Vietnamese prostitute or a nun in an orphanage. But, along the way, Mr. Gunton's
performance gathers more weight than even the sum of its many brilliant parts.
His Americans all share the same brash cynicism and pragmatism - attributes that
could well define the United States presence in Southeast Asia. His Vietnamese -
whether a Maoist guerrilla or a Madame Nhu-like tyrant - all share the same
private nature that places them just beyond their Western visitors' perceptions.
As we watch Mr. Gunton define the essences of both societies, his everchanging
face becomes an emblematic map of the cultural clash that was doomed to bring
tragedy to them both.

Not that Mr. Gunton is the whole show. As his performance synthesizes the
essentials of the American adventure in Vietnam, so does Mr. Gray's play. ''How
I Got That Story'' contains one additional character - a naive reporter, played
by Don Scardino, who has come to Amboland (as the playwright fictionalizes his
setting) to cover the war. In a series of pithy, ever-more-upsetting scenes, the
reporter, like the audience, is constantly torn among the various Vietnams
embodied by Mr. Gunton. And, by the end, this forlorn pilgrim's progress becomes
a paradigm of his country's own experience in those nightmarish years. Instead
of winning his battle to cover the war, the reporter is destroyed by it - to the
point that he loses both his innocence and his mind.

At first Mr. Scardino is a frisky, good-natured go-getter, always on the prowl
for a scoop. He's eager to be ''impartial,'' to ''try to see, then write the
truth,'' to do colorful features about the ''normal, regular people'' who
survive ''in the midst of horror and confusion.'' But objectivity becomes
impossible as he witnesses first-hand the horror of a monk's self-immolation or
the confusion of the government's official doublespeak. Finally, the reporter
quits his job and goes over to the other side - only to find that he is no more
at home among peasants and guerrillas than he is among his own countrymen. He
remains a spectator in a strange land who ''can never understand what anyone is
doing.''

Mr. Gray has an uncommonly sharp ear for idiosyncratic speech - whether
foul-mouthed G.I. slang, bargirl pidgin English or journalistic shoptalk - and
many of his scenes make both chilling and funny use of language. In the best, he
captures the missed connections as the reporter and his subjects carry on
extended conversations in which neither party ever quite understands what the
other is saying. When Mr. Scardino tries to interview the prostitute, she
mistakes his questions for kinky sexual pillow talk; when he tells a guerrilla
of his sympathy for the insurgency, the revolutionary dismisses him as a
''morbid and decadent'' addict of ''a land in turmoil.''

The bleak laughs of these exchanges are all mined by the director, Carole
Rothman, who also staged the play in its limited-run New York premiere at the
Second Stage last winter. With the aid of Patricia Woodbridge's bamboo-framed,
sliding-screen set, Miss Rothman also does an inventive job of convincing us
that a small, nearly bare stage can be a jungle, a neon-lit bar or even an
airplane cockpit. As of the press preview, however, the requisite split-second
lighting and scene changes sometimes seemed ragged and under-rehearsed. The
costumes and Mr. Gunton's pre-recorded sound effects have also become a bit too
busy, and some of Mr. Gray's minor script-tinkering has erred on the side of
unsubtlety.

But if this production isn't quite as smooth or pure as the last, it has gained
a great deal from Mr. Scardino, who is a strong newcomer to the cast. When the
reporter succumbs to madness in Act II, this young actor becomes a pitiful,
crouching beggar in black Oriental pajamas - adrift in lunatic giggles and
fevers as he fails to enter his new home country or re-enter the one he has left
behind. He's the perfect foil for Mr. Gunton's relentless attack, which doesn't
let up until Mr. Scardino's once-idealistic American is spat out like a
discarded slug into a gutter in Saigon.

Vietnam Revisited
HOW I GOT THAT STORY, by Amlin Gray; di- rected by Carole Rothman; scenery by
Patricia Woodbridge; costumes by Carol Oditz; lighting by Pat Collins; sound by
Gary Harris; choreography by John Lone; stage manager, Fredric H.  Orner;
general management, Buckley, Urban- ski and Wells. Presented by Harold DeFelice,
Louis W. Scheeder, with J.N.H. Ventures Inc.  and Margo Lion. At the Westside
Arts Theater, Cheryl Crawford Theater, 407 West 43d Street.  The Reporter
.............................Don Scardino The Historical Events
......................Bob Gunton

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Don Scardino and Bob Gunton

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BARTHELME TAKES ON TASK OF ALMOST DECIPHERING HIS FICTION

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 920 words


Donald Barthelme, whose short stories in The New Yorker and 10 books (to name
three tantalizing titles: ''Snow White,'' ''Come Back, Dr. Caligari,''
''Unspeakable Practices, Unnatural Acts'') have placed him on the summit of
modern fictional invention, turned the tables on his critical interpreters
Tuesday night. He did what he has seldom done: interpreted himself - somewhat.

In a talk presented by the Writer at Work series of New York University's
Gallatin Division in the Bobst Library, he offered a Rosetta stone for the
meaning behind some of his demotic characters.  If his interpretations weren't
always a precise key to deciphering his work (now collected in ''Sixty
Stories''), at least his talk before some 200 editors, publishers, authors and
students was received as a pyrotechnical performance in the use of the spoken
word as literature.

Among the subjects he ribbed for nearly an hour were Sarah Lawrence seniors,
Tiffany's, the Downtown Nursery, the Whitney Museum, Johns Hopkins,
Existentialism, Moonbeam McSwine, Alain Robbe-Grillet, the Bolivian Army and the
Internal Revenue Service. (In a fictional conceit in his talk, Mr. Barthelme
invents Gaston, a literary critic, ''who is a guard at the Whitney Museum, is in
love with an I.R.S.  agent named Madelaine, the very I.R.S. agent, in fact, who
is auditing my return for the year 1979.'')

One for the White Rock Girl

By contrast, those who came off well were Stephane Mallarme, Upton Sinclair,
Lewis Carroll, Samuel Beckett, the White Rock girl, Robert Rauschenberg, George
Orwell, Louis Armstrong and the pre-Hitler newspaper Frankfurter Zeitung.
Especially Mallarme, of whom the 50-year-old author said: He ''shakes words
loose from their attachments and bestows new meanings upon them, meanings which
point not toward the external world but toward the Absolute, acts of poetic
intuition.''

At the core of his talk, which was serious despite its humorous, low-key
delivery, was a defense of what he called ''the alleged Postmodernists'' in
literature. He placed himself in this category, plus, among other Americans,
John Barth, John Hawkes, William Gass, Robert Coover and Thomas Pynchon; in
Germany, Peter Handke and Thomas Bernhard; in Italy, Italo Calvino.

He said, ''The criticisms run roughly as follows: that this kind of writing has
turned its back on the world, is in some sense not about the world but about its
own processes, that it is masturbatory, certainly chilly, that it excludes
readers by design, speaks only to the already tenured, or that it does not speak
at all, but instead, like Frost's Secret, sits in the center of a ring and
Knows.''

In a Manner of Speaking

Disputing such implied criticism of himself and other practitioners of
avant-garde fiction, Mr. Barthelme explained: ''Art is not difficult because it
wishes to be difficult, rather because it wishes to be art. However much the
writer might long to be, in his work, simple, honest, straightforward, these
virtues are no longer available to him. He discovers that in being simple,
honest, straightforward, nothing much happens: he speaks the unspeakable,
whereas we are looking for the as-yet-unspeakable, the as-yetunspoken.''

Mr. Barthelme indicated that serious writing could not be simply charged on an
American Express or Diners Club card; that it was really difficult for the
creator to order up.

''Writing is a process of dealing with not-knowing, a forcing of what and how,''
he said. ''We have all heard novelists testify to the fact that, beginning a new
book, they are utterly baffled as to how to proceed, what should be written and
how it might be written, even though they've done a dozen. At best there is a
slender intuition, not much greater than an itch. The not-knowing is not simple,
because it's hedged about with prohibitions, roads that may not be taken. The
more serious the artist, the more problems he takes into account, the more
considerations limit his possible initiatives.''

Not Like It Used to Be

Mr. Barthelme noted that changes had taken place in other forms of writing,
including newspapers. Among other publications, he once worked on The Houston
Post. He said:

''The earlier newspaper culture, which once dealt in a certain amount of nuance
and zestful, highly literate hurly-burly, has deteriorated shockingly. The
newspaper I worked for as a raw youth, 30 years ago, is today a pallid imitation
of its former self. Where once we could put spurious quotes in the paper and
attribute them to Ambrose Bierce and be fairly sure that enough readers would
get the joke to make the joke worthwhile, from the point of view of both reader
and writer, no such common ground now exists.''

He asked his audience to wonder with him if contaminated language could be
considered a co-conspirator in such ''massive crimes'' as ''Fascism, Stalinism,
or'' by implication ''our own policies in Vietnam?'' And found that there was a
''loss of reference'' in the use of everyday language and, citing Ernest
Hemingway's observation, he noted that ''honor,'' ''glory'' and ''country'' had
become perjured words.

As Mr. Barthelme put it more lightly: We cannot ''watch the wine of life turning
into Gatorade.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Donald Barthelme

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FORCE OF 1,200 KEEPS THE HILL SECURE

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 577 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


It is no longer political extremists trying to shoot up the House or blow up the
Senate who are giving the Capitol Hill police their biggest security headaches.

As often as not these days, according to the Capitol Police Chief, James M.
Powell, the gun-toters are otherwise law-abiding visitors who show up armed
after being warned that crime is rampant in Washington.

At least a dozen times a year, Mr. Powell said, Capitol police officers making
routine checks on employees and tourists entering Congressional buildings find
guns tucked away in handbags, packages or briefcases.

'Have to Arrest Them'

''Much as we hate to do it to folks like that, we have to arrest them,'' Mr.
Powell said. ''That's the law.'' The tight security was tightened still more
recently when it was reported that Libyan assassination squads might be on their
way to Washington to kill President Reagan and possibly other top Government
officials. The existence of the assassination squads has not been verified.

The security measures and the police force of almost 1,200 officers resulted
from two separate events, both of which occurred on March 1, 17 years apart.

On March 1, 1954, three Puerto Rican nationalists with pistols fired 30 shots
from the House visitors' gallery, wounding five Congressmen.

On March 1, 1971, a bomb exploded in a men's room on the Senate side, causing
$118,000 worth of damage to a section of the Capitol that dates to the 1790's.
No one was hurt.

Retaliation for Laos Incursion

It is still uncertain who planted the bomb, although the radical Weather
Underground took credit for the explosion, saying it was an act of retaliation
for United States military activity in Laos in the Vietnam War.

Now everyone entering the Capitol or the Senate and House office buildings, even
those who work there and are on a first-name basis with the police, must undergo
a search of any package or other object being carried. The rule applies even to
Cabinet members and other high-ranking officials.

In addition, there are electronic scanners, similar to those used on passengers
at airports, through which all visitors must pass before entering Senate or
House galleries.

Security is even tighter when a President goes to the Capitol to address a joint
session of Congress. Some areas of the building are cordoned off completely, and
police units are increased.

Recently, after a piece of debris from a building under construction fell on
Vice President Bush's limousine, one entrance to the Senate side of the Capitol
was placed off limits for an hour of so while Mr. Bush was in the building.

To provide this kind of security, the Capitol force now has about 1,180
officers, including 103 women, all of whom undergo 16 weeks of training.

Forced Has Doubled Since '65

It's a far difference force than the one James Powell joined in 1958. At that
time, there were only 146 policemen assigned to Capitol Hill. Since 1965, when
he became chief, the force has nearly doubled.

The police maintain an office in the basement of the Capitol, but their
headquarters is now in what was once the Plaza Hotel, near the Dirksen Senate
Office Building.

On the side of the old building is a large sign, weathered by age, that
proclaims, ''Rates, $2 and up.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CLOAK AND DAGGER BUSINESS BOOMING

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


The figures are secret. So are the contents of the recruiting interviews. But
the Central Intelligence Agency can say this much: More people than ever are
trying to join up.

''Business is booming,'' reports Charles E. Jackson, chief of recruitment at the
agency. ''We're seeing more resumes than we ever have.''

With a tight job market and new attitudes about the agency, more and more young
people are looking into a career that many of their older brothers and sisters
would never have considered. And now, with the Vietnam War and the spate of
student demonstrations across the country ended, the C.I.A.'s recruitment
activities are increasingly being conducted in the open.

The agency advertises in newspapers. Like recruiters from such long-time campus
frequenters as Proctor & Gamble, its representatives buzz from college to
college, interviewing eager undergraduates and talking about such things as
salary, working conditions and health insurance benefits. Two years ago the
agency published a recruiting booklet.

Still a Cloak of Mystery

But even with its new openness, a cloak of mystery still surrounds the C.I.A.,
and this is reflected in ''Intelligence: The Acme of Skill,'' the booklet
published by the agency and used by its recruiters. The publication is almost,
to use a word favored by the intelligence agency itself, a sanitized version of
intelligence operations.

Beside the introduction, for example, are pictures of Queen Elizabeth I of
England and Sir Francis Walsingham who, according to the photo caption,
''created an extensive intelligence organization which sent agents to foreign
lands.'' Later, there is a full-page picture of a group of people carrying a
giant-size picture of Josef Stalin in a street march and the caption: ''In its
early years, the Central Intelligence Agency's primary concern was with Soviet
military activities and political intentions.''

Although the agency has received much attention for its covert activities, the
subject itself is barely covered in the brochure.  Intelligence, according to
the booklet, ''has less to do with cloaks and daggers than with the painstaking,
generally tedious collection of facts, analysis of facts, exercise of judgment
and quick, clear evaluation.''

Cloaks and daggers excepted, the brochure is lavishly illustrated.  A picture of
its headquarters is inset in a wide shot of the attack on Pearl Harbor. There is
a picture of a mushroom cloud. And there are pictures of unnamed C.I.A.
employees accompanied by quotes like this, from a senior analyst with the
agency: ''I believe that the analyst is at the center of the intelligence
process and, I would like to believe, the most important part of the
intelligence process.''

Interviews Conducted Daily

Interviews are conducted each day in the 11 recruitment offices across the
country and in the walk-in office at the agency's headquarters near Washington
in Rosslyn, Va. But despite its active recruitment program, the C.I.A. remains
very selective in deciding who will join its ranks.

For its career trainees, traditionally the entry-level professional employees,
the agency looks for people in their 20's to the age of 32 with graduate degrees
in international affairs. If applicants have lived overseas or have had done
some international traveling, so much the better. Language abilities are another
plus.  Applicants with computer science, electronic, economic or enginering
backgrounds are also in demand. The starting salary: as high as $22,500.

On campuses, the agency's recruiters work in the manner traditional of the
nation's largest businesses, checking in with the college placement director and
making a presentation. There is almost always a fast-paced slide show. From time
to time an agent or two is introduced.

These days, nearly two decades from the era of large student protests, seldom is
heard a discouraging word from demonstrators.  ''We think those days are behind
us,'' said Mr. Jackson. ''We're doing very well.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of CIA book

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NO COMBAT PLANS FOR EL SALVADOR, REAGAN DECLARES

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1135 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 18


President Reagan said today that there were ''no plans to send American combat
troops into action'' in El Salvador or anywhere else.

But the President, as he and other members of his Administration have done
before, refused to discuss any options that might be under study by the
Administration to bolster the Salvadoran Government.

In a televised news conference, Mr. Reagan declined to be drawn into any
discussion of whether there were plans to try to stop the flow of arms to
insurgents in El Salvador by ''destabilizing'' the Sandinist Government in
Nicaragua. At one point, after several questions had been asked about Central
America, he referred reporters to the speech on the Caribbean he is scheduledt
to make Tuesday before the Organization of American States.

Comparison to Vietnam

Later, in answer to a questioner who compared El Salvador to Vietnam in asking
about American involvement, Mr. Reagan showed some confusion about details of
Vietnamese history. (Page A8.)

The President was asked if he agreed with the assertion of Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. this month that the United States would do ''whatever is
necessary'' to block a Communist takeover in El Salvador and under what
conditions he would send troops there.

''There are all kinds of options, economic, political, security and so forth,''
he replied, ''and as I've said so often, I just don't believe that you discuss
those options or what you may or may not do in advance of doing any of those
things, except that I will say, lest there be some misunderstanding, there are
no plans to send American combat troops into action any place in the world.''

'I Might Get Mad'

When asked if he could envisage any circumstances in which American combat
troops might be sent to El Salvador, he responded, jocularly, ''Well, maybe if
they dropped a bomb on the White House I might get mad.''

At one point, when asked by a reporter if there were plans ''to destabilize''
the Nicaraguan Government, Mr. Reagan seemed momentarily to mistake Nicaragua
and El Salvador.

''Well, no, we're supporting them,'' he said. Then realizing that the question
was about Nicaragua, which the United States has called an ally of Cuba, he
cried out, ''Wait a minute, wait a minute, I'm sorry, I was thinking El
Salvador.''

''Here again, this is something upon which the national security interest - I
just, I will not comment,'' he said. ''But let me say something about all of
Central America right now, and questions on that subject. Next week, I will be
addressing the Organization of American States on that entire subject.''

When asked if he saw any parallel between Vietnam and El Salvador, he gave a
rambling account of how the United States had become involved in Vietnam and
concluded by saying, ''I don't think there's any parallel.''

A questioner referred to the shipment of a new squadron of MIG-23 fighters to
Cuba by the Soviet Union and asked if this violated the 1962 agreement between
the United States and the Soviet Union ending the Cuban missile crisis. As part
of that accord, the United States pledged not to invade Cuba if the Soviet Union
agreed to withdraw and not reintroduce offensive weapons into Cuba that could
threaten the United States.

''Again, you are talking on a subject that is under review and discussion right
now in our Administration and I would rather not answer that question now,'' he
said.

Secretary of State Haig did discuss the situation last Sunday, however.  He said
that when the Soviet Union withdrew bombers that were in Cuba in 1962 it was a
''good-will demonstration'' and not part of the accord by which the missiles
were taken away.

''These MIG-23's are, in many respects, as capable as those bombers at the
time,'' he said.  The Soviet Union has sent MIG-23's to Cuba previously and the
view of State Department experts is that without nuclear weapons they pose no
significant threat to the United States. The Soviet Union has asserted that
there are no nuclear weapons in Cuba and this has not been disputed by
Washington.

Questioned on Grain Embargo

But because of the possibility that they could be clandestinely armed with
nuclear bombs and because Florida is within their range, Mr. Haig did raise the
American concern over the latest shipment of MIG-23's with Foreign Minister
Andrei A. Gromyko of the Soviet Union in Geneva last month.

Mr. Reagan was asked if he would impose a grain embargo if the situation in
Poland worsened, a move opposed by farm groups and members of Congress from
agricultural states. He did not reply directly but repeated that he would only
embargo the sale of grain to Moscow as part of a total ban on trade.

On the possibility of declaring Poland in default on its debts, Mr. Reagan
rejected a questioner's contention that he had ''bailed out'' Warsaw by paying
American banks the interest Poland owed. He repeated the Administration's
contention that this had enabled Washington to retain its leverage over Poland
and said it was still possible that default could be declared in the future.

Discussing the concern expressed by Israel this week about the possibility of a
sale of F-16 fighters and air-defense missiles to Jordan, Mr. Reagan said
''there's no definite plan'' for such a sale. He reiterated that Defense
Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger had returned from his trip to the Middle East
'without any request'' from Jordan ''for any of those weapons.''

'No Difference in Policy'

On reports of differences over approaches between Mr. Haig and Mr.  Weinberger,
with the Secretary of State more sympathetic to Israel's concerns than the
Defense Secretary, Mr. Reagan said that press coverage was ''overblown'' and
that ''there is no difference in policy between them.''

The President was asked if there was ''solid evidence'' to back up the
Administration's charge that the insurgents in El Salvador have received arms
from Cuba and the Soviet Union by way of Nicaragua.  ''We are convinced by the
evidence,'' he said, ''that the arms that are flowing into Nicaragua are coming
by way of Cuba, and their connection with the Soviet Government.''

The President reiterated that the Cubans had received more military equipment in
the last year than at any time since 1962 and that the Nicaraguan Army was ''of
tremendous size, beyond anything that they might need for possible defense.''
But he said he would not go beyond that restatement of the situation at this
time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SEEMS CONFUSED ON VIETNAM'S HISTORY

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 789 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 18


President Reagan sidestepped a question today that sought reassurance that the
United States would not secretly become more deeply involved in El Salvador's
civil war, but in rejecting a reporter's suggested analogy to Vietnam, Mr.
Reagan seemed confused about Vietnamese history.

After his last news conference a month ago, the President was criticized for his
handling of purely factual matters and it seemed likely this could happen again.
At one point in today's news conference, a reporter said that in the 1960's the
Central Intelligence Agency had contrived a ''secret plan to get us involved in
Vietnam in a surreptitious, covert manner,'' and asked if the President could
assure the public that the United States would not be similarly drawn deeper
into El Salvador.

Most students of recent Vietnamese history would disagree that such a ''secret
plan'' existed, and Mr. Reagan also expressed disagreement with the premise of
the question.

However, the President went on to give his personal recollections of history,
which seemed to clash with widely accepted accounts of the past.

'Two Separate Countries'

Mr. Reagan said that ''North and South Vietnam had been, previous to
colonization, two separate countries.'' He said that at the 1954 Geneva
conference, provisions had been made that ''these two countries could by a vote
of all their people decide together whether they wanted to be one country or
not.'' He continued that Ho Chi Minh, the Vietnamese Communist leader, ''refused
to participate in such an election.''

The President went on to say that American military advisers were then sent to
South Vietnam to work in civilian clothing and without weapons, until they were
attacked with ''pipe bombs.'' Ultimately, Mr. Reagan said, former President John
F. Kennedy authorized the ''sending of a division of Marines.''

Nearly all of these statements are either wrong or open to challenge.  When not
artifically divided by Chinese or French colonialists, Vietnam was politically
united through much of its history.  After conquering the country in the late
19th century the French administratively divided Vietnam into not two but three
units: Cochin China, in the south, Annam, the central region. and Tonkin, in the
north. However, even under the French, the country was officially reunified
under Emperor Bao Dai in 1950. This reunification was not fully effective,
however, because much of the country gave its allegiance to the nationalist
forces led by Ho Chi Minh.

Temporary Partition

The Geneva accords of 1954, which ended French rule in Indochina, provided for a
temporary partition of Vietnam at about the 17th parallel and called for
national elections in 1956. The new Government of South Vietnam did not sign the
accords, and neither did the United States, but Washington undertook not to
undermine the agreement.

The Saigon Government under the President Ngo Dinh Diem refused to participate
in the proposed elections or even to participate in discussions on how such
elections could be held. Ho Chi Minh did not refuse to participate, and he
complained when such balloting did not occur.

In the mid-1950's a United States Military Assistance Group, in uniform, trained
nine South Vietnamese divisons. As the Communist insurgency in the South grew in
intensity, President Kennedy, in late 1961, authorized ''combat support'' of
Vietnamese forces. Armed helicopter units, American fighter pilots flying with
Vietnamese copilots and an eventual total of 19,000 combat advisers were sent to
the country.

However, Mr. Kennedy did not send American ground combat units to Vietnam.
President Johnson sent a Marine brigade there in March 1965, followed by the
Third Marine Division and the 173d Airborne Brigade in a few weeks.

Mr. Reagan also seemed to misunderstand legislation on Congressional oversight
of clandestine intelligence operations. Mr.  Reagan said that ''there's a law by
which things of this kind have to be cleared with Congressional committees
before anything is done.''

In fact, the Intelligence Oversight Act of 1980 provides that the select
intelligence committees of the Senate and the House should be informed of covert
intelligence operations, although the President may in some circumstances delay
notification until after the operation is over. The committees do not have, and
have not sought, authority to veto such actions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADORANS AT FT. BENNING 'A SMATTERING' OF JUNGLE WAR

BYLINE: By WENDELL RAWLS Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 603 words

DATELINE: FORT BENNING, Ga., Feb. 18


A group of five soldiers struggled to find a way to move a heavy, cumbersome,
two-wheel cart across the water with only bridge pilings and a few boards to
work with, and time was running out. Two-thirds of the way across, the soldiers
and the cart plummeted into the water.

That was one of 17 outdoor leadership tests given today to 156 Salvadoran
officer candidates training at this large military base on the outskirts of
Columbus, Ga. The problem-solving exercises are the same as those given to
United State Army officer candidates.

According to the Army instructors, the Salvadorans perform virtually the same as
others who have been through the course.  The soldiers, almost all of them
between the ages of 19 and 21, are part of a contingent of 490 Salvadorans
selected to qualify to become officers in the Salvadoran Army by training here
for 14 weeks instead of four years at El Salvador's military academy.

1,000 Trained at Fort Bragg

In addition, 1,000 noncommissioned officers and infantry soldiers are being
trained by American instructors at Fort Bragg, N.C., as part of the Reagan
Administration's plan to aid the Salvadoran Government in its war against some
4,000 to 6,000 leftist guerrillas.

Publicly, Army spokesmen and other military officers said today that the
Salvadorans ''are doing very well.'' They said the officer candidates had
performed ''superbly on the rifle range; their marksmanship is near the very
top.''

''They are enthusiastic and interested in learning,'' Lieut. Col.  Wayne
Andrews, the public affairs officer in charge of the ''noninterference visual
opportunity'' for the press, said today.  ''They look like they are good
soldiers.''

Privately, however, other officers, including some instructors, acknowledged the
ghosts of Vietnam floating on the morning fog of Fort Benning.

Pressed about potential parallels between this training mission and the United
States' advisory involvement in the early years in South Vietnam, the officers
force a smile and say they are not qualified to address such a question.

Jungle Warfare Training

Asked whether they think that these trainees will be able to fight productively
at home under higher-ranking officers who have limited, if any, knowledge of the
tactics or methods taught here, or whether United States military officers will
be needed to lead them in battlefield exercises, the instructors give the same
smile and the same answer.

Colonel Andrews said the candidates would receive ''a smattering'' of
antiguerrilla and jungle warfare training, even though virtually all the
fighting in El Salvador is against guerrillas and much of it is in jungles. He
said the soldiers training at Fort Bragg were receiving more hours of
guerrilla-related, Special Forces-type instruction.

He added that leadership and small-unit tactics training were applicable in any
locale and in much of the fighting that the Salvadoran candidates would face at
home.

The colonel said the candidates were generally of a higher educational, social
and economic level in El Salvador and had been picked for the training here
because of those qualifications. The Salvadoran Army has about 700 officers,
considered far fewer than the more than 1,000 needed in its 22,000-member armed
forces.

Cost Put at $3 Million

Colonel Andrews said the training of the 490 men would cost slightly more than
$3 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Salvadoran soilders at Ft. Benning Georgia
(Page A1)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT DENIES LAPSES LAID TO HIM IN THE PRESS

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 965 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 18


At his news conference today, President Reagan said that the news media wronged
him after his last such session and that he had proof of the accuracy of
statements and anecdotes that he used Jan. 19 to support his policies.

Later the White House press office declined to release the sheaf of papers that
the President brandished today, saying, ''I was right on five of them, and I
have the documentation with me.''

He pulled the papers from an inside suit pocket as he responded to a question
challenging his assertion that wealthy children in New York got free school
lunches. ''But you don't really want to get into all those mistakes you said
that I made the last time, do you?'' he said. ''Because I'd like you to know
that documentation proves the score was 5 to 1 in my favor.''

A White House aide said the President's criticism of the press arose from anger
over articles portraying him as susceptible to factual errors.

The White House staff is trying to alter a reputation for incorrect statements
that his political advisers privately fear as a threat to his political standing
and credibility. An aide, who asked not to be identified, said that David R.
Gergen, the White House director of communications, had ordered the research
that provided Mr. Reagan with the papers.

Other aides said Mr. Gergen was the strongest advocate of today's news
conference and that this overcame misgivings of other senior White House
advisers who argued that Mr. Reagan had been damaged by controversy that
followed earlier news conferences. To ease such fears, Mr. Reagan was given
thorough briefings before today's appearance. Even so, he presented an
apparently confused history of the Vietnam War and misstated the amount of money
that the Government spends on social services.

Edwin L. Dale Jr., an official of the Office of Management and Budget, said Mr.
Reagan ''slightly misspoke'' today in saying that the budget for ''all of human
and social affairs is $382 billion.'' Mr. Dale said that was the amount of
direct payments to individuals under such programs as Social Security. The
correct figure is much higher, he said.

In defending the decision not to release the documentary evidence to which Mr.
Reagan referred today, Larry Speakes, the deputy White House press secretary,
said that to do so would give new life to ''an old story.''

''The President did it in sort of a jesting way to prove a point, but the White
House does not plan to release it,'' he said of the papers Mr. Reagan drew from
his pocket. ''It was really 6 to 1,'' he continued, ''but 1 was a close call. We
gave the press the benefit of the doubt, because it was on the inside corner at
the knees.''

In referring to his 5-to-1 count, Mr. Reagan said he had been correct at his
Jan. 19 news conference when he said that volunteers had successfully replaced
paid workers in a Government program to provide meals in Pima County, Ariz. He
said most of a budget of over $50,000 had gone for staffing and overhead. The
Associated Press later quoted officials of the program as disputing the
President's figures and saying paid workers had worked unwillingly as volunteers
when Government funds ran out.

An official involved in the research project said Mr. Reagan was responding to
an Associated Press article that cited the Pima County situation in a group of
six alleged errors. The others dealt with Mr. Reagan's statements on military
spending as a percentage of the gross national product, a ''multibillion-dollar
expansion plan'' in the steel industry, the level of interest rates since his
election, unemployment figures and the income tax penalty for married couples.

Mr. Gergen said Mr. Reagan was incorrect when he said that the penalty was
eliminated by his tax bill, when in fact it was reduced.  On the other five
points, he said, ''the staff reports indicated that there was strong
justification for the points the President had made.''

Mr. Gergen acknowledged that on some of those points, such as the employment
figures, where there is a difference between month-tomonth comparisons and
annual average employment, there was evidence to support both Mr. Reagan and his
critics.

Today, The Associated Press transmitted an article explaining the basis for its
earlier account of the President's misstatements.  Mr. Reagan also blamed what
he called ''overblown'' news reports for leading to the latest round of
criticism in the press that his foreign policy team was in disarray. He was
referring to the reported dispute between Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig
Jr. and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger over policy in the Middle East.

Mr. Reagan did not say that the reports were fundamentally wrong.  Also, when
challenged about his remark that children whose parents make $75,000 a year got
free school lunches in New York, Mr. Reagan said he could not cite his authority
for that statement.

Pressed to name the school district, Mr. Reagan added, ''I know that it was up
in New York someplace. I couldn't remember that by now.''

Mr. Reagan's aides acknowledge his tendency to repeat things he hears before
they are ''scrubbed'' for accuracy. ''It's a homework problem and a framing
problem,'' said one adviser, adding that the President has difficulty
''framing'' his answers in a way that precludes errors from rambling or
overstatement.

Mr. Reagan's past mistakes, the adviser added, have created an atmosphere so
tense that each news conference is now ''like going into the arena of the lions
again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CAPUTO RETAINS SUPPORT FOR RACE

BYLINE: By MAURICE CARROLL

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 361 words


Leaders of the Right to Life and Conservative Parties said yesterday that
disclosures that Bruce M. Caputo had described himself inaccurately as a Vietnam
-era ''draftee'' and Army lieutenant would not diminish their support for his
campaign to become United States Senator from New York.

''My inclination is to dismiss it as a tempest in a teapot,'' said Serphin R.
Maltese, the Conservative Party's executive director, although he added, ''It
certainly was a mistake.''

Mary Jane Tobin, the Right to Life chairman, said: ''Our issue is the unborn
baby. I can't see any problems. Besides, in our resume he doesn't say anything
about being in the service.''

The Republican state chairman, George L. Clark Jr., declined to comment until he
had spoken with Mr. Caputo. The party's Bronx chairman, John D. Calandra, said,
''This puts Caputo in a mess.'' He added that the situation might attract
opponents for a primary, but that so far none had appeared.

Held a Civilian Job

On the resume he has distributed during the present campaign, Mr.  Caputo, who
is 38 years old, describes the job he held as ''assistant to the Secretary of
Defense.'' Mr. Caputo worked as a civilian in the Office of the Secretary of
Defense from 1967 to 1969.

The entry on Mr. Caputo in Who's Who in American Politics says he entered the
Army as a second lieutenant in 1967. The reference first appeared in 1973 and
has appeared in each edition since. He described himself as a ''draftee'' during
a campaign appearance last September in Westbury, L.I.

Mr. Caputo, a former United States Representative from Yonkers, said Wednesday
that he had ''never intended to mislead anyone.'' He is seeking the Republican,
Conservative and Right to Life nominations to run in November against Senator
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the Democrat.

Mr. Caputo's campaign manager, John Sheehan, said yesterday that Mr. Caputo had
expected to be commissioned as a lieutenant at the Pentagon. ''But when he
arrived at the Pentagon, he was told he would serve as a civilian,'' Mr. Sheehan
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words


By John Leonard
CHINABOUND. A 50-YEAR MEMOIR. By John King Fairbank. Illustrated. 480 pages.
Harper & Row. $20.

ON his 60th birthday, 15 years ago, Harvard friends threw a surprise party for
John King Fairbank. He was asked to explain his success as the ''dean'' of China
studies in this country. He replied: ''Shucks, fellas, it was easy! Just get in
on the ground floor between the world's greatest revolution and the world's
greatest university - it's a Pianola!''

So it seems in this delightful memoir. Seldom has someone so civilized and witty
looked back on such a long life with so few regrets - excepting, of course, Mr.
Fairbank's colleague, John Kenneth Galbraith. If we live in a barbaric century,
tenure at Harvard helps. Mr. Fairbank, whose father was a Congregationalist
minister, cheerfully admits that he does not believe in God. However: ''My
acquired religion is Harvard.''

Dream along with him, from Huron, S.D., to Exeter, N.H., to Madison, Wis., to
Cambridge, Mass., to Oxford, England, to Peking.  From the beginning, he got
excellent advice, especially from his mother, and took it. He married well -
Wilma, the daughter of the physiologist W.B. Cannon, is an accomplished artist -
and thought well and taught well. He knew what would happen in China before the
rest of us wanted to, and those of his students who became professors have been
setting minds on fire for a quarter of a century. One of them, Joseph R.
Levenson, who is now dead, taught me the difference between Tao and Mao.

Imagine arriving in China in the early 1930's, when the action between Chiang
Kai-shek and Mao Zedong was just coming to a boil.  Imagine returning to Harvard
in time to team up with Edwin O.  Reischauer on an Asian studies program.
Imagine being posted back to China, twice, by the Office of War Information in
the 1940's, and finding in Chongqing the likes of Eric Sevareid, Joseph Alsop,
Brooks Atkinson and - a former student - Theodore H. White. Imagine discovering
that every time you needed money to persevere, the Rockefeller or the Ford
Foundation would provide.

When Mr. Fairbank first reviewed a book for a general audience, it appeared on
page 1 of The New York Times Book Review. When Mr.  Fairbank published his first
book for a general audience, ''The United States and China,'' it also was
reviewed on page 1 of The Times Book Review.

He would go on to organize the East Asian Research Center and the Committee of
Concerned Asian Scholars; after which he would be elected president of the
Association for Asian Studies and the American Historical Association; and then,
naturally, when Deng Xiaoping had dinner in the White House in 1979, Mr.
Fairbank, when he wasn't talking to Shirley MacLaine on his left or Rosalynn
Carter on his right, would have this chat with the Chinese leader:

DENG: How old are you?  FAIRBANK: 72.  DENG: I am 74.  FAIRBANK: But you still
have your hair left and I don't.  DENG: You have obviously used your brain too
much.  Such a career is not an accident. Mr. Fairbank may have been lucky, but
he was also good, and the system was waiting, was in fact designed, for someone
with just his self-confidence. He didn't ''lose'' China; he simply warned
everybody that Chiang's Kuomintang was corrupt and incompetent and brutal, which
it was; and that Mao's equally brutal but rather more idealistic Communists were
likely to prevail, which they did; and that the United States, no matter how
many gunboats, was helpless to influence the outcome. Before, after and in
between, he taught Asian history, went to meetings and wrote a staggering number
of books of surpassing grace.

There was a single inconvenience. During the McCarthy binge of the early 1950's,
he was accused of having been a spy. Nonsense, of course, and the Pentagon
cleared him. He said at the time, ''There is no denying I was in China before
the Communist victory, but I do not go as far as some in causally connecting the
two phenomena.'' His sympathies may have been with Mao, but any ideology is
alien to him; he would prefer to play ''fistball'' with the Harvard faculty and
think about the 1850's in the Orient. Anyway: ''My livelihood and security were
never at stake.''

Nevertheless, similar accusations destroyed the livelihood and security of
friends like John S. Service, John Paton Davies and Edmund Clubb. They worked
for the Government instead of Harvard. Mr.  Fairbank, who was eloquent in his
opposition to the Vietnam War, wonders whether it ever would have happened had
such old East Asia hands been around in the State Department to explain history
and politics. As Mr. Fairbank points out with edge, they weren't and Dean Rusk
was.

Whether he is writing about how to coax books from graduate students or what
it's like to sit in the nose-bubble of a bomber plane over the Himalayas or why
he left a dinner party at which Harold Laski and Felix Frankfurter were the
special guests or when he was considered undesirable both in Taiwan and on the
mainland, Mr.  Fairbank is gentle, amusing, fastidious, ironic, likable. The
names drop like snowflakes. He is at home, a humanist, inside the honorable life
he has led, inside the house that Harvard gave him, the wise father and the
child who winks.

When his stomach is turned - as it has been by the McCarthy era, the Vietnam War
and the Cultural Revolution - it is always because scholars and intellectuals
have been hurt. That ''class'' into which he effortlessly ascended suffers a
wound, or death, at the hands of ''another type,'' a Red Guard or a demagogic
bumpkin. The world, unfortunately, isn't Harvard -some of those Harvard people
got us into Vietnam in the first place - but while reading Mr. Fairbank, one
wishes, on a Pianola, that it were.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 20, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ENVOY TO EL SALVADOR URGES U.S. TO ALLOW ADVISORS TO CARRY RIFLES

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 860 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


The United States Ambassador to El Salvador has asked the Reagan Administration
to permit American military advisers there to carry rifles as well as pistols
for personal protection, State and Defense Department officials said today.

This recommendation, the officials said, was made by the Ambassador, Deane R.
Hinton, in a message to Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. in the last few
days. Officials said the Ambassador was concerned lest a United States soldier
be killed or wounded because he lacked sufficient protection.

Issue Is Under Study

The question is being studied by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and by officials in
the State Department, which has primary jurisdiction over United States
activities in El Salvador, the officials said.  They said they did not know when
a decision would be made.

Mr. Haig, who was in Bal Harbour, Fla., today for a meeting with leaders of the
A.F.L.-C.I.O., said at a news conference there that M-16 rifles were ''far more
reassuring'' weapons for the advisers than pistols when in an ''unpredictable
guerrilla environment.''

The issue of what sort of arms could be carried in El Salvador by advisers, or
military trainers, as the Pentagon calls them, erupted last week when several
Americans, among them Lieut. Col. Harry Melander, were photographed carrying
M-16 rifles as they were training a Salvadoran Army unit.

Ambassador Hinton ordered the colonel to leave El Salvador for violating a
directive restricting trainers to sidearms, and he issued reprimands to two
other trainers. A Defense Department official said Colonel Melander was sent
home more for failing to get permission than for carrying the M-16.

The issue of arms for the advisers has engaged the highest authorities in the
Administration because of the way the United States became involved in the
Vietnam conflict.

War Powers Act Cited

Today State and Defense Department officials were at pains to assert that the
United States involvement in El Salvador was markedly different from what it had
been in Vietnam when American military advisers first went there in 1954.

While the issue of the arming of the advisers is under review in the
Administration, Senator Paul E. Tsongas, Democrat of Massachusetts, plans to
raise the question of whether a decision would involve the War Powers Act and
thus require President Reagan to justify the new policy to Congress. An aide to
Mr. Tsongas said the Senator would do so when Congress returns to Washington
next week.

The aide said the action would be based on the assessment of the M-16, the
Army's basic infantry weapon, as a combat weapon. The law, he noted, says that
''The President in every possible instance shall consult with Congress before
introducing United States armed forces into situations where imminent
involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated.''

A spokesman for the State Department said that the legal counsel was studying
the question.  Senator Larry Pressler, Republican of South Dakota and a veteran
of the Vietnam War, said today, ''It is really unfair to ask anybody to go into
a combat zone without an M-16.''

Defense and State Department officials said that military advisers in El
Salvador, operating under an agreement between the two departments, were
directed to carry only sidearms with three exceptions. They are permitted to
keep an M-16 in their quarters, to have it in a vehicle or helicopter, and to
carry it with permission from the Ambassador, the senior United States official
in the country.

Directly after the incident last week, Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger, then on a trip through the Middle East, defended the carrying of
M-16's. He said: ''Trainers down there have to have some kind of personal
protection. It is essential in that kind of a situation.''

'They Began Being Blown Up'

On the parallel with Vietnam, President Reagan said in his news conference
Thursday that the first United States advisers who went to Vietnam were not
permitted to carry weapons until ''they began being blown up where they lived
and walking down the street by people riding on bicycles.''

When the first United States advisers went to Vietnam in the summer of 1954,
they were not permitted to carry sidearms openly. Some carried them in
briefcases or in other concealed places while moving about Saigon, where they
were, as the President said, sometimes targets for terrorist attacks.

Later, as the advisers moved into the field with Vietnamese units, they carried
whatever personal arms they deemed necessary. By 1962, that included rifles,
carbines, and submachine guns.

Officials asserted today that the military people in El Salvador were trainers,
not advisers, as they were in Vietnam. They have been ordered not to go into
combat areas or areas where they would be subject to guerrilla attack, unlike
the advisers in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 20, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESSMAN ASSERTS SALVADOR DOES NOT WANT U.S. TROOPS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


A Democratic member of Congress who led a delegation to El Salvador this week
has reported to the Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., that no one in
the Salvadoran Government wants American troops sent to that country.

The Representative, John P. Murtha of Pennsylvania, submitted a report to the
Speaker this week that warned against ''deciding these kinds of debates on the
emotions of Vietnam,'' according to Congressional aides and members of the
delegation.

He told the Speaker that the United States should support the Salvadoran
electoral process, but with four reservations. He said that Washington should be
satisfied that the voting on March 28 for a constituent asembly was ''free and
open,'' that the Salvadoran Government was making progress in human rights and
was moving ahead with its land redistribution program, and that an acceptable
''middle ground'' of parties had won the election.

Group Cites Progress

The delegation found significant progress in the land restribution program as it
now stands, according to staff and delegation members.  The group was also said
to be impressed by preparations for the elections.

The belief that the election process should be given a chance in El Salvador was
shared by Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island, the ranking minority
member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Senator Pell said in a
interview Thursday that ''we shouldn't rock the boat until after the election.''

Senator Pell is preparing a report for his committee on his trip to El Salvador,
Nicaragua and Mexico.  Two other delegations have made trips to Central America
this week. Representative Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, returned
today. Representatives Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa; James L. Oberstar, Democrat
of Minnesota, and Jim Coyne, Republican of Pennsylvania, are expected to return
Sunday night.

Mr. Long said he would convey to the State Department an offer from Nicaragua to
assist in halting any flow of arms to El Salvador through Nicaragua.

Mr. Long, the chairman of the House Appropriations subcommittee on foreign
operations, said Daniel Ortega, a top military commander in the Nicaraguan
Government, proposed that the United States ''show the Nicaraguans where the
arms are coming through so they can put a stop to it.''

Only Request Is More Aid

Mr. Murtha said the Salvadoran Government leaders and American diplomats he met
in San Salvador last weekend also did not want additional United States military
advisers. The only requests were for more United States aid.

Mr. O'Neill is expected to comment on the report when Congress meets next week
after a 10-day break. The Massachusetts Democrat sent the mission to El Salvador
because of what he said were increasing questions about continued United States
aid to the Salvadoran junta.

The recommendations of Mr. Pell and Mr. Murtha are likely to strengthen the
position of a more cautious opposition to United States involvement in El
Salvador than that expressed by a group of senators and representatives seeking
to end American military aid to the junta. The group is pressing for a
negotiated end to the civil war that would give the insurgents a part in the
political process before elections.

The Reagan Administration has rejected such a course, putting its hope on
gradual political development beginning with the March 28 voting for an assembly
to draw up a constitution. The Administration has urged its allies in Europe and
elsewhere to join in sending observers to monitor the election process.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 20, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Reagan Aide Dismisses Comments on Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 164 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


President Reagan's chief spokesman today dismissed Mr. Reagan's rambling and
factually incorrect account of Vietnamese history at Thursday's news conference
as having little relevance ''to the problems he was elected to deal with
today.''

''I don't think it's the heart of what really concerns people in this country,''
said David Gergen, the White House Communications Director.

Mr. Reagan, at his nationally broadcast news conference Thursday, made a number
of comments about Vietnam that did not square with the historical record. He did
so in disputing the premise of a questioner who asked whether there were secret
plans for United States involvement in Latin America comparable to early Central
Intelligence Agency plans in Vietnam.

Mr. Gergen said in an interview with National Public Radio that the President's
comments were an ''ad lib.'' And he played down the importance of the remarks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 20, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EL SALVADOR AS 'DOMINO'

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


As construction crews prepare to break ground for a Vietnam War Memorial on the
Mall, a different kind of remembrance of that conflict has taken shape here, a
debate over whether United States involvement in El Salvador is leading toward a
new Vietnam.

It has stirred passions dormant since the last Americans pulled out of Saigon.
It is a constant topic of conversation and has led to a series of events,
including acrimonious Congressional hearings and public disputes about
government intelligence data, all uncannily evoking the Vietnam era.

The comparison between Vietnam and El Salvador came up several times at
President Reagan's news conference Thursday as reporters asked him whether he
saw similarities. One question prompted him to offer a short history of American
involvement in Vietnam that seemed to clash with accepted accounts.

After a trip to El Salvador, Representative John P. Murtha, Democrat of
Pennsylvannia, a Vietnam veteran, told House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. that
El Salvador was not another Vietnam, that the terrain would make it much harder
to fight a guerrilla war and that no one in the Salvadoran Government wanted
more American military advisers. The quintessential Vietnam question was posed
at a recent Senate hearing by Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of
Kansas: ''Can you see light at the end of the tunnel?''

Recently, several authorities talked about the ''domino theory,'' the Rosetta
Stone of the Vietnam conflict: That the collapse of one democratic government in
a region would inexorably topple others.  President Johnson used it as a main
justification for military involvement in Vietnam.

In recent Senate hearings, Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs, defended aid to the Government of El Salvador in terms
reminiscent of the domino theory: ''There is no mistaking that the decisive
battle for Central America is under way in El Salvador. If, after Nicaragua, El
Salvador is captured by a violent minority, who in Central America would not
live in fear?''

Gen. William C. Westmoreland, the commander of American troops in Vietnam, said
when asked to comment, ''The domino theory has validity in Central America. If
El Salvador falls, after Nicaragua, then Guatemala, Honduras, and Costa Rica
could go. After that, there's nothing standing in the way of the Panama Canal.''

Critics say no two nations are exactly alike and the threat in El Salvador is
primarily from long-simmering internal discontent, not an external Communist
conspiracy. They warn, polishing off another Vietnam artifact, that the United
States could find itself in a ''quagmire'' if it dispatched troops to El
Salvador.

Former Senator George McGovern, who led opposition to the Vietnam War, said the
other day, ''Once again, the United States assumes that insurgents are actually
fighting a proxy war for the Soviets.  We're repeating the mistake of supporting
an unpopular government.''

Supporters of increased American aid say United States strategic interests are
more clearly at stake in Central America than they were in Vietnam. Secretary of
State Alexander M. Haig Jr. recently underscored that concern: ''This is a
profound challenge to the security of our hemisphere. Had it been determined at
that time that South Vietnam was indeed a vital challenge to fundamental
American interests, then perhaps some of the conduct of the whole affair would
have been differently handled.''

Another echo of Vietnam in the debate has been widespread skepticism about
United States Government statements and intelligence data. In the early 1960's,
Government leaders cited intelligence information about North Vietnamese support
for guerrillas in South Vietnam, but would not give details.

Reagan Administration officials have said the Soviet Union, Cuba and Nicaragua
were supplying arms to left-wing rebels in El Salvador, but would not give
details, saying intelligence sources could be jeopardized. In the Johnson
Administration, that kind of dispute was part of the ''credibility gap.''

The role of the press is also becoming an issue again, as it did in the Vietnam
War when Johnson and Nixon Administration officials criticized the news media
for what they called negative reporting of the war and sympathetic accounts of
antiwar activities. In a recent editorial The Wall Street Journal criticized
several publications for their coverage of El Salvador and cautioned the press
against once again making government credibility a major issue.

The domestic debate about American involvement in El Salvador, including the
role of the press, is itself a replay of Vietnam history. Dean Rusk, President
Johnson's Secretary of State, who was a main defender of involvement in the
Vietnam War, finds the domestic debate about El Salvador the only genuine
parallel.

Mr. Rusk, a professor at the University of Georgia, said when asked to comment:
''If you run down a checklist including territory, population, nature and
strength of opposition forces, there is little resemblance between Vietnam and
El Salvador. The only objective link I can see is the politics of the thing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dean Rusk photo of George McGovern photo of
William Westmoreland

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 20, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE POSTPONES DECISION ON PLEA OF AFGHANS DETAINED IN CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 19


At least six more weeks of indecision stretched before a group of Afghan
refugees today when an administrative law judge put off hearings on their
applications for political asylum.

The hearing today was on an appeal of a decision made Wednesday by David
Ilchert, regional director for the Immigration and Naturalization Service. Mr.
Ilchert, in denying the Afghans' application, said that they used tricks to get
into the United States without papers on Jan. 7.

Of the 29 refugees, one turned out to have proper documents. Judge Bernard
Hornback then questioned each of the others, through an interpreter, and
assigned hearing dates beginning in 45 days.

Meantime, Mr. Ilchert has defended his decision.

Concern for 'Viability of System'

''There are hundreds of thousands of Afghanstanis around the world watching,''
Mr. Ilchert said Thursday. ''This was well orchestrated.  This is not 29 people
from the same family. My feeling is that if you allow this to happen, if this
package goes down, you will destroy the viability of the system, and that's why
I denied the application.''

He said the group, now housed at a onetime airfield in Marin County, had arrived
aboard a Japan Air Lines flight that they had boarded by using counterfeit
passports and visas. Airline tickets were bought in Madras, India. He said that
between Tokyo and San Francisco, the last leg of the trip, the Afghans destroyed
all their travel documents.

''They were not going to have any documents on them that would help the United
States to identify them and might help the United States to remove them to
another country,'' Mr. Ilchert said.

''Finally, after long and arduous hours of questioning, they admitted they were
from Afghanistan and made application for political refugee status. They finally
broke down and told the story.''

Mr. Ilchert said that application for political asylum had been made for all of
the group at New Delhi, but that their chances of getting into the United States
were slim because the Middle East quota for this year was only 5,000.

''These people figured they'd never qualify as refugees,'' Mr.  Ilchert
asserted. ''They thought they'd never get a number.''

Priority for Scientists

Priority is given to scientists and government officials, then to relatives of
American residents.  Aid to Afghan Refugees, a group organized two years ago by
former Peace Corps workers in Afghanistan, arranged for a San Francisco law firm
to represent the refugees at the hearing today.

''We will be backing them,'' said John Schaecher, one of the founders of the aid
group.  There are nine children and 20 adults in the group living five to a room
in World War II military barracks at the airfield, where Cambodians, Laotians
and Vietnamese awaiting resettlement also live.  Children of all the groups
played together on swings and slides Thursday while the adult Afghans discussed
their plight with reporters.

Kahin Azad, 29 years old, who said his father ran a business selling trucks and
rifles in Kabul before he was killed by the Afghan Government, declared: ''If I
am sent back, I will go to lie next to my father. I came here because I heard
there was democracy and human rights in America.''

He said he and the others had paid $100 each in Peshawar, Pakistan, for their
counterfeit travel documents. A Sunni Moslem, he said he walked out of
Afghanistan wearing a turban and tribal clothing.

Mahbooba Omar, 23, who said she is seven months pregnant, said she had been a
stewardess with the Afghanistani airline but was forced to quit by pressure to
join the Communist Party.

'They Will Kill Us'

''If we go back to Afghanistan, first we will go to jail and second they will
kill us,'' she said, with Mr. Azad interpreting.  ''They may as well take my
body here,'' said Azizullah Alemzay, 27, who was a government clerk for eight
years. ''It is better to die here than to be taken by Russian machine guns.''

Dr. Gollabuddin Jamal, 47, father of five children in the group, said he left
his medical practice ''because our lives were in danger.''

''I didn't want my children to become Communists,'' he added.  Mr. Ilchert said:
''We'll make every effort to find a country to take them. If the only country
that will take them is Afghanistan, then of course we'll permit them to remain
here pending a change in the situation in Afghanistan.''

Airline Paying for Food

Meantime, until their status is clarified, Japan Air Lines pays for their food.
Because they arrived on a Friday and could not get a hearing until Monday, the
airline spent $6,000 keeping them in a hotel. Now they live rent free in the
barracks, but their food costs about $500 a day, a spokesman for the airline
said.

The refugees said they had been getting Vietnamese food, which they disliked.
One night they got hamburgers from McDonald's, which they thought tasted like
their traditional kebabs.

Mr. Schaecher of Aid to Afghan Refugees said he hoped the plight of this group
would focus attention on ''what's happening in Afghanistan.''

''There's poison gas, and we've heard of a substance put in the dust that eats
away the flesh on the feet of people who walk through the dust,'' he continued.

''The Russians are going to overcome these people by any means possible. Anybody
who was outraged about Vietnam must be equally outraged about this.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 20, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
To Misspeak Is Human

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 908 words


At a speech-cum-discussion with New York City schoolteachers the other day, one
of them asked me if I believed public officials were more honest these days than
they were when I covered the State Legislature back in the late 1960's.

My meandering answer reflected my own lack of certainty. What I answered,
essentially, was that after the credibility-and-integrity scandals of Vietnam,
Watergate, Abscam and the like, officials were probably being more careful. I
also said that I thought I knew more public servants now whose ethical standards
were higher than those of their counterparts in that earlier era. But at bottom,
I concluded, reciting a cliche, our politicians and bureaucrats are but a
mirrorimage of the ooze, sleaze and cupidity at large - that is, the level of
larceny in our own hearts and minds and fingers.

Perhaps that is why bursts of public outrage are rarer than they might be. Or
perhaps it is just weariness over the stubbornness of the disease.

The latest revealed case of public-servant morality is that of Bruce Caputo, a
former Congressman and state assemblyman who is running for the United States
Senate and who has been passing himself off as a Vietnam veteran who served a
two-and-a-half-year hitch in the Army as a second lieutenant. In real life, Mr.
Caputo - to avoid being drafted - arranged for a civilian job in the Defense
Department.

He is now backpedaling with celerity, saying that possibly he had not expressed
himself clearly or possibly someone on his staff made a mistake when submitting
biographical data to Who's Who in American Politics or possibly he ''misspoke''
(the terminology now used in polite society for lying).

Will the Republican Party, despite all this, still misendorse him as its
candidate against Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan? The party's state chairman,
George Clark - who has been spending much of his time recently accusing Mayor
Koch of not telling the truth about earlier promises never to run for governor -
says he doesn't see what the fuss is all about. ''Who cares about service
records these days?'' shrugs Mr. Clark. ''You don't have to be a war hero to get
elected.''

I couldn't agree more. War heroes are old hat. But what about just a modicum of
basic training in telling the truth?  And then there's Frederick Richmond, the
popular Brooklyn Democratic Congressman. A Federal judge recently ruled that the
millionaire Representative ''feigned'' retirement from the Walco National
Corporation, a company he controls, and proceeded ''improperly and unethically
to appropriate Walco resources for his own personal financial and political
benefit.''

''I don't feel one ounce embarrassed,'' Mr. Richmond said. ''I'm not ashamed of
anything I've done. I've done nothing wrong.'' Absolutely nothing? Isn't he
human? Didn't he ever misspeak himself?  Just once in his life? Just a tiny
misspeakment?

There are also those gray areas of aggrandizement - the kind of thing that
happens when public officials leave their jobs to work at much higher pay for
private companies that do business with the city.

The city's Board of Ethics ruled against one such official recently -Steven
Kauffman, who left the Transit Authority to work for one of the Transit
Authority's equipment suppliers - and he was forced to pay nearly $30,000 in
settlement of the conflict-ofinterest charges.

But most of these cases slip right through the holes in the law.  That is
because the law says you can go to work for anyone as long as you do not deal
specifically with any projects or matters you were involved in as a city
employee.

State Insurance Department officials often end up as executives in insurance
companies, banking officials in banks. City employees in planning, housing,
leasing and development posts often go to work for contractors, builders or
developers.

Is it illegal? Not by the letter of the law. Is it right? That is for voters to
decide; they have the ballot box and other community institutions through which
to express their displeasure, either over a policy or an offending public
official.

In the end, the condition of our ethics, public or private, rests on the
individual's personal sense of what is right and wrong. But those personal
standards are deeply affected by public example. If misspeaking is deemed O.K.,
then what about cutting moral corners, cheating, stealing, mugging old ladies?

Yet maybe I'm wrong to think it can all start with a few harmless fibs. Maybe it
works the other way around. Maybe the more heinous crimes are committed first.

This reverse progression of moral decay was suggested by Tom Lehrer, that writer
of satiric ditties, in one of his wicked social comments, a song known as ''The
Irish Ballad.'' In it, a piqued young maid does in her entire family, one by
one, through cyanide, drowning, butchery and immolation: And when at last the
police came by, Her little pranks she did not deny, To do so, she would have had
to lie, And lying, she knew, was a sin, a sin, Lying, she knew, was a Copyright
sin.*

*1952 and 1954 Tom Lehrer. Copy-

right renewed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 20, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 47, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 607 words


Questions appear on page 14.  1. He is the advertising man in charge of a
promotional campaign for the state of New Jersey.  2. In carrying an M-16
automatic rifle while helping Salvadoran soldiers erect a bridge, he violated
regulations restricting the weapons that advisers are permitted to carry on
training missions.

3. The papers were said to show that charges by journalists that Mr. Reagan had
made inaccurate statements in a recent news conference were themselves
inaccurate in five out of six cases. The White House declined to release the
papers.

4. Gerry Cooney. His heavyweight title fight with Larry Holmes, in which he
stood to earn $10 million, was postponed because of an injury to his left
shoulder.

5. The duck, which uses powerful strokes of its paddle-like feet to churn
unusually large amounts of water as it moves, is the first new species of the
duck, goose or swan family reported since 1917.

6. It was a huge oil-drilling rig which sank in a storm off Newfoundland.  7.
Mr. Caputo had previously described himself as a Vietnam era ''draftee'' and an
Army lieutenant, when he was neither. After the office of Senator Daniel Patrick
Moynihan, his Democratic opponent, pointed out inconsistencies in his record, he
acknowledged that he had taken a civilian job in the Defense Department to avoid
being drafted.

8. The correspondence, between Louis D. Brandeis and Felix Frankfurter,
disclosed that while Justice Brandeis was on the United States Supreme Court, he
paid Mr. Frankfurter, then a Harvard law professor, more than $50,000 to further
Brandeis's goals on public policy.

9. Citicorp.  10. 31-35.  11. To advise the Prime Minister that the United
States remained committed to maintaining Israel's military superiority over Arab
neighbors and that no new ''requests'' had been made to sell military equipment
to Jordan.

12. The drawing represents the position of the planets on March 10, 1982, when
they will be more closely clustered than at any time in 179 years. Doomsayers
contend that with all the planets on one side of the sun, their collective
gravity will imperil the Earth.

13. Richard Petty, seven times, and Cale Yarborough, twice.  14. That parties in
divorce cases did not have to prove that ''extraordinary circumstances existed''
to change custody agreements.  15. Prime Minister Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe
dismissed Joshua Nkomo after a discovery of a cache of Soviet-made weapons on a
farm owned by a holding company controlled by Mr. Nkomo and elements of his
political party.

16. Lee Strasberg and Thelonious Monk.  17. Gasoline.  18. Lane Kirkland,
president of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
Organizations.  19. Poland. Violations, most of them petty, of martial law.  20.
She gave up the policy of accepting expensive dresses on loan and later giving
them to museums; she has become involved in efforts to combat drug abuse,
particularly among the young.

21. France.  22. Is not.  23. 30 percent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. CATHOLIC BISHOPS OPPOSING ADMINISTRATION'S SALVADOR POLICY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1670 words


A guerrilla commander says 1982 will be the ''definitive'' year of the war in El
Salvador. Page 20.

By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

Responding to growing debate over United States involvement in El Salvador, the
National Conference of Catholic Bishops has become a forceful opponent of Reagan
Administration policy, toughening its stand against all forms of military aid to
the Central American country and demanding a negotiated settlement there.

Many other religious groups have attacked the Administration's strategy,
including an interfaith coalition of 350 people who, in a letter to members of
Congress last week coordinated by Clergy and Laity Concerned, demanded an end to
military aid. But the special place of the Roman Catholic Church in the lives of
90 percent of Latin America's people makes the voice of the church hierarchy in
the United States especially powerful.

The State Department has carefully studied the bishops' protests, and church
sources say the United States Ambassador to El Salvador, Deane R. Hinton, has
privately singled out the church's opposition as the main obstacle to the
Administration's effort to increase military aid to the Salvadoran Government,
which is fighting leftist guerrillas.

Major Turning Point Seen

The solid position of the hierarchy in the United States, expressed in a series
of official statements and in Congressional testimony, stems from a history of
close contact with Latin American Catholics and signals a major turning point in
the church's readiness to criticize United States foreign policy. A similar
climate of objection has developed around the issue of disarmament.

In broader church terms, the move is an outgrowth of an approach to the third
world that began in the early 1960's with the Second Vatican Council's appeal
for human rights. It continued in Pope Paul VI's 1967 encylical on social
justice, ''Progress of the Peoples,'' and was taken further at meetings of Latin
American bishops in 1968 and in 1978 that called for the church to side boldly
with the poor.  During the same period, the establishment of regional episcopal
conferences encouraged bishops to make more of their own decisions.

''We feel an obligation to heed the voice of the South American church,'' Bishop
John E. McCarthy of Houston said in discussing El Salvador. ''And we feel it is
our duty to challenge the public policy of the American Government, which is
arming, training and guiding military forces which are obviously oppressing its
people.''

In stepping up the criticism, the bishops say they are gaining confidence in
their ability to make distinctions. ''The biggest hurdle,'' said Archbishop
Rembert G. Weakland of Milwaukee, ''is the idea that if you're not pro-U.S.
policy, then you're pro-Communist, that there's only black and white, no middle
ground. We're calling for a new, realistic policy. We can side with the poor and
not be Communist.''

Archbishop James A. Hickey of Washington began visiting El Salvador in 1975
when, as the Bishop of Cleveland, he supervised many church workers from his
diocese, including two of the four churchwomen slain more than a year ago. In a
letter this month to Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland and
chairman of the House subcommittee on inter-American affairs, Archbishop Hickey
expressed a common view among bishops that the United States must press for
negotiations between the Salvadoran Government and the guerrillas. He also
called for an international peacekeeping force as a prelude to fair elections.

''My attempt is to present a balanced case,'' Archbishop Hickey said, commenting
on the letter. ''I don't want a Communist government there, but I don't want
arms supplies going there either.''

Vatican Stays Mostly Aloof

Meanwhile, the Vatican itself has caused some uneasiness among American
churchmen by remaining largely aloof from the public debate, reportedly because
of worries over the possibility of Communist expansion in the region.

Some of the anxiety in the United States has stemmed from the delay in naming a
permanent head of the San Salvador Archdiocese to replace Archbishop Oscar
Arnulfo Romero, the outspoken foe of military conflict and of Salvadoran
Government policies who was shot dead while saying mass two years ago.
Archbishop Romero's plea to President Carter to withhold arms to El Salvador had
first prompted action by the Catholic hierarchy in this country.

Bishop Arturo Rivera Damas, who is widely believed to hold views similar to
those of Archbishop Romero, has been acting Archbishop since the prelate was
killed, but the long process of choosing a permanent replacement troubles some
churchmen.

Tensions Reported in Curia

Some Catholic leaders attributed the Vatican's silence on the Salvador issue to
tensions among high officials of the Curia, the central administration of the
church, over how best to address the human rights problems in the region in the
face of what some prelates see as a growing threat of Marxist influence in
Nicaragua and El Salvador. ''Basically,'' said one leader, ''the Vatican
does@n't want 'little Cubas' all over the area.''

The situation is complicated by the fact that the acting Archbishop is virtually
the only progressive in the Salvadoran hierarchy and that the president of the
country's Bishops Conference, Bishop Pedro Arnoldo Aparicio y Quintanilla, is a
staunch conservative who favors United States military assistance. Some critics
of the United States bishops, including State Department officials, have drawn
on Bishop Aparicio's statements, but the bishops insist their primary
responsibility is to weigh the actions of their own Government, which, they say,
are wrong.

The United States bishops have taken independent initiatives without seeking
outright approval from the Vatican. At a closed-door session in November that
discussed the position of the bishops' conference regarding El Salvador, some
prelates wanted to consult the Vatican, but the suggestion was rejected by a
large majority on grounds that the Americans knew better than Rome how to
respond to the situation.

'Tacit Approval' Seen

Archbishop John R. Roach, president of the conference, noted that the Vatican is
''fully aware of our position'' and said the lack of any explicit objection
constituted ''tacit approval.''

Such decisiveness mirrors a changing role for the bishops as they expand their
concern for moral issues and human rights to the realm of international affairs.
In so doing, they are taking greater responsibility for assessing the policies
of their own country.

Archbishop Roach sharply attacked military assistance to El Salvador in a letter
released at the outset of Senate hearings on the matter. He called the ''present
direction'' of Administration policy ''a dangerous course, with a result
potentially as damaging to us as it is to the Salvadorans.''

The Archbishop repeated the call by the full conference last November for an end
to all ''outside military assistance'' and urged Washington to encourage talks
among conflicting parties rather than ''massively increasing the destructive
capability of the armed forces.''

Church Has New Confidence

The adamant support for this stand among most United States bishops indicates a
degree of confidence and determination unusual for a church once disposed to
approve Washington's foreign policy with few if any reservations. ''We were an
immigrant church during the last century and most of this one,'' said Bishop
Raymond A.  Lucker of New Ulm, Minn., ''and we went through a period when we
bent over backwards to prove we were American.''

By comparison, church opposition to United States actions in Vietnam grew more
gradually, beginning as support for American involvement in 1966 and culminating
in a call for the total withdrawal of American troops in 1971.

''The Southeast Asian experience is in back of everybody's mind,'' Bishop
McCarthy said.  Among the chief differences between reactions by the church to
the two conflicts was that ties between the Catholics in the United States and
in Central America go much deeper and are more personal.  For more than two
decades, since Pope John XXIII called on United States bishops to send personnel
to South America, hundreds of priests, nuns and lay people have gone to serve
poor parishes in the region, under the direction of bishops who usually traveled
to the missions and learned firsthand of the problems there.

'Bishops Became Aware'

''Those bishops who went there became aware on an experiential basis,'' said
Bishop Weakland. ''That took the church out of its inner circle to another part
of the world. It gave us knowledge and courage to take stands otherwise we
probably wouldn't have taken. We have our own sources of information and people
we trust. We can speak forcefully and feel good about speaking out.''

Administration officials have been concerned about the strength of the bishops'
stand. A year ago, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., along with Under
Secretary James L. Buckley, met with several top Catholic officials to press the
Administration's case. Subsequent meetings have been held between small groups
and individuals from both sides, but neither side has appeared to give ground.
The bishops seem to have stiffened their resolve.

''I don't think we can stay in the sacristry and talk about holy things,''
Bishop Lucker said. ''These are holy things. People are holy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bishop Arturo Rivera Damas photo of Bishop
Pedro Arnoldo Aparicio y Quintanilla photo of Archbishop John R. Roach

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VOTERS REPORTED LESS CONFIDENT OF REAGAN PLAN

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1310 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 20


Members of the House of Representatives who provided President Reagan with his
victories in economic battles last year now report that their constituents are
losing confidence in Mr.  Reagan's economic program and are taking a more
critical look at his latest budget and tax plans.

As a result, members of both major parties now generally agree that Mr. Reagan's
program will be severely altered before it becomes law.  ''I think people are
beginning to say, 'Maybe this guy didn't have the answer like we thought he
did,' '' said Representative Don Fuqua, Democrat of Florida, who supported most
of Mr. Reagan's initiatives last year.

''I don't think people are taking a lot of venom out on the President - I think
he's still well liked,'' Mr. Fuqua continued.  ''But they are beginning to
question the policies he's advocated and whether they will really solve the
problems or not.''

'Feeling of Lost Confidence'

Representative Jim Leach of Iowa, a leading voice among moderate Republicans,
said: ''The President's budget was dead in its tracks the day it was delivered.
Conservatives rejected it on the ground that the deficit was too large, and the
liberals on the ground that its priorities were askew.

''As a moderate, I agree with both. The feeling out here is one of lost
confidence. No one elected Ronald Reagan to preside over a recession.''

That sense of lost confidence among the voters mirrors a similar disillusionment
with Reagan economic policies that appears to be growing on Capitol Hill. A
senior Republican Senate committee chairman was asked whether any of his
colleagues still had faith in the President's economic plans. After a pause, he
said, ''I guess my silence is my answer.''

Sense of Alarm on Foreign Policy

As they traveled through their home districts this week of their recess,
Congressmen also said they sensed a rising alarm over the Administration's
foreign policy, particularly in regard to El Salvador. Representative Olympia J.
Snowe, a moderate Republican, said the issue had dominated meetings she held
this week in several small towns in her state, Maine.

''It was the first question raised - I just can't get over it,'' she said.
''People are very concerned that we will get involved in El Salvador like we did
in Vietnam. They want to know if Congress is in control of the situation and
whether we'll be able to block any action by the President involving troops.''

The President said this week that he had no plans to send troops to El Salvador.
Before Congress left town last week for a 10-day recess, Mr. Reagan wrote a
letter to all Republican lawmakers, seeking their support for his economic
program. ''While you are home this weekend,'' he said, ''I urge you to listen to
the real voices of the American people, not just the squeaky wheels.''

- Several Congressmen reported that voters still liked the President and wanted
him to succeed. They were among more than a dozen House members interviewed, all
from two groups who hold the balance of power in the House: moderate Republicans
from the Frost Belt and conservative Democrats from the Sun Belt

Local political leaders interviewed around the country said last week said that
voters they had talked to had not turned against Mr.  Reagan after he had
announced his budget proposals for increasingly large deficits.

Among the returning Congressmen interviewed here, Representative Gregory W.
Carmen, a freshman Republican from Farmingdale, L.I., said in a typical comment:
''President Reagan's popularity still seems to be very substantial,''

Some feel that the President will again carry the day in Congress.  ''People in
Washington are finding ways to distance themselves from the President,'' said
Representative Bill Frenzel, Republican of Minnesota, a member of both the
Budget and Ways and Means Committees, ''but the truth is, I don't think too many
will be voting too differently in the future.''

But most of the lawmakers said that the ''real voices'' they heard back home
were echoing with doubt and fear as they saw the economy collapsing around them.

In Union, N.J., Representative Matthew J. Rinaldo, a Republican, heard from one
of the largest auto dealers in his district. The man, an old friend, was going
out of business and needed a job.

In Pine Bluff, Ark., Representative Beryl Anthony Jr., a Democrat, was told that
this year the area would ''lose a good many farmers'' to the ravages of high
interest rates and the weak demand for rice.

In Cincinnati, Representative Bill Gradison, Republican of Ohio, counted up the
latest loss of jobs: three auto plants closed, meat packers threatening to head
south for cheaper labor, a jet engine factory laying off workers as demand for
airplanes slumps.

Linking Troubles to Reagan

The voters are now starting to identify these troubles with the President. In
Representative Kent Hance's district in West Texas, Mr. Reagan won 72 percent of
the vote in 1980, and the Democratic Congressman came under heavy pressure to
back the President's program.

''Last August, the President's popularity was like this,'' said Mr. Hance,
tilting his arm upward. ''Now, the trend is like this,'' and Mr. Hance, who
co-sponsored the Reagan tax bill, tilted his arm downward.

Mr. Reagan has pleaded with the public to give his program more time to work,
but Mr. Hance and others say they believe he is now being victimized by his own
campaign language and the promise he held out of swift and painless recovery.

''Simple answers,'' said Mr. Hance, ''that's a dog the President turned loose in
the campaign, and it's a dog that has come back to bite him.''

This shift in sentiment has important political significance for lawmakers who
now feel freer to criticize the President. As Mr.  Gradison, a member of the
Ways and Means Committee, put it: ''Last year, from the very beginning of the
budget process, the message was, 'Support the President.' Now I think it's more,
look at each item, reach a judgment, don't take it all on faith. That comes from
both conservatives and liberals, rich and poor.''

Proposed Deficit Assailed

In particular, the lawmakers are hearing widespread criticism of Mr. Reagan's
proposed budget deficit, which the Administration says will be $92 billion. One
answer that seems to command growing support is a sharp reduction in proposed
increases for the Defense Department.

''Even the most conservative Republicans,'' said Representative John E. Porter,
Republican of Illinois, ''who wholeheartedly support increased defense spending,
say Reagan has to cut something from defense. I figure in the end he'll have to
concede about $20 billion.''

Many voters equate the high deficit with high interest rates, and seem willing
to forgo scheduled tax reductions if the savings can be applied to the deficit.
''They've gotten their tax increase and they see it's nothing,'' observed
Representative Ken Holland, Democrat of South Carolina. ''They tell me, 'Why
don't you go ahead and repeal that thing, if it will help cut the deficit?' ''

Mr. Leach says he finds that voters in Iowa are starting to agree with
Democratic complaints that the Reagan budget is unfair to the poor and middle
class. ''Ronald Reagan won the legislative battle of 1981,'' he said, ''but the
Democrats might be winning the partisan war. Their message that the Reagan
budget is too beneficial to the well to do is catching on.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
Cambodia Accuses Thais Of Chemical Warfare

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 173 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 20


The Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh has accused Thailand of firing
shells containing ''poisonous chemicals'' into Cambodia, the Hanoi radio said
today. Thailand denied the report.

Quoting a Foreign Ministry statement from the Cambodian capital, the radio said
that 105-millimeter shells fired from Thailand landed at Phnom Melai on Feb. 11
and 14. The Cambodian Government said the explosions wounded 20 people and
caused vomiting among the inhabitants.

Phnom Melai is generally considered a stronghold of guerrillas loyal to the Pol
Pot regime, which was ousted by the present Cambodian authorities with
Vietnamese help. Fighting has been reported around Phnom Melai as Vietnamese-led
troops use their dry season mobility to try to smash the rebels.

Thailand and the United States have accused Vietnam, which has 200,000 troops in
Cambodia, of using Soviet-s@upplied poisons against the insurgents. Vietnam has
denied the charge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY MEN SAY CONGRESS CUTS TOO CLOSE TO BONE

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 20


For years, Congress has attacked military spending plans with vigor and, to the
Pentagon's way of thinking, has succeeded far too often. Military and budget
experts say that Congress always manages to cut the military budget in a way
that does the most damage, sacrificing operations and maintenance spending while
protecting spending for expensive weapons systems.

Military spending accounts for only 26 percent of this year's Federal budget,
down from 45 percent or more through much of the 1950's and 1960's.

Now the Reagan Administration proposes an increase of $44 billion, a peacetime
record, in the 1983 budget. But such Congressional leaders as the
military-minded Republican Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada are ready to forgo some
of the increase to bring down the Federal deficit. The deficit is officially
estimated at $91.5 billion, yet could easily be higher. In the end, as much as
$10 billion could be cut from military spending, Congressional leaders say.

However, military critics of the annual economy drive say that each time
Congress takes up the Pentagon budget, the legislators find anew that the
simplest way to achieve big savings, and quickly, is to cut the amount earmarked
for operations and maintainence.

This means, the military men say, that items directly affecting the services'
ability to respond to emergencies, including ammunition, flight training,
repairs and the like, are pared down while expensive weapons systems often
remain largely untouched.

Thus, when former Defense Secretary James R. Schlesinger ordered every naval
vessel near the Gulf of Thailand to steam to the aid of the United States
merchant ship Mayaguez in 1975, he found that not one could move at full speed.
In what was considered the result of long-standing neglect of maintenance, an
aircraft carrier and a helicopter carrier never reached the scene, and a third
ship had power-supply problems.

Payoff May Be in Early Years

This, according to military professionals, is related to the ''spendout rate''
of military contracts. Hardware such as ships, planes, missiles and tanks must
be procured over several years, with an average of just 12 percent of total
outlays made in the first year. In such categories as operations and
maintenance, on the other hand, 83 percent of the money is spent in the first
year.

This means, according to Representative Les Aspin, a Wisconsin Democrat who
serves on both the Budget and Armed Services committees, that there is more
''bang'' for the budget-cut dollar in operations and maintenance, and less in
the big-ticket, and to many Congressmen politically appealing, weapons.

If Congress were to cut $10 billion in spending on planes this year, it would
have to cut the budget authority for them by $100 billion, or more than three
times as much as the Administration wants to spend for them, Mr. Aspin stated
recently. But one could get a $10 billion savings in operations and maintanance
by chopping only $12 billion out of $73 billion in those categories.

''Given this choice,'' he said, ''it's a pretty good guess that the cuts are
going to come exactly where they should not be, in the operations and
maintenance account that funds readiness.''

Others have recognized the problem, which became acute during the Vietnam War,
but there seems no easy remedy.

Neither Option Is Attractive

''It's a dilemma,'' Alice Rivlin, the head of the Congressional Budget Office,
said in an interview. Unless contracts for equipment ordered in earlier years
are canceled, big savings can come only out of military pay and pensions or
operations and maintenance, ''and neither is a very attractive option,'' she
said.

Mr. Schlesinger, who also served as acting budget director, said, ''Outlays are
very difficult to cut without cutbacks in readiness unless you want to play
around with military pay.''

He said that he does not favor finding savings in weapons procurement, despite a
$24 billion increase in budget authority proposed for the 1983 fiscal year. Even
under the current buildup, begun by President Carter, he said, the average piece
of military hardware ''will continue to age.''

But others worry that heavy purchases of equipment will aggravate the problem of
limited response to crises. Keeping manpower levels constant ''could cause
problems in the readiness area as large quantities of sophisticated new weapons
are deployed with little increase in the troops to man the systems,'' according
to a House Budget Committee analysis of the Reagan plan.

Congress Asked to Alter Approach

Mr. Aspin, in his own plan for military savings, has suggested three ways of
improving the budget process.  First, he says, Congress should approach military
spending decisions in terms of a number of years instead of regarding them as
''just an exercise in holding down this year's outlays.''

Second, he says, military budgeting should no longer be a ''feast or famine''
reaction to today's headlines.  Finally, Mr. Aspin adds, if readiness must be
impaired, available spending should be devoted to those units likely to be
called on early in an emergency.

Mr. Schlesinger agrees that this would be good, but cautions that, in his
experience, both the military and Congress cling to traditional ways. ''That,''
he said, ''runs against the grain of the service ethos, which tends to feel that
all units should share in the fat years and the lean years equitably.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rep. Les Aspin

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON PLOYS

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1381 words


WASHINGTON DEFENSE Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger concluded a tour of the Middle
East last weekend talking of new arms for Jordan and leaving the impression of
an American tilt away from Israel and toward the Arab states. Among those
accompanying him on the trip and reinforcing that impression was Francis J. West
Jr. Mr. West did the staff work for the trip and frequently, on a
not-for-attribution basis, explained to reporters what Mr. Weinberger was really
doing.

The Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs, Mr.  West is a
pivotal figure in what is known as the Defense Department's little State
Department. It is a lean and adaptable body that can be galvanized into
bureaucratic shock troops by a Defense Secretary who wants to play a major role
in formulating American foreign policy.  That seems to be precisely what Mr.
Weinberger wants.

Clashes with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. have thus been inevitable.
They have been made worse because the two men seem to be working at cross
purposes on almost every issue touching the Soviet Union. Earlier this month,
Mr. Weinberger dissented from the decision not to declare Poland in default of
its debts to American banks. Now, the tug of war is over the Middle East.

Both Mr. Haig and Mr. Weinberger view the Soviet Union as the main threat to
American interests in the area and hope to improve American ties with moderate
Arab states. But while Mr. Haig seems more mindful of Israeli security, Mr.
Weinberger makes no efdort to hide his conviction that a beefed-up Arab military
would be more helpful in the anti-Soviet cause. With Jordan on the verge of
buying a mobile antiaircraft missile system from Moscow, he made it known that
he favored offering a comparable American system as a substitute - and some F-16
fighter planes to boot. The statement ran directly counter to Mr. Haig's efforts
to reassure Prime Minister Menachem Begin of American fidelity. Mr. Haig
considers this essential as Israel's fuse over southern Lebanon grows shorter
and the return of the rest of Sinai to Egypt draws near.

In an unusual near-unanimous vote, the Israeli Parliament last week expressed
its ''deep concern'' over the Weinberger arms suggestions and said they would
pose ''a serious danger to Israel's security.'' Mr. Begin followed up with a
letter to President Reagan, noting that the sale of a mobile antiaircraft
missile system to Jordan would violate a 1975 American commitment.

Mr. Reagan had already prepared a ''Dear Menachem'' letter, affirming that
America would keep its commitments. It added: ''I am determined to see that
Israel's qualitative technological edge is maintained.'' At his news conference,
he called press coverage of Mr. Weinberger's trip ''overblown'' and said ''there
is no difference in policy'' between the two Secretaries.
Weinberger's Aims and Views

In the view of a number of foreign diplomats and some Administration officials,
much of the confusion stemmed from the fact that the President has not
elaborated a formal Middle East policy. By virtually all accounts, he has
tackled Middle East questions, like so many other matters, on an ad hoc basis,
without hammering out the differences between Mr. Weinberger and Mr. Haig. As a
result, Administration actions have drifted one way and another, generally in
the direction of more differences with Israel.

Mr. Weinberger came into his job a year ago with little background but very
strong views about military and foreign policy. He sought a lot more money for
arms, a much tougher stance toward Moscow and less of a European and more of a
Persian Gulf focus to policy.

These predelictions were reinforced, shaped and embedded into a global strategy
by the men he chose to head his little State Department: Fred C. Ikle, Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy; Richard N. Perle, Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Policy, and Francis West. They inherited slightly more than 200
professionals (civil servants, military officers and a few foreign service
officers on loan), organized to mirror the State Department.

The small size of their agencies contributes to their power.  Control can be
established quickly through the appointment of a dozen or so deputy assistant
secretaries and office directors. It takes much longer to master the State
Department's several thousand professional personnel.

The little State Department can act more rapidly and decisively.For example, Mr.
West has to get only Mr. Ikle's approval for many of the memorandums he sends to
Mr. Weinberger, while an assistant secretary of state has to coordinate many of
his memorandums to Mr.  Haig with two or three other assistant secretaries and
at least one under secretary. Thus the recommendations of the Pentagan body are
often less diluted. This cutting edge helps in doing battle between the
departments.

The dominant ideology of the little State Department can also change rapidly. It
has no institutional position, no fixed constituency to please, no established
budget to defend.

The group was founded in the early 1950's to administer the multibillion grant
military aid program. Over time, it became involved in decisions on arms and
overseas bases and its role grew to dealing with the State Department on most
questions of foreign policy. As the National Security Council system evolved and
interdepartmental committees proliferated, the Pentagon's little State
Department always had a seat at the table with the State Department, the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and the staff of the N.S.C. The Pentagon team reached its zenith
of power and controversy in the 1960's under Defense Secretary Robert S.
McNamara, whose role on Vietnam and arms control was that of a de facto
Secretary of State.

Ikle the Senior Member

The men of the little State Department today also have considerable power and
strong points of view. Mr. Ikle is the senior member, directly under Mr.
Weinberger and Deputy Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci. Swiss-born, reserved and
a former director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency under President
Ford, he is considered a good general strategist and a weak bureaucrat. He is
particularly interested in emergency war planning and in developing American
capacity to fight long wars. He advanced the Pentagon's position to declare
Poland in default of its debts to put more pressure on Moscow.

Mr. Perle is responsible for nuclear matters, East-West and arms control issues
and European affairs. He gained prominence as an aide to Senator Henry M.
Jackson, Democrat of Washington and has a reputation for political toughness and
skill. Like Mr. Ikle, he opposes detente, believing it cannot work unless
Washington regains a military edge over Moscow. He regards arms control
agreements in the absence of such strength as dangerous.

He was the prime mover behind President Reagan's proposal to eliminate
medium-range nuclear weapons in Europe. Mr. Perle's detractors saw the proposal
as an effort to kill arms control in Europe because of the certainty that Moscow
would reject it. Others saw it as a brilliant stroke to put Moscow on the
diplomatic defensive.

Mr. West, a red-haired, outgoing former Marine and protege of former Defense
Secretary James R. Schlesinger, is responsible for all regions except Europe and
for the arms sales program. Along with the Secretary of the Navy, John F.
Lehman, his major contribution has been the conception of the global maritime
strategy. Now the Weinberger strategy, it would focus military planning somewhat
less on Europe and a lot more on the Persian

Gulf. This also means more attention to the Arabs and less to Israel. More
airlift and a 600-ship Navy would provide the backbone for the strategy. This
would provide the necessary flexibility, it is argued, for the United States to
respond to a Soviet attack in the Persian Gulf by striking Cuba, Libya or
Vietnam.

Like Mr. Weinberger, these three men have staked out clear-cut hard-line
positions, warning against compromise on defense or with the Russians. If the
President moves in the other direction, they will find themselves on a self-made
limb. But they talk and act as though they are convinced that Mr. Reagan will
eventually lean toward them and away from the other State Department.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinber aboard USS
Constellation photos of Richard N. Perle Fred C. Ikl e Frnacis J. West Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The World in Summary;
Salvador Junta Wants Lots of Help, and Soon

BYLINE: By Barbara Slavin and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 432 words


Administration critics have been quick to warn against repeating the errors of
Vietnam in El Salvador, but not everybody agrees on the history that ultimately
turned Saigon into Ho Chi Minh City. Last week, President Reagan added to the
confusion. He said North Vietnamese Communists had refused to participate in an
election to unify the country, when in fact it was the Saigon Government that
refused to participate. It is El Salvador where leftists are boycotting March 28
elections, leaving the field to President Jose Napoleon Duarte's Christian
Democrats and rightist parties. The Government barred the guerrillas from
participating unless they first laid down their arms.

Mr. Reagan reiterated last week that ''there are no plans to send American
combat troops into action any place in the world.'' As for the nearly 50
military advisers in El Salvador, the Administration was considering
reclassifying M-16 rifles as ''personal'' weapons so that advisers in the field
could carry them. After all, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. said, ''an
M-16 is a far more reassuring sidearm'' than a pistol.

North American visitors streamed through San Salvador last week and most of them
came away convinced that President Duarte's junta needed a lot more help. Lieut.
Gen. Wallace H. Nutting, the United States commander for the region, said there
would be ''no quick, easy cheap solutions'' to the war. Diplomats in San
Salvador said the junta would need tens of thousands of additional troops, but
the Government wasn't asking for any from Washington. ''What we need is aid,''
said Gen. Jose Guillermo Garcia, the Defense Minister. He mentioned enough
helicopters to transport two battalions simultaneously plus other planes and
electronic surveillance equipment. The cost was estimated at half a billion
dollars.

What we need is napalm, Roberto d'Aubuisson's far-right Nationalist Republican
Alliance insisted. The alliance, which equates Mr.  Duarte's Christian
Democratic philosophy with Communism, was picking up strength and Salvadoran and
United States officials feared that if it won the March elections, that would
intensify the civil war.  Senator Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island said United
States aid should cease if the alliance won. He also endorsed a suggestion by a
fellow Democrat, Senator Patrick Leahy of Vermont, to reduce aid, after the
elections, if the junta still refused to negotiate with the guerrillas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM AND SALVADOR-A BATTLE FOR HEARTS AND MINDS

BYLINE: By FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2001 words


WASHINGTON THE words from the scene are chillingly familiar. The President said,
''We are losing the fight with the guerrillas in the countryside.'' The visiting
American general said the United States would have to rethink its policy of not
allowing American advisers to accompany local troops on combat missions. The
Defense Minister told visiting Congressmen that a government victory was not
possible without more United States military aid. A non-American diplomat said
the government ''cannot win without troops from the United States, or someone.''

But the country is not Vietnam and the time is not the early 1960's. It is El
Salvador and the time is last week.  More and more people are asking openly
whether El Salvador is going to be another Vietnam. The question itself is
important, reflecting popular fears and moods. That is one difference. Nobody
asked at the time of the Gulf of Tonkin incident, when President Johnson got a
Congressional blank check to intervene in Vietnam, whether he was getting us
into another Korea. This time, there is a sense of caution and a deep distrust
of what the bureaucrats call ''incrementalism,'' asking for a little more and
then a little more, so that it doesn't sound like a dangerous and dubious
long-term commitment until suddenly the country finds itself in a full-scale war
with no way out but giving up.

That distrust underlies the question. But the comparison means different things
to different people. To some, Vietnam is a metaphor for a blind plunge into a
no-win morass. Their question is whether expanded United States aid and possibly
military involvement in Salvador would defeat the rebels' attempt to win
government power.

Some Differences

To others, Vietnam means an immoral and pernicious intervention in another
society which shouldn't be undertaken regardless of whether it might succeed or
not. And to some, Vietnam means primarily a tremendous drain on resources and
young men's lives which frayed America's own social fabric and left painful
scars of division at home while projecting the image of the ''Ugly American.''

Nobody is suggesting Vietnam as a positive analogy, as an inspiring crusade or a
noble mission. Ambassador Jeane J.  Kirkpatrick came closest to attempting to
justify it when she was asked at a conference of American Legion leaders last
week whether the United States might be repeating in El Salvador a pattern that
had failed in Vietnam. ''I don't think we were driven out of Vietnam,'' she
replied. ''I think we left.'' That hardly answered the legionnaire's question,
but it does raise the issue of why ''we left.''

In a report to the Speaker of the House on his visit to El Salvador,
Representative John P. Murtha, a Pennsylvania Democrat who was a Marine officer
in Vietnam, warned against ''deciding these kinds of debates on the emotions of
Vietnam.''

There are obvious differences in the two situations. El Salvador is in Central
America, not a faraway country few Americans ever heard of until they started
being sent to fight there. Logistics are much easier. The United States would
have fairly short supply lines.

It is a small country, though densely populated, with only five million people.
And it is a country, unlike South Vietnam which was only half of a nation
supposedly temporarily divided by the 1954 Geneva accords ending the French war.
Those accords provided for elections which were to lead to reunification. Saigon
refused to implement them and sought to turn the demilitarized zone between
North and South into a state border. That added a nationalist factor to the
social and political civil war, an issue which doesn't exist in El Salvador.

That difference also means that the insurgents do not have a natural base for
sanctuary, resupply and recruitment adjoining, but not inside, the combat zone.
At present, the neighboring Governments of Honduras and Guatemala are hostile to
them, though these countries would certainly be affected by an expanded war and
cannot be considered indefinitely stable.

The nearest regime friendly to the guerrillas is Nicaragua, which has no land
border with El Salvador but is not far by sea across the Gulf of Fonseca.
Farther away is Cuba and far away is its Soviet ally.

Senior officials insist on another important difference - the nature of the
regime and the society. The Salvadoran junta has embarked on land reform and has
promised other development efforts.  Vietnam did not have the gross inequity in
agricultural tenure and oligarchic rule that has characterized Salvador, but it
was conquered by Japan in World War II and emerged from colonial rule and
occupation a fragmented, fragile and sharply divided society.

In culture and religion, Salvador is homogeneous while Vietnam is a Buddhist
country with a large Catholic minority, many feuding sects, and had an important
Chinese minority.

But the same United States officials who point to land reform as an important,
encouraging distinction between Salvador and the South Vietnam which the United
States fought to ''save from Communism'' offer the same reason for American
intervention now. Without using the words, they argue the domino theory. If the
insurgents win in Salvador, that will lead to the overthrow of regimes in
Guatemala and Honduras, and maybe Costa Rica. That could endanger Panama and
spread insurrection in Colombia and Venezuela, and so on through the hemisphere,
they say.

In this way, tiny Salvador is portrayed as a crucial bridgehead to vast American
strategic interests as Vietnam was said to be the line against the peril of
Communist China.

It is true that the United States has far more important strategic interests in
Central America than it ever had in Indochina. There is already talk in
Washington of the danger that an unfriendly regime in Salvador would mean in
case of ''resupply needs for Europe.'' That is officialese for the possibility
of a war in Europe which would require huge American military reinforcements and
drastically reduce troops and supplies available for continental defense.

But despite the crucial geographic difference, these scenarios advanced by the
supporters for expanded military do tend to sound more like than unlike the talk
of the Vietnam build-up years.
Challenging the Body Count

Other similarities are more striking. The most glaring is the regime's failure
to meet urgent social needs, leaving a desperation that nourishes the call to
revolution. Administration officials argue that reform has been launched and
that its limited effectiveness has been due to disruption by guerrillas who want
to polarize feelings to the extremes of right or left. But other observers doubt
the junta's capacity to push peaceful reform.

President Jose Napoleon Duarte is probably a good deal more democratic-minded
than any leader South Vietnam produced, but he has not been able to dominate
authoritarian elements in the security forces and on the right. President Reagan
has certified that the junta made ''progress'' last year in gaining control of
the security forces and reducing what are euphemistically called human rights
violations - that is, the murder of noncombatants.

But that view is widely challenged and charges are multiplying that statistics
are being faked, as in Vietnam, to justify a political decision. Representative
Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, notes that the United States Embassy in
San Salvador estimates 6,000 noncombatants were killed last year, while the
Salvadoran Archbishopric, Amnesty International and several other sources put
the total killed at 12,000 - an increase, not a decline. Further, Mr. Solarz
notes that in terms of total population, 6,000 is a percentage equivalent to
more than 270,000 in the United States. As in Vietnam, human devastation in El
Salvador is provoking mounting moral outrage in the United States and among
friendly countries. While Americans aren't doing the killing, they are
increasingly being blamed for not stopping it.

European diplomats and Mr. Solarz say that President Duarte wants to start
negotiations for a settlement but that Washington sides with Salvadoran security
forces opposed to the idea. A senior American official says privately that while
he doesn't expect a military victory over the rebels, he expects it will take
another six or seven years before they become convinced they can't win by force
of arms and ''desirable'' conditions for negotiations can emerge.

That assessment is not being made publicly by the Administration because it
doubts that American opinion would accept such a long-term commitment. The
effect is similar to the gradual revelation of the difficulties of America's
engagement in Vietnam, though the difference is that at least some of the
decision-makers now appear to know that there is no quick, easy way to achieve
their policy goals in El Salvador.

And, as in Vietnam, the United States must confront harsh disputes and
infighting in the regime it supports. Last week, the right-wing extremist
Roberto d'Aubuisson, who was described as a ''pathological killer'' by the
previous United States Ambassador to El Salvador, was reported as gaining
strength in the election campaign. He could emerge as a dominant force in the
junta, displacing Washington's favorite, Mr. Duarte. Some leftists may even vote
for Mr.  d'Aubuisson, the report said, on the grounds that he would drive many
thousands of Salvadorans to support the guerrillas against him.

Another similarity is the role of the church. The Salvadoran hierachy, like
leading Vietnamese Buddhist officials during their war, want above all to find
ways to end the killing. Therefore it urges a compromise that would inevitably
give the rebels a share of government power. Washington is convinced, as it was
in Vietnam, that such a compromise would lead to total Communist domination.
There are members of Congress who flatly disagree and call for negotiations, but
the official view is on the same line the Johnson and Nixon Administrations held
toward Vietnam.

Meanwhile, foreign opinion about United States involvement is also developing
much as it did during the Vietnam war and perhaps even more strongly, precisely
because of the precedent. Canada and Mexico signaled disapproval by refusing the
request to send observers to next month's Salvadoran elections.

Whatever the real extent of Soviet-originated aid to the guerrillas, Moscow's
propaganda is drawing benefits from America's role in El Salvador. The
neutralist movement in Europe is gaining support from people who ask, ''What is
the difference between Salvador and Poland, or Afghanistan?'' and conclude that
the two superpowers are equally menacing to peace and other nations'
independence.

In the end, the sum of differences and similarities to Vietnam is probably that
the chances of military success are higher in Salvador, but the stakes are much
greater and the political cost to America would be no less and possibly more
because attitudes reflect cumulative condemnations. There is also the
unforeseeable risk of widening the war. Pulling out of Vietnam was costly to the
United States in many ways, but it is hard to imagine any way that the United
States could pull out of Central America if it fails. That is the ultimate
difference.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of American advisors in El Salvador photo of
American sergeant in Vietnam 1962

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MRS. KIRKPATRICK PUTS A WORLD VIEW IN A NUTSHELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 382 words


JEANE J. Kirkpatrick, the chief United States delegate at the United Nations,
last week made clear the Administration's resolve not to repeat in El Salvador
the mistakes of Vietnam as it sees them. The following remarks in reply to
questions at an American Legion conference in Washington were taped by CBS News.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick was asked, ''Are we in a losing posture again?'' Will the
United States be driven from El Salvador, as it was from Vietnam? ''I don't
think we were driven out of Vietnam - I think we left,'' she replied. ''I think
that's an important distinction and one we should not lose sight of. By the way,
I don't think the French were driven out of Vietnam either. They left too.''

What about American backing for a ''bad, corrupt'' Salvadoran regime, a
questioner wanted to know. Mrs. Kirkpatrick said, ''The truth is that most of
the governments in the world are, by our standards, bad governments. (They) are
not democratic, never have been. Democracy has been rare in the world. Most
governments are, by our standards, corrupt.''

And in Nicaragua, are the Sandinists, whom the Administration finds repugnant,
any better or worse than the Somoza dictatorship?  ''The most significant
difference from the perspective of the Nicaraguan people,'' she said, ''is that
the Sandinista regime is even more repressive of their liberties than was the
dictatorship of Somoza. From the perspective of the United States, the most
significant difference...is that one (the Somoza regime) was friendly toward the
United States and one has, as a line in its national anthem, that we, the United
States, are the enemies of mankind.''

''We live in an imperfect world,'' Mrs. Kirkpatrick said. ''Most people are
badly governed, and always have been. We wish we had (only) allies who were
democratic and well-governed, (but) we still have to look after ourselves and
freedom in the world. Therefore, sometimes we are going to have to support and
associate with governments who do not meet our standards. The relations between
power and morality are often very complicated. I don't think they're so
ambiguous, but I think they're very complicated.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Jeane J. Kirkpatrick

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Topics;
PASSING RITES;
Rank Inaccuracy

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 216 words


Bruce Caputo has come up with an interesting way of ending the Vietnam vet's
sense of estrangement from other Americans: let nearly everyone qualify as a
veteran. A former Congressman and present aspirant for New York's Senate seat,
Mr. Caputo considers himself a veteran because for 2 1/2 years he held a
civilian job in the Pentagon. On that reasoning, any worker whose employment was
connected with the war was also a veteran, ending the Viet vets' sense of being
an outcast minority.

Good thinking, Mr. Caputo. Sure, it was ''not technically accurate'' to say that
he was a Vietnam ''draftee'' or had served for 2 1/2 years as an Army
lieutenant. But why get sticky about it? Mr.  Caputo points out he never claimed
he was a war hero, ''nor am I embarrassed that I served during the Vietnam War
in the Pentagon.'' Likewise, he explains that no harm was meant when he
described himself as an ''assistant'' to the Secretary of Defense. Basically,
that's what he was doing - assisting - along with 30,000 others in the Pentagon.
On that basis, Mr. Caputo should propose that all who vote for him will be
allowed to call themselves assistant candidates and maybe assistant senators.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EL SALVADOR AND ITS WOULD-BE 'SOCIAL REFORMERS'

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 716 words


T o the Editor: Once again we are subjected to a propaganda onslaught designed
to win sympathy for forces fighting a government which, for all its
shortcomings, happens to be friendly to the United States.

The excerpted comments of Cayetano Carpio, identified as the senior leader of
the Salvadoran guerrillas (Op-Ed Feb. 9), are but the latest contribution to the
concerted effort to challenge U.S. policy for El Salvador, and for Latin America
in general.

True, Mr. Carpio sounds quite reasonable. But so did Fidel Castro before seizing
power. And what about Nicaragua's Sandinistas? In some interviews given before
the overthrow of the Somoza dictatorship, their spokesmen were the models of
moderation.

And while it may still be too early to make a final judgment of Nicaragua under
Sandinist rule, one can do so in the case of Castro's Cuba. What fundamental
human rights are being observed in today's Cuba? What benefits are enjoyed by
the people of a country whose economy is dependent on Soviet largess and whose
leader, as partial payment, sends Cuban soldiers to fight and die in Africa?

This predictable metamorphosis of ''social reformers'' into tyrants the moment
they have gained power apparently bothers not one whit those members of the
Western intellectual community and media who have always been enamored of all
things revolutionary. For them, a revolutionary is a ''progressive,'' a champion
of the downtrodden; anyone else is a contemptible reactionary, a Neanderthal.

The Carpios know that they can count on the automatic support of many an opinion
molder in the West. But only so long as they appear to represent a ''moderate''
alternative to the ''oppressive'' regime they are fighting. So the rhetoric is
muted, willingness for an accommodation is implied, reasonableness is the order
of the day.

So Mr. Carpio waxes conciliatory and extends an olive branch. He speaks of an El
Salvador in which ''there is room for everybody's contribution, from large
businessmen to small farmers and merchants.'' Is he trying to kid only us, or
himself, too?

Whoever is helping foot the bill of the guerrilla operations is surely going to
insist on having a say, perhaps a decisive one, in the political, economic and
social makeup of El Salvador should the insurgents win. And the countries that
support them are hardly noted for tolerance of a free, pluralistic society.

And where is the massive aid to reconstruct post-civil-war El Salvador to come
from? If from the Soviet Union (directly or by proxy), then does Mr. Carpio
really expect us to believe that the Soviets would give aid to a genuinely
democratic state?

The tragedy of El Salvador would not come to an end if we listened to the
Carpios and abandoned the Duarte Government. At the same time, it is clear that
El Salvador needs constructive change, and President Duarte cannot marshal
broadly based popular support unless some of the glaring inequities in that
country are redressed.

While not easy to do so in wartime, many of the overdue reforms ought to be at
least begun. Participation of some of the more moderate guerrilla leaders in a
government of national reconciliation also is an option that ought not to be
dismissed out of hand.

It has become fashionable to talk of El Salvador as another possible Vietnam.
Many of the proponents of this theory are the very people who once talked of the
Vietcong as ''reformers,'' only to become strangely silent in the face of
internal oppression and imperialism in Cambodia and Laos by the masters of
today's Vietnam.

Yes, we must not forget the lesson of Vietnam. Part of that lesson is taking a
closer look at Vietnam today and pondering whether that is the fate to which we
want to condemn El Salvador and other countries seeking our help.  MILAN B.
SKACEL President Chamber of Commerce of Latin America New York, Feb. 10, 1982

*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRAFTS;
BEATING THE ODDS AT BLOWING GLASS

BYLINE: By PATRICIA MALARCHER

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 14, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1226 words


LAMBERTVILLE WHEN Leonard DiNardo sets up shop next weekend at the Winter Market
of American Crafts in Baltimore, his two dozen blown-glass vessels will be those
that have overcome the odds.

On a recent afternoon, with concentration matching the intensity of the raging
ovens beside them, he and his apprentice transferred a glowing form from one
blowpipe to another.

''This is a critical part,'' he explained, negotiating the exchange after an
hour's close attention to shaping and inflating the piece.  Except for the top,
it was finished. The streaked, glistening faces of the two workers bespoke the
physical demands of the process.  Seconds later, a small dark spot appeared on
the spinning globe.  ''There's a crack,'' David Wedsworth, the apprentice, said
with resignation.  In glassblowing, something can go wrong at every stage,
especially when it involves the complicated graal technique. For Mr. DiNardo,
however, the rewards compensate for the disappointment and loss.  (Broken pieces
cannot be reconstituted).

''When you get a perfect piece,'' he said, ''there's just no other feeling like
it.'' The clarity and simplicity of Mr. DiNardo's patterned forms - they are
adapted from American Indian pottery and baskets - belie the complexity and risk
of the process.

But even at the Orrefors Glassworks in Sweden, where the graal technique was
developed early in this century and near where Mr.  DiNardo attended a technical
school, the production is small, he maintained. Ordinarily, he noted, a
hand-blown object can be made in 30 minutes or less.

Essentially, glassblowing involves gathering, on the end of a long, hollow pipe,
liquid glass from a melting furnace. While the pipe is rotated to center the
fluid mass, air blown into it swells the glass like a balloon.

However, Mr. DiNardo's distinctive pieces requires an arduous process in two
stages.  First, a small, bottle-shaped ''blank'' with three layers of color is
blown. When this cools, the artist covers it with tape on which a repeat design
has been drawn. The negative shapes are then cut away, with the remaining tape
masking the rest of the design. Next, sandblasting removes the top layer of
exposed glass, revealing the color underneath.

After this, the form is reheated so it can be expanded, manipulated into shape
and encased in crystal. The control needed to avoid distortion requires the
combined skills of two men.

As a team, Mr. DiNardo and Mr. Wedsworth have developed the sort of instinctive
cooperation that one associates with a finely tuned discipline, such as ballet.
It is, in fact, not unlike observing dance when watching the two men respond to
each moment's demands.

Mr. DiNardo's ''love affair with glass'' began 11 years ago. Then a teacher at
Watchung Hills Regional High School, he began working with stained glass as part
of a crafts program. Eventually, he left teaching to set up a glass studio and
retail shop in Scotch Plains.

''Things were going well,'' he recalled.  However, after attending a
glass-blowing workshop at the Hunterdon Art Center in Clinton, his life took
another turn.  ''I made the important decision to close my shop and develop my
interest in glassmaking,'' he said. ''I was infatuated with the material.''

While supporting himself with stained-glass commissions for restaurants and
homes, Mr. DiNardo pursued his new interest through intensive studies at the
Penland School of Crafts in North Carolina and the Pilchuck Glass Center in
Stanhope, Wash.

In both places, he encountered Ann Warff, a designer for a glass factory in
Sweden, who was visiting glass-making centers in the United States.

''Glassmaking in Swedish factories is divided between designers and those who
work at making things,'' Mr. DiNardo said. ''In America, she saw the same person
designing, melting, grinding, polishing and cutting.''

Those meetings led to an invitation for him to go to Sweden as Miss Warff's
assistant. Three weeks later, he had sold a newly purchased house and learned
Swedish by listening to records.

With the long Scandinavian nights -Mr. DiNardo arrived in autumn, when it was
dark at 2:30 P.M. - and company limited to factory workers, the artist at first
found Sweden ''lonely, dreary and cold.''

However, while working for Miss Warff, he also was able to study at a school
near the Orrefors Glassworks. The year-long experience proved a valuable
''educational venture.''

Among other things, Mr. DiNardo, who is a native of Newark, ''learned to
appreciate country living.'' Returning to the States, he was fortunate to find
for rent a house on an estate in the Lambertville area. It had a two-story
barn-garage, in which he set up a studio with ovens, a bench and other equipment
that he had made himself.

In determining a direction for his own work, Mr. DiNardo wanted something that
would involve pattern, form and color. Having always admired Maria Martinez, the
famous Indian potter, and her husband, Julian, he decided to create a series of
works embodying stylized adaptations of designs used by the Pueblos, Apaches,
Navajos and other tribes.

''I liked the ethnological slant, the idea of making a statement on a culture,''
Mr. DiNardo said.  Although his vessels often are taken directly from ceramic
forms such as an olla, or water jar, a feeling of glass is retained in the way
the color fades into clear glass at the base.

The success of Mr. DiNardo's efforts has earned him shows at such notable
galleries as the Heller in Manhattan and the Glass Veranda in Boston, as well as
space at prestigious craft events. These include, besides the Baltimore market,
the Rhinebeck Craft Fair and the Morristown CraftMarket.

Mr. DiNardo also will be represented in an international invitational glass
exhibition that will be seen in nine cities in Japan. In addition, he has been
awarded a fellowship by the State Council on the Arts for 1981-82.

For the future, he visualizes a simplified extension of his present work, but
which might yield higher production. Since glassblowing is an energy-dependent
activity, the cost of fuel makes it increasingly harder to survive in the
profession.

''Right now is an exciting time,'' Mr. DiNardo said. ''When I see someone take
$500 from his pocket for my work, that is gratifying.'' One point that Mr.
DiNardo likes to make is that, as a Marine who enlisted at 17, he served for
five years during the Vietnam War.  ''It's important for people to know that
there are Vietnam veterans doing positive and constructive things,'' he said.
''It's wonderful to feel the creative force every day.

''And at a time when computers and robots are taking over industries, I believe
those things that will have real value are those that provide personal
gratification.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Leonard DiNardo

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIANS PRESS ANTI-VIETNAM PACT

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 21


The Prime Minister of the ousted Pol Pot regime in Cambodia and the exiled
Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that they had reached a preliminary agreement
on forming a coalition to oppose the present Vietnamese-backed Government in
Phnom Penh.

The New China News Agency quoted the two men as saying that they hoped Son Sann,
the leader of a third resistance group in Cambodia, would come to Peking soon to
join them in a conference that could lead to cooperation in fighting the
Vietnamese in Cambodia and to an eventual coalition government.

China had agreed to play host for such a meeting at the request of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which met recently in Singapore. These
nations want to see the three main guerrilla factions in Cambodia resolve their
political differences and put together a coalition that would mount a more
effective resistance.

Met With Chinese Leader

Prince Sihanouk has been living in Peking for several weeks as a guest of the
Chinese Government and had lunch last Thursday with the Chinese leader, Deng
Xiaoping, for what was believed to include a strategy session on the Cambodian
issue.

Khieu Samphan, the Prime Minister under the Pol Pot group, flew in Saturday for
the meeting with Prince Sihanouk. However, Mr. Son Sann, a former Prime Minister
under Prince Sihanouk who leads an anti-Communist guerrilla force, has not yet
agreed to come.

After a 90-minute meeting today, Prince Sihanouk said that he had sent a message
to Mr. Son Sann urging that he attend the meeting. Mr. Khieu Samphan told
reporters that Prince Sihanouk and he both hoped to meet Mr. Son Sann ''as soon
as possible.''

The New China News Agency quoted Prince Sihanouk as saying: ''If there are
differences among us, it is precisely the reason for us to meet and discuss our
viewpoints. We hope that Son Sann will take into account our wish and come here
as soon as possible.''

Three Points Made

The agreement announced after today's meeting included three points:

- If a tripartite coalition is formed, it should offer a ''minimum political
program.'' This appeared designed to give such a coalition an identity beyond
simple resistance to the present regime of Heng Samrin in Phnom Penh, without
committing it to a particular ideology.

- Such a coalition government, if formed, should be within the legal framework
of the ousted Pol Pot regime, which is still recognized as a member of the
United Nations. This was aimed at claiming international legal status as the
legitimate government of Cambodia.

- The three resistance parties represented by Prince Sihanouk, Mr.  Khieu
Samphan and Mr. Son Sann would each retain their ''full autonomy, their freedom
in ideology and way of thinking.'' But if a coalition government were formed, it
would observe common rules, rights and duties in order to cooperate and present
a harmonious united front.

Prince Sihanouk, in asking Mr. Son Sann to join the meeting, added a note of
urgency by saying that Mr. Khieu Samphan had said that he had many things to do
back in Cambodia, ''including fighting the Vietnamese so he cannot stay in China
very long.''

The Asean nations have expressed interest in Mr. Son Sann's anti-Communist
faction, which does not have the reputation for brutality that the Pol Pot group
gained after it took over Cambodia in 1975. The feeling is that a coalition
cannot hope to win international support or be effective unless the guerrillas
represented by Mr. Son Sann are included.

At a banquet in honor of Mr. Khieu Samphan this evening, the Chinese Prime
Minister, Zhao Ziyang, praised the Pol Pot governmentin-exile for having
''initiated'' the effort to form a joint resistance against the ''Vietnamese
aggressors'' in Cambodia.  ''We wholeheartedly hope their meeting will bear
fruit and promote the just cause of tripartite union,'' he said.

China recognizes the Pol Pot group as the government of Cambodia.  Vietnam
invaded Cambodia in 1978 and overthrew the Pol Pot regime, which had been
accused of killing as many as three million Cambodians.

Prince Sihanouk said that he and Mr. Khieu Samphan would hold more talks here on
Tuesday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Aide to Discuss Missing G.I.'s in Hanoi

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 21


The United States Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, Richard L. Armitage,
arrived here today en route to Hanoi on a trip designed to underline American
concern over some 2,400 Americans still officially listed by the Pentagon as
missing in action in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

Mr. Armitage is to arrive in Hanoi Tuesday as the leader of a fiveman
delegation. Washington and Hanoi have no formal diplomatic relations.

Mr. Armitage, the highest ranking member of the Reagan Administration ever to
visit Vietnam, and his group will have two days of discussions on the issue.
Vietnam insists that it is holding no United States troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
WHY THE KID GLOVES?

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 840 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Feb. 21


Blunder, incoherence and policy disaster increasingly mark the Reagan
Presidency. The reporters and editors who watch official Washington know how bad
it is, but they are not really saying it on television or in the papers. They
are still giving Ronald Reagan a cushion.

Taking it easy on Mr. Reagan? The press will resent the charge, and deny it. But
give it a simple test. Imagine how the press would be treating Jimmy Carter if
he had been President for a year and the record looked something like this:

* The Federal budget was headed for a $100 billion deficit, with more of the
same for years ahead.

* The country was in a severe recession, the housing and automobile industries
facing calamity.

* In a crucial area of American interest, the Middle East, the President had no
policy and his subordinates were in open conflict.

* The President had made one major decision on strategic weapons - and then
changed it drastically, twice.

* Despite months of warning, a Polish military crackdown had caught Washington
unprepared and without an agreed alliance response.

* In the sensitive area of race, the President had ordered a sharp change of
policy on the basis of legal advice so bad that officials quickly had to look
for a way out.

No one can doubt what the press would be doing to Jimmy Carter under such
circumstances. It would be savaging him as incompetent and vacillating. It would
be treating him with contempt, mocking him in stories about ''killer rabbits.''
It would be writing darkly about the disarray in Washington.

But that record is not Jimmy Carter's. It is Ronald Reagan's, every item of it.
President Reagan presides over the biggest budget deficit and the worst
recession in years.  President Reagan has gone a year without a Middle East
policy, changing signals again and again: arm Jordan, don't arm Jordan; tilt to
the Arabs, reassure Israel; strategic understanding, no understanding.

President Reagan decided last October to put MX missiles in superhardened Titan
silos. Then he moved them to Minuteman silos.  Then he abandoned the idea of
further hardening. The changes have transformed the character of the weapon,
dangerously so, without any explanation or evidence of thought.

President Reagan had months to try to head off disaster in Poland, or to prepare
a response. He did neither.

President Reagan ordered tax exemptions given to racist schools, on legal
grounds that courts had consistently rejected and that soon collapsed on the
Administration lawyers who had pushed the argument.

The vacillation and incompetence in that record surely matched the worst any
recent Administration has offered. And on top of it there is the disturbing
evidence of Mr. Reagan's personal failure to come to grips with the reality of
the country's problems.

His performance at last week's press conference was so feeble that his own
supporters were worried. He called the conference at a time when El Salvador and
the economy were bound to be the main concerns, and then he declined to say
anything of substance about either. He answered a serious question with an
awkward joke. He gave a potted history of Vietnam that was not just wrong but
preposterous.

Yet the press still holds back from giving an unvarnished picture of this
President. The substance of his policies is thoroughly explored, but his
competence is not. Even in commenting on the disastrous press conference last
week the press was muted. It sounded embarrassed, almost protective.

Why? That is the interesting question. Why are editors still treating Mr. Reagan
so gingerly?  One reason may be respect for his political success. He won big in
1980. He won again last year in the Congressional tax and budget battle. He has
a political legitimacy that may well make the press shy.

Second, some in the press may worry because their views on issues are more
liberal than the President's. If they do tough stories on his handling of the
job, they fear, they may be accused of treating him unfairly because they do not
agree with his aims - accused, that is, of being insufficiently objective.

But I think a third reason, little recognized, may be the most important. Some
of the reporters and editors who watch Mr. Reagan are frightened by what they
see. They see a man who acts without real information. They see a man with an
anecdotal view of the world, who may apply in El Salvador lessons of imagined
history in Vietnam. They see a man who gives simplistic answers to complicated
questions. They care about their country, and they find it too upsetting to
acknowledge - to the public or to themselves - that the enormous power of its
leadership is in such hands.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Says U.S. Exploits Issue of Missing G.I.'s

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 152 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Feb. 22


Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam said today that the United States
was using the issue of missing servicemen as a ''political weapon'' and he
threatened not to cooperate in the search for them.

He said Vietnam was angered last year when American officials asked why it had
taken six years for the remains of a serviceman to be returned.

''We gave them the remains of three Americans, but they used them as a political
weapon against us,'' Mr. Thach said at a news conference. ''There will be no
more cooperation if they continue to use the issue as a political weapon against
us.''

He spoke with American reporters on the eve of the arrival of United States
officials coming here to discuss the issue. He also said Vietnam would not let
Americans join in the search for remains of missing Americans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 725 words


Children's Lobbyist

The Rev. Alfred Keane is a Maryknoll missionary from Boston who has spent 22
years in Korea working on the plight of the outcast children born to American
men and Asian women. There are, perhaps, as many as 80,000 of these children in
Asia.

Now Father Keane says he will remain in the United States, shuttling between
Washington and a Maryknoll residence in Boston, to press for legislation that
would open the way for some, maybe many, of the children to enter this country.
Bills have been sponsored by Representative Stewart B. McKinney, a liberal
Republican from Connecticut, and Senator Jeremiah Denton, a conservative
Republican from Alabama who was a prisoner of war in Vietnam.

''This is an issue that, in the past, Congress simply didn't care about,'' said
Father Keane in a tight voice. ''Here are these children suffering every single
day, suffering and hurting, and nothing is being done to relieve their agony.
These children came to me and said, 'Please help us.' They are treated as
outcasts in their society. They look American, they look just like our own
children, our own flesh and blood. How can we do ignore our own children? It's
brutal and tragic.''
Abortion Outlook

N anette Falkenberg says she is hopeful and, perhaps, a little nervous about the
looming fight on abortion - a fight, she insists, that abortion rights forces
can win if the economy and other issues remain the dominant concern of Congress.

Miss Falkenberg, a former union organizer and the new head of the National
Abortion Rights Action League, said she now expects the Senate Judiciary
Committee to start hearings in early March on a proposal by Senator Orrin G.
Hatch, Republican of Utah, that would give Congress and the states joint
authority to restrict or prohibit abortion and would declare that no right to
abortion is secured by the Constitution.

Although Miss Falkenberg and others have expressed concern that the Hatch bill
may have enough support to sweep the Senate and that it would be signed by
President Reagan, a foe of abortion, her tentative optimism that the measure
will be stalled is based on several assumptions. One is that abortion opponents
are divided among themselves, and many of them view the Hatch bill as too weak.
''That's fine with us,'' said Miss Falkenberg.

Beyond this, Miss Falkenberg added, she hears reports that Mr.  Reagan's
advisers are telling him the issue is a ''no-win'' situation for him this year,
especially with the critical budget fight looming. ''It does not appear that
there's strong pressure from the White House to get it on the Senate calendar,''
she said.

Opponents of abortion disagree. Such Senators as Jesse Helms and John P. East,
Republicans of North Carolina, have said an abortion ban would be a ''top
priority'' in the spring.
Allen Conferring

Yes, there is life after the White House. The President's former national
security adviser, Richard V. Allen, is conferring with Richard Richards,
chairman of the Republican National Committee, about serving as a foreign policy
adviser to the group.
An Alternative Budget

A mid budget cutbacks in social programs, the Children's Defense Fund, which
seeks to aid youngsters, has issued an ''alternative budget,'' and asked, in
effect, how many school lunch and immunization programs could be salvaged if the
Administration cut $5 million from the Defense Department's ''servant program,''
$1.4 million for veterinary services for the pets of military personnel and $1.7
million for five private dining rooms in the Pentagon.
Watt Overheard

A t the White House itself, David R.  Gergen, the director of communications,
was having a chat in the hallway outside his office the other day with Interior
Secretary James G. Watt when a reporter walked past. Mr. Watt was saying that he
was glad President Reagan was being somewhat hard-edged with the obstreperous
and oh-so bothersome press corps.

''I'm glad to see he's getting tougher,'' said Mr. Watt, who added that the
press had been ''indecent, cruel,'' and marked by ''pettiness'' in its treatment
of the Administration.

The reporter chimed in with the comment that, on the contrary, the press might
have been somewhat lenient toward Mr. Reagan. But Mr.  Watt responded firmly,
''The people are with my point of view.'' Francis X. Clines Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The Quiz Kid

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 447 words


The Presidential news conference inevitably includes an element of quiz-show
suspense. ''Stump the President,'' it might be called: can he display amazing
factual mastery over the most complex or trivial subjects? Can the questioners
trip him up on issues that any President ought to know about?

In recent news conferences, President Reagan seems to have tripped -
''misspoken'' - in response to several questions. But he won't concede that, and
is in any event abundantly sensitive about the subject. Aides said after his
news conference last week that he was ready to say much more about how he was
being wronged by the press. A paper in his pocket said: ''I have never claimed
to be a whiz kid, a robot, a bionic adding machine or a walking encyclopedia. I
am a human being. But I value the truth, I take my responsibilities seriously
and I work hard to get the truth to the people.''

The President didn't, finally, say all that - but it is dismaying that he would
even consider doing so. The problem is not perfect accuracy. There's no reason
to expect a President to get every detail of a story straight, not even one with
a penchant for improving on anecdotes. By recalling Vietnam history loosely, he
may commit other flubs and leave himself open to corrections. But there are
flubs and there are flubs.

In his Jan. 19 news conference, for instance, he was asked what he was going to
do about people suffering hardship in this period of high and rising
unemployment. He acknowledged the unemployment, but went on. Compared with ''the
beginning of our term,'' he said, ''there are a million people more working than
there were in 1980.''

There are two troubling things about that assertion. The first is that it was
wrong. Perhaps the best that can be said is that it was true a season earlier.
There were a million more people at work in October 1981 than in Jimmy Carter's
last October. But the question was asked, and answered, in January. By December
1981 total employment had not increased by a million in comparison with Jimmy
Carter's last December; it had not increased at all; indeed, it had decreased,
by 94,000.

Whether jobs are going up or down is not just a flub. To state social facts
wrong in a way that makes his Administration look good is not just a flub and
not just a fudge, but a deception. A President need not be a whiz kid, quiz kid
or bionic adding machine to render the factual report card correctly.

There remains the second troubling point. When he tosses facts around so
loosely, does he think no one will notice?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'A PEACEFUL TOWN' IN JERSEY MOURNS SLAYINGS OF 2 OF ITS 'BEST LITTLE GIRLS'

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: HOPATCONG, N.J., Feb. 22


Jennifer Hanna and Heather Tranter were bright and happy second graders and
inseparable friends. They rode the bus to Durban Avenue School together, went to
meetings of Brownie Troop 341 together and played together in the woods and
gullies near their homes here.

Late Saturday afternoon, they were apparently lured deep into those woods, amid
swamp and ledge, and strangled. A baldish, slightly built 29-year-old neighbor
with a history of psychiatric ailments and a disability discharge from the
United States Army has been charged in the slayings.

Trembling and sobbing, the suspect, Eugene E. Dingman, was arraigned today and
held without bail in nearby Newton. At Durban Avenue School, regular classes
were delayed for an hour as teachers tried to ease fears and console the 550
friends and schoolmates of Jennifer, who was 8, and Heather, who was 7.

''The teachers were really depressed and grief-stricken,'' said Howard Hatton,
the school principal. ''We are all friends.'' Jennifer's mother, Barbara, is an
aide in the school's kindergarten classes. Heather's mother, Carol, works as a
classroom volunteer.

'Best and Brightest'

''We didn't want to raise anybody's anxieties or turn it into a day of mourning
for them,'' Mr. Hatton said. ''And we didn't want to create a general atmosphere
of depression. We told them this was the toughest thing they would ever have to
face, but that they had to be as brave and courageous as they possibly could.

''They were among the best and brightest little girls. They were just delightful
and excellent students. In every class they had they were the teacher's
favorites.''

On Tuesday, all classes at Durban Avenue School will be dismissed at 11:30 A.M.
to allow students to attend funeral services at Saint Jude's Roman Catholic
Church.

The slayings, and the suspect, seemed to be on everyone's mind here today in the
gasoline stations, delicatessens and small stores.  Hopatcong is a small
community of about 15,500 people in the wooded hills on the west bank of Lake
Hopatcong, the largest recreational lake in northern New Jersey, about 40 miles
from New York City.  Murder is rare here.

'A Peaceful Town'

David DiMarco, the Chief of Police, could not remember a homicide during his 15
years on the force, and he was not sure if there had been any before then.
''This is a peaceful town,'' he said.

There were steady processions to the Hanna and Tranter homes, as friends and
neighbors walked through the bumpy and curving neighborhood roads to bring food,
baked goods and condolences.

On other days, Mr. Dingman was a fixture on those roads and elsewhere in the
Hopatcong Hills neighborhood.  He lives with his mother in a plain green home
with crumbling front steps at 2 Akron Way, about 300 yards from the Hanna home
on Nebraska Trail. Frequently, neighbors said, Mr. Dingman walked those streets
alone.

''He's been here as long as I can remember,'' said Carol Smith, whose 8-year-old
son, Matthew, was a close friend of the two girls.  ''But I never knew his name.
He'd just walk by and look at you.''

Other residents recalled seeing Mr. Dingman often with his mother at local
weekly bingo games or in the small grocery stores. Often, they said, he wore
ill-fitting clothes, Western-style boots and a cowboy hat.

'Teen-Agers Would Heckle Him'

Frequently, he was taunted. ''A lot of kids used to make fun of him,'' said Greg
Puglis, owner of Nan Pratt's Country Store. ''He'd be out walking along the
roads, and the teen-agers driving by would heckle him.''

Jean Aquilar remembered him from bingo.  ''He wouldn't talk much, but if you
were nice to him and struck up a conversation, he'd get a nervous twitch and
start blinking a lot,'' Mrs. Aquilar said.

None of those who recalled Mr. Dingman's habits said they had felt fearful of
him or knew anyone who had.  ''If anybody ever had been threatened or
frightened, no information like that was ever brought to our attenton,'' Chief
DiMarco said, adding that Mr. Dingman had no criminal record.

During arraignment in State Superior Court, Gerald B. Hanifan, Mr.  Dingman's
attorney, told Judge Frederick Weber that his client had ''psychiatric
problems'' and a ''100 percent disability discharge'' from the Army. Mr. Hanifan
said he knew no other details of Mr.  Dingman's military history or ailments,
other than that he did not serve during the Vietnam War.

Patient at V.A. Hospital

Mr. Dingman was a patient at a Veterans Administration Hospital in East Orange
from Nov. 11 to Nov. 20, 1979, according to a spokesman who declined to reveal
other details.

The two girls were found dead at about 6:30 P.M. Saturday, about three hours
after Jennifer's father, John, last saw them playing in the woods behind the
Hanna home.

Mr. Dingman was arrested at his home at 11 P.M. Saturday.  Bloodhounds helped
the police in the arrest of the suspect, according to Brian Laddey, the Sussex
County Prosecutor.

Mr. Laddey refused to divulge any evidence that had been assembled against Mr.
Dingman, other than to say: ''He enticed them to go deeper into the woods.''

Mr. Hatton, the school principal, noted that teachers and administrators had
frequently cautioned their students to avoid any contact with strangers.

Nonetheless, he said, ''none of those precautions can prevent 100 percent the
unforeseen circumstances.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of northern New Jersey photo of Jennifer Hanna photo
of Heather Tranter photo of Eugene E. Dingman photo of reporters near site of
killings

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 'FOR COLORED GIRLS' ON 'AMERICAN PLAYHOUSE'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 648 words


NTOZAKE SHANGE'S ''For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the
Rainbow Is Enuf'' has had an interesting marketing history. The work began as
poems being read in San Francisco bars around 1970. Later, the pieces began to
take dramatic shape at Woody King's New Federal Theater in New York. Then, in
the mid-1970's, widespread acclaim and success were gained with a stunning stage
production mounted for the Public Theater that later moved to Broadway - in the
days before Joseph Papp took to making embarrassing singing commercials for
radio.

Now, ''For Colored Girls'' has been adapted for television and can be seen
tonight at 9 o'clock on WNET-TV as part of ''The American Playhouse'' series.
Through a number of miscalculations, it has not traveled well on this part of
its production journey. What Miss Shange prefers to call a ''choreopoem'' has
been expanded into realistic settings that too often resemble the sanitized
atmosphere of an episode of ''Good Times.'' The net result has been a
considerable reduction in the work's emotional impact.

Miss Shange writes about being black and, more specifically, about being a
woman. She writes about pain and sadness and joy, all within the general context
of what she sees as ''the struggle against patriarchy.'' The play employs six
women to represent a broad range of personalities weaving in and out of key
moments in their lives.

The stage production was almost austerely spare, using music and touches of
dance to set the required scenes. The actresses flowed across the stage,
sometimes singly, sometimes in groups. There were no men in the production, but
Miss Shange's words evoked their presence with searing precision. A good many
black men were not too happy with ''For Colored Girls'' at the time, feeling
that the ''brothers'' deserved more positive images in the public arena.

Directed by Oz Scott, the television production becomes noticeably more labored
as it attempts to find workable visual images. Miss Shange, who appeared in the
Public Theater's version, now sits pecking away at a typewriter as the camera
shifts to some nearby photographs that capture parts of her life. She then picks
up an infant girl and begins explaining what it was like to be a black woman.
The fragile context thus established, the loosely related scenes of the play
begin to unfold.

There is, certainly, much power and beauty remaining in these portraits. The
young girl finding her first lover, the angry woman ending an affair and the
''passion flower'' who glitters honestly, delighted that she is wanted -the list
of splendidly realized cameos is long. And the cast is superb. Along with Miss
Shange, Laurie Carlos and Trazana Beverley are also from the original cast. They
have been joined by Carol Lynn Maillard, Lynn Whitfield and Alfre Woodard.

But the overall concept devised for television succeeds, more often than not, in
diluting the basic material. There are now men on the scene, but they amount to
little more than convenient mannequins, striking poses and very rarely getting a
line to speak. When all else fails, the actresses are forced to resort to
talking to a rag doll.  And, in the second half, the outdoor setting of a picnic
is woefully inappropriate for the powerful scene in which one of the women
recalls her relationship with a disturbed Vietnam veteran.

The strength of Miss Shange's work is in its language, in its ability to capture
the sounds and cadences of contemporary black America. Many of the earthier
elements have been cut for this adaptation, but enough remains to reflect the
sheer vitality of a gifted writer. It's just a matter of ignoring the visual
clutter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 24, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A TEAM AT STATE IS KEY TO EL SALVADOR POLICY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 981 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 23


Who is making Administration policy on El Salvador?  President Reagan, of
course, along with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., Secretary of
Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and numerous officials at the Agency for
Intenational Development, the National Security Council and the Central
Intelligence Agency. Some Congressional committees and a number of private
individuals and study groups also are involved.

But for day-to-day development of El Salvador policy, the place to look is Mr.
Haig's Latin American team at the State Department. Its members deal with the
problem almost hourly, produce many of the public statements and documentation
and appear before Senate and House committees. They were instrumental in
formulating the Reagan Administration's new Caribbean Basin development plan,
due to be unveiled tomorrow in a major speech by the President.

The El Salvador policymakers at State, from Deane R. Hinton, the United States
Ambassador in San Salvador, to Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs, are mostly career diplomats with considerable
foreign experience. However, only a few have served in Central America.

Confidence of Haig

By growing consensus, the most powerful of the group, not only on policy but
also on how it is documented and presented to the public, is the 50-year-old Mr.
Enders. He has served as Ambassador to Canada, as charge in Phnom Penh during
the American bombing of Cambodia and as Assistant Secretary of State for
Business and Economic Affairs.

Mr. Enders has the confidence of Secretary Haig, officials say, and that
apparently has allowed him something of a free hand in Central America while Mr.
Haig and the President have been preoccupied with Poland, the Soviet Union and
the Middle East.

He does not speak Spanish and had no direct experience in Latin America or the
Caribbean before assuming his present position. Yet he has managed to bring
Central America to the forefront of American policy issues and, as a frequent
Capitol Hill witness, has impressed members of Congress with his quick
intelligence and self assurance.

He was largely responsible for framing the new Administration policy that
envisions Central America not just as a little known area between North and
South America but as an intregal part of the Caribbean Basin, geographically
close to the United States and economically and strategically critical to it.
Within the basin, he has identified Cuba as an adversary to the east and
Nicaragua as an adversary to the west.

Two Deputy Assistants

There are two Deputy Assistant Secretaries of State who are deeply involved in
El Salvador matters, Stephen W. Bosworth and Everett E.  Briggs. Both speak
Spanish fluently, have experience in Latin America and are well respected, even
by critics of Administration policy.

Mr. Bosworth, who is responsible for advising Mr. Enders on economic policy, is
said to have organized the day-to-day work on the Caribbean Basin plan. He was
assisted by Robert J. Ryan Jr., director of the Latin American bureau's Office
of Regional Economic Policy, who was upgraded to ambassadorial rank to give him
greater authority.

Mr. Briggs is regarded as particularly well-informed. His responsiblities
include following the progress of the electoral process in El Salvador and he
makes regular trips there. In Washington, he meets with a wide range of
Salvadoran poltical figures, including the representatives of guerrillas
fighting the Salvadoran Government.

Gordon Sumner Jr., a retired Army lieutenant general, serves as a special
adviser to Mr. Enders and travels with ambassadorial credentials. He recently
served as chairman of the Center for Inter-American Security, a conservative
foreign policy group, and was an outspoken critic of the Panama Canal Treaties.

Controversial Appointment

Mr. Enders can also call on the services of Vernon A. Walters, a retired Army
lieutenant general and former Deputy Director of Central Intelligence who was
named an ambassador-at-large by Secretary Haig. The appointment of General
Walters provoked controversy among some Latin American policy groups because he
had lobbied in Guatemala for an international oil consortium and had made public
statements favoring a resumption of United States aid to the Guatemalan
Government, despite the State Department's own unfavorable report on the human
rights situation there.

Another State Department official concerned with El Salvador is L.  Craig
Johnstone, director of the department's Office of Central American Affairs. He
is new to the region, having served in Vietnam, Laos and Canada.

The State Department's Latin American Affairs department, unlike several other
regional bureaus, has its own policy planning staff.  The chief policy planner
is Luigi R. Einaudi, a veteran Latin American specialist who served as a policy
planner for the entire State Department under the Nixon and Ford
Administrations. He spent four months last year at the Woodrow Wilson Center as
a resident scholar before being called back on Jan 1. by Mr. Enders.

Mr. Einaudi is the author of ''Beyond Cuba: Latin America Takes Charge of Its
Future,'' a collection of essays in which he wrote: ''Economically, politically
and culturally, South America is a most challenging part of the new
international scene. Current needs are for trade, not aid, and for
understanding, not preaching.''

United States policy, he argues, will have to reflect even greater awareness of
''the revolution behind the scenes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Asst. Secretary of State Thomas O. Enders Photo
of Deane R. Hinton Map of El Salvador

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 24, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 943 words


HESTON-ASNER STRUGGLE IS SPLITTING ENTERTAINERS

LOS ANGELES, Feb. 23 (AP) - It's the stuff that motion-picture and television
dramas are made of - Ben Hur vs. Lou Grant - but the battle is not Hollywood
make-believe.

Since January, a fight for philosophical control of the Screen Actors Guild, the
powerful 50,000-member actors' union, has divided the entertainment industry and
led to a death threat and a recall movement against its president, Edward Asner,
star of television's ''Lou Grant.''

The drama began when the guild announced its annual award to Ronald Reagan, a
six-time president of the union, and then retracted it.  That move, ostensibly
over the President's handling of the airtraffic controllers' strike last summer,
was bitterly criticized by Charlton Heston, the actor and former guild
president, as ''a gross blunder'' and an ''example of the radicalization of the
guild.''

The White House had no comment on the award's withdrawal.

Political Actions Found

Mr. Heston, star of such movie hits as ''The Ten Commandments'' and ''Ben Hur,''
said that the guild, with Mr. Asner as president, had drifted deeper into
political waters. He pointed to a movement to merge three actors' unions, plus
the guild's donation of money last summer to the striking air-traffic
controllers and a board resolution in December that the union speak out more on
political issues, including endorsement of candidates.

''Actors are very touchy about having people speak for them,'' Mr.  Heston said
in an interview. ''What they want from their union is attention to the jobs
problem,'' in an industry where, he said, 76 percent of the guild members earned
less than $2,500 last year.

The death threat against Mr. Asner was made last Wednesday when a man called the
guild headquarters and told the actor's secretary that a group was ''out to
get'' the actor for his aid to rebels in El Salvador.

The caller referred to a Washington news conference that Mr. Asner and several
other prominent actors held Feb. 15 to announce a $1 million fund-raising drive
to send medical supplies into El Salvador through left-wing guerrillas.

Tightening of Security

Bodyguards have been assigned to Mr. Asner, security guards were posted at the
entrance to the ''Lou Grant'' set, security was increased at the studio gates
and Mr. Asner has temporarily stopped giving interviews, said his spokesman,
Mike Mamakos.

Also on Wednesday, a guild member, Tony Cecere, began a drive to unseat Mr.
Asner and said he had already gathered 300 signatures. A petition campaign would
require valid signatures from 10 percent of the guild's 50,000 members before
the union's board would consider action. Two-thirds of the guild's members must
approve a recall in a written ballot.

Mr. Heston, who does not favor the recall, said he was ''appalled'' by the death
threats but, referring to Mr. Asner, added: ''It is certainly true that he was
carelessly derelict in his responsibility. Without even hearing his comments, I
am positive he did not give guild money. What he did do was fail to make clear
he was not speaking on behalf of the guild.''

Mr. Heston said he had received ''at least a hundred'' calls from guild members
criticizing Mr. Asner's stance on El Salvador.  ''I would suggest that the
serious professionals in the Screen Actors Guild would not want the guild to
take positions on El Salvador or solar energy,'' he said, ''but on acting.''

'Obligation to Speak Out'

In an article with the byline Edward Asner on the Op-Ed page of The New York
Times last Saturday Mr. Asner wrote:

''I think that it's not only a right but an obligation for every responsible
citizen to speak out when our Government is acting in ways we believe are wrong.
That's why I went to our nation's capital.'' - ''because the situation in El
Salvador is rapidly becoming another Vietnam War, and I want to prevent that
from happening.''

Before Mr. Asner stopped giving interviews, he said his goal was to strengthen
the guild, not radicalize it.  ''I have yet to make one political act, to call
for one political act,'' Mr. Asner said, adding that Mr. Heston's attacks may be
''at the behest of the White House because of the S.A.G. award embarrassment.''

Mr. Heston replied: ''I can't believe he was serious. I cannot believe the
President of the United States has nothing better to do than concern himself
with the inner politics of the Screen Actors Guild.''

'Nitpicking and Confrontation'

Mr. Asner charged that Mr. Heston had been engaged in ''a great deal of
nitpicking and street confrontation the past six weeks'' - the same charge that
Mr. Heston leveled at Mr. Asner regarding recent negotiations between the guild
and producers of radio and television commercials.

Mr. Asner termed it ''a bald-faced lie'' that he had advocated confrontation
tactics during talks on the contract for the commercials industry. A tentative
commercials agreement has been reached.

On the proposed merger of the guild with the American Federation of Television
and Radio Artists and the Screen Extras Guild, Mr.  Heston has been critical,
saying it was ''designed to increase the power'' of Mr. Asner and other guild
leaders. Mr. Asner has said: ''The bigger the union, the stronger it has to
be.'' ''Merger,'' he added, ''can only help the individual.''

Mr. Asner said that Mr. Heston, who last year headed a special Presidential task
force on private financing for the arts, should spend his time seeking more jobs
for actors.

''Out of one side of his mouth he talks of jobs for actors; out of the other
side, he rubber-stamps job cuts in the arts,'' Mr. Asner said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STUDENT ABUSE OF DRUGS REPORTED TO DECLINE

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1110 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


Use of illicit drugs by American high school students has dropped sharply since
the late 1970's, when it reached its peak, according to a major study made
public today.

Probably the most dramatic finding is a substantial decline in the number of
students who say they regularly smoke marijuana, which is by far the most widely
used illicit substance. In 1978, one in every nine high school seniors said they
were daily users. By last spring the proportion had dropped to one in 14, and
the decline showed signs of continuing.

The study involved 17,000 high school seniors around the country.  It strongly
suggests that young people are beginning to take seriously the warnings about
the significant health and psychological hazards of drug abuse.

More Amphetamine Use Reported

This may reflect the success of prevention efforts, including advertising,
school drug awareness programs and changing attitudes.  The study found that use
of almost every major class of illicit drugs, as well as alcohol and cigarettes,
had declined or remained stable in the last year. The only significant exception
was stimulants, such as amphetamines. More than a fourth of the students said
they had tried them in the previous 12 months, a 25 percent increase over 1980.

Decline in use were found for tranquilizers; for hallucinogens, particularly
PCP, widely known as angel dust, and for amyl and butyl nitrites, the liquid
inhalants known as ''poppers'' that are sold legally. Use of barbiturates, LSD,
heroin and methaqualone, known as Quaaludes, showed no significant change.
Cocaine use remained nearly stable, with 16.5 percent saying they had tried it
in the year.

Moreover, even those who continued to use drugs reported that they now tended to
consume smaller amounts and for shorter periods of time.

Authors Consider Use 'High'

The authors of the study were Dr. Lloyd Johnston, Dr. Jerald Bachman and Dr.
Patrick O'Malley of the University of Michigan.  Despite what they called
''these tangible improvements,'' they said that drug abuse among American youth
remained high. By conservative calculations, they said, two-thirds of the class
of 1981 had tried at least one illicit drug in the year.

''We judge these still to be very high levels both in absolute terms, and
relative to other countries,'' the report stated. ''In fact, they are still
probably the highest levels of drug abuse among young people to be found in any
industrialized nation in the world.  Thus, while some improvements are
definitely beginning to emerge, the problems of drug use and abuse are still a
very long way from being solved.''

The survey, taken in 130 public and private schools selected to provide a
national cross-section of high school seniors, has been taken annually since
1975 by the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan. The
studies have been done under a contract with the National Institute on Drug
Abuse.

The information has been obtained under a special dispensation from the Justice
Department, so that no Federal, state or local police authorities may obtain
personal information on the students from the researchers. It is considered one
of the most reliable indicators of drug abuse trends, otherwise notoriously hard
to measure.

The results were cited this morning by Dr. William E. Mayer, the administrator
of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental Health Administration, which includes the
National Institute on Drug Abuse, as evidence that the Government's prevention
efforts were bearing fruit. He was alluding to such efforts as widespread drug
abuse programs in the schools. He testified before the Senate Labor and Human
Resources Subcommittee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse.

Tensions May Be Reduced

The trend might reflect changing times, according to Dr. Johnston, one of the
authors, who said, ''I think drug use is responding to its own cues. The old
catalysts are no longer present - the Vietnam War, generational tensions,
Watergate, unrest in the cities.''

The study for 1980, reported last year, was the first in which researchers saw
enough evidence of moderation to feel there was a downward trend. Now the data
seem to point to an indisputable downward trend.

In 1981 nearly 60 percent of the students said they believed regular marijuana
users faced a ''great risk'' of harming themselves. Three years ago, only 35
percent held that view.

The study, which was based on an overall national sample, found important
regional differences in drug use. For example, cocaine use was two to three
times more prevalent in the Northeast and West than in the South and Middle
West. There were also differences among rural, suburban and urban youths. Even
so, the downward trend was consistent in all regions.

Use by Dropouts Not Reported

Dr. Johnston acknowledged a shortcoming in that the study excluded the 15 to 20
percent of 18-year-olds who were school dropouts and widely believed to be heavy
drug abusers. Therefore, he said, overall figures for drug abuse were probably
conservative. However, since this ''bias'' had been the same every year, he
said, year-to-year trends were probably reliable.

The trends were also striking because the students perceived drugs to be just as
available and affordable as ever. Ninety percent said that it was ''fairly
easy'' or ''very easy'' to find marijuana. Fifty percent said the same of
cocaine.

Further, no offsetting increase in alcohol use was found. There was no change in
the 6 percent reporting daily use of alcohol. However, Dr. Johnston said he
found it ''disturbing'' that 41 percent said they consumed five or more drinks
at least once in the two weeks before answering the questionnaire.

Daily cigarette use continued to fall among both boys and girls; it reached 20
percent overall, after having reached a high of 29 percent in 1977.

Single copies of the report, ''Highlights from Student Drug Use in America
1975-1985,'' are available without charge from the National Clearinghouse on
Drug Abuse Information, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Md., 20857.

The trends in reported use of drugs closely paralleled changes in attitudes
toward drugs, which appeared to be based on publicity about drug dangers.

For instance, the survey detected a pronounced drop in support for legalizing
the use marijuana, down from 33 percent in 1978 to 23 percent last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: chart (page A22)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. DESTROYER MONITORS ACTIVITY IN AREA OF SALVADOR AND NICARAGUA

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 937 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


The United States Navy has for the last two months stationed a destroyer
equipped with electronic surveillance devices off the Pacific coast of Nicaragua
and El Salvador to gather intelligence, Defense Department officials said today.

The officials said the vessel's mission was to monitor shipments of arms from
Nicaragua across the Gulf of Fonseca to anti-Government guerrillas in El
Salvador and to listen with to radio traffic in the region.

The Reagan Administration has long charged that guerrillas in El Salvador have
been receiving arms provided by the Soviet Union and its allies through Cuba and
Nicaragua and that the Sandinist Government in Nicaragua and Cuban advisers are
supporting the Salvadoran rebels.

Mission Is Termed 'Routine'

Administration officials said the destroyer's mission was ''routine'' and
intended only to keep the United States informed.  They said the ship had been
in international waters at all times and its presence was not provocative.

They also said there was no parallel between the stationing of the ship off the
Gulf of Fonseca and the intelligence mission of two United States destroyers in
the Gulf of Tonkin in 1964 that led to a Congressional resolution permitting
President Johnson to order ground forces into the war in Vietnam.

Pentagon officials said one destroyer that had been stationed off the Gulf of
Fonseca, the 7,800-ton Deyo, returned to her home port at Charleston, S.C.,
today and was relieved by a sister ship, Caron.  Both are among the Spruance
class of destroyers, the Navy's newest.

Listening Gear Aboard

The ships, powered by four gas turbine engines, are capable of 33 knots. Their
radar could pick up small ships at sea or in the Gulf of Fonseca. Officials said
the ships had listening gear aboard that enabled them to monitor radio
transmissions.

Naval officers said all ships were under standing orders to defend themselves if
attacked at sea. They declined to discuss special orders that might apply to the
ships on that station.

The Nicaraguan Navy, according to the latest issue of Jane's Fighting Ships,
consists of 200 officers and men, fewer than the full complement of 296 officers
and men aboard a Spruance destroyer.

The largest ship in the Nicaraguan Navy, according to Jane's, is a 60-ton patrol
craft armed with three machine guns and capable of 26 knots. Nicaragua also has
four 35-ton patrol boats built in Israel that carry two small guns and can
travel at 22 knots.

In 1979, after the left-wing Sandinists came to power, Nicaragua announced that
it had extended its territorial waters to 200 miles.  The United States has not
recognized such claims, by Nicaragua or other nations, and maintains that three
miles is the internationally recognized limit. Defense Department officials also
said the United States reserved the right of free passage within the three-mile
limit as long as a vessel was not manuevering in a hostile manner.

Pentagon officials said Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and his
deputy, Frank C. Carlucci, had been aware of the surveillance missions of the
Navy ships, having been routinely briefed on such operations.

But the officials said Congress had not been notified under the War Powers Act
because the ship had been ordered into international waters and was not involved
in the introduction of American forces into hostilities and because there was no
indication of imminent involvement in hostilities.

Recognition Signals Exchanged

The Pentagon officials also said that Deyo, which is under the command of the
Second Fleet, with headquarters at Norfolk, Va., had sighted many ships and
exchanged recognition signals with several.  But they said no foreign ship had
tried to stop the American vessel.

The Defense Department declined to say, as a matter of policy, whether the ship
carried intelligence experts from the National Security Agency, which
specializes in electronic intelligence gathering.

In the past, the Defense Department has sent intelligence ships into areas of
tension to gather information through electronic devices and return it to
Washington for analysis. In some cases, ships were fitted out for that mission.
In other cases, vans with electronic apparatus were lifted aboard the decks of
ships and operated by personnel from the National Security Agency.

Those intelligence ships have occasionally figured in hostilities that have had
far-reaching consequences. Two destroyers, Maddox and Turner Joy, operating in
the Gulf of Tonkin off the coast of North Vietnam in 1964, were supposedly fired
on by the North Vietnamese.

Ship Attacked by Israel in 1967

That led to the Congressional resolution under which President Johnson sent
combat forces into Vietnam. It later became a symbol of excessive Presidential
power and was counterbalanced by the War Powers Act.

In 1967 a Liberty ship that had been outfitted with an array of electronic
devices was repeatedly attacked by Israeli ships and planes while in
international waters in the eastern Mediterranean.  Its mission had been to
listen in on Israeli and Egyptian radio transmissions.

In January 1968 the small intelligence ship Pueblo was seized by North Korean
gunboats in international waters off North Korea and forced into the harbor at
Wonsan. Her crew was held captive for nearly a year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of the destroyer Caron

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN ANNOUNCES AID FOR CARIBBEAN AND ASSAILS CUBA;
Transcript of address, page A14.

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1501 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


President Reagan proposed a broad plan of trade and investment incentives today
designed to improve the economic well-being of the Caribbean area. At the same
time, in what seemed a warning to Cuba, he pledged that the United States would
do ''whatever is prudent and necessary'' to prevent the overthrow of the
governments in the region.

In a 40-minute address to the Organization of American States, Mr.  Reagan
announced a six-point economic plan for the Caribbean Basin.  It was the first
time he had publicly dealt at length with the crisis in El Salvador and the rest
of Central America. He asserted that ''brutal and totalitarian'' forces, backed
by the Soviet Union and managed by Cuba, were trying to impose Communist
dictatorships there.

''If we do not act promptly and decisively in defense of freedom, new Cubas will
arise from the ruins of today's conflicts,'' he said.  ''We will face more
totalitarian regimes tied militarily to the Soviet Union, more regimes exporting
subversion, more regimes so incompetent yet so totalitarian that their citizens'
only hope becomes that of one day migrating to other American nations as in
recent years they have come to the United States.''

Cautious Approval Expressed

The President's speech drew cautious approval from Caribbean governments, but
some diplomats noted that winning the necessary approval for the plan from
Congress might prove difficult. (Page A15.)

Although Congressional leaders generally praised Mr. Reagan's proposals, some
said that the economic situation in the United States might pose an obstacle to
passage.(Page A16.)

Representatives of organized labor, meanwhile, expressed concern over the
possibility of further unemployment as a result of higher imports; they were
expected to lobby hard to defeat the President's plan.

Mr. Reagan's program includes $350 million in additional economic aid for the
region for this fiscal year and $60 million more in military assistance,
bringing to $996 million the total aid planned for the fiscal year that ends
Sept. 30.

The other five points of the plan are special duty-free status for products from
the Caribbean, tax incentives for investment in the region, technical
assistance, efforts to persuade other countries to help, and protection of the
special status already held by Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands.

Mr. Reagan seemed aware of potential problems in getting his economic program
approved by Congress. ''It represents,'' he said, ''a farsighted act by our own
people at a time of considerable economic difficulty at home.'' He said he had
decided to go ahead with it because it ''is vital to the security interests of
this nation and this hemisphere.''

''The energy, the time and the treasure we dedicate to assisting the development
of our neighbors now can help to prevent the much larger expenditures of
treasure, as well as human lives, which would flow from their collapse,'' he
said.

Aid Pledged for Friendly Nations

Although he pledged, as Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  has in the
past, to do whatever was necessary to assist friendly governments such as the
one in El Salvador, he offered no specific plans for helping them militarily,
other than the $60 million in military aid in addition to the $112 million
already approved for this fiscal year. Some $106 million is budgeted for the
1983 fiscal year. Most of the military aid is going to El Salvador.

In a possible reference to public concern about American military involvement,
the President pledged that the United States would not ''follow Cuba's lead in
attempting to resolve human problems by brute force.''

The economic package is consistent with the Administration's stress on promoting
free enterprise and investment. He described it as ''an integrated program that
helps our neighbors help themselves, a program that will create conditions under
which creativity, private entrepreneurship and self-help can flourish.''

'Free Trade' Is Planned

These are the program's six points as outlined by Mr. Reagan and other
officials:

- The ''centerpiece'' is ''free trade'' for Caribbean products exported to the
United States for 12 years, a period expected to be long enough to encourage
investors to take part. The only exception will be textile and apparel products.

- ''Significant tax incentives'' will be sought from Congress because of the
high risk for investors in the area. In addition, the United States might
negotiate special investment treaties with Caribbean countries.

- Emergency aid of $350 million will be sought for this fiscal year for
countries hard hit economically. About $100 million is earmarked for El Salvador
and $110 million for Costa Rica. For the 1983 fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1,
$664 million is budgeted for the area.

- Technical assistance and training will be offered to the private sector in the
Caribbean countries, including investment promotion and export marketing.
American business concerns will be asked to augment the efforts of such
established groups as the Peace Corps, which has 861 volunteers in the region.

- The United States will work closely with Mexico, Canada, and Venezuela, which
already have aid programs in the region, ''to encourage stronger international
efforts'' at coordination with other potential donors such as Colombia. European
allies and the Japanese and international lending bodies will also be asked to
increase assistance.

- To meet concerns in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands that their preferred
status will be endangered, ''special measures'' will be proposed to insure
retention of ''our special, valued relationship.'' These would include, for
instance, allowing Federal excise taxes on Puerto Rican rum to be rebated to the
island.

Past Programs Are Noted

Mr. Reagan's so-called Caribbean Basin Initiative is the latest in a series of
proposals to help out Latin America going back to President Franklin D.
Roosevelt's Good Neighbor Policy, and including President Kennedy's Alliance for
Progress and President Carter's own Caribbean plan.

''I'm aware that the United States has pursued good-neighbor policies in the
past,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''These policies did some good. But they're inadequate
for today. I believe that my country is now ready to go beyond being a good
neighbor to being a true friend and brother in a community that belongs as much
to others as to us.  That, not guns, is the ultimate key to peace and security
for us all.''

Preparation for the President's program began a year ago at the same time that
Mr. Haig was launching a major effort to focus attention on what he regarded as
Soviet and Cuban backing for insurgent forces in El Salvador and elsewhere.

The purpose of the broader Caribbean Basin program, officials have said, is to
show that the United States is not only concerned about combating guerrillas but
is also doing something to help out the economies of the region.

To demonstrate the straits in which various countries find themselves, Mr.
Reagan noted that in 1977 one barrel of oil was worth five pounds of coffee or
155 pounds of sugar. ''To buy that same barrel of oil today, these small
countries must provide five times as much coffee - nearly 26 pounds - or almost
twice as much sugar - 283 pounds,'' he said. ''This economic disaster is
consuming our neighbors' money reserves and credit, forcing thousands of people
to leave for the United States - often illegally - and shaking even the most
established democracies.''

The President said that ''economic disaster has provided a fresh opening to the
enemies of freedom, national independence and peaceful development.''

Originally, the speech was limited to the economic program, but at the urging of
Mr. Haig it was redrafted so that about a quarter dealt with the security
concerns of the region.

In a briefing for reporters, Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs, said that the amounts of military equipment being
shipped from Nicaragua to the insurgents in El Salvador had reached record
levels in recent weeks. He said the weapons came from Vietnam, the Middle East
and perhaps the Soviet Union.

Mr. Reagan said there were two possibilities for the region - either the
establishment of moderate, constitutional governments with economic growth and
improved living standards, or ''further expansion of political violence from the
extreme left and the extreme right resulting in the imposition of dictatorships
and - inevitably - more economic decline and human suffering.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET-IRANIAN RELATIONS: 'FRIENDLY' AND 'PROFITABLE'

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 24


Relations between the Soviet Union and Iran have improved noticeably since the
estrangement that followed the storming of the Soviet Embassy in Teheran in
December 1980.

The Soviet press recently reported record trade between the two countries, and a
visiting Iranian Minister described the Soviet Union as a ''friendly'' nation.

Developments such as these have been watched closely by diplomats sensitive to
shifts in the prickly attitude that the Teheran Government adopted toward both
the United States and the Soviet Union after the overthrow of the Shah three
years ago.

Although hostility toward Washington has been unrelenting, pragmatists appear to
have persuaded Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the Iranian leader, that a
relaxation of tension with the Moscow could help ease pressure on the Teheran
regime.

But the new relationship is likely to be a wary one as long as the Islamic
clergy remains in authority in Teheran.

'No Less a Satan'

Ayatollah Khomeini has described the Soviet Union in the past as ''no less a
satan'' than the United States. The clergy remains staunchly anti-Communist, and
continues to order harsh repressive measures against leftists. The targets
include some members of Tudeh, the pro-Moscow Communist Party that has been
among the many factions contending for power since the ouster of Shah Mohammed
Riza Pahlevi in early 1979.

There are wide differences between Teheran and Moscow on international issues,
particularly the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan.

Tensions over the issue led to the storming of the Soviet embassy 14 months ago.
Teheran described the protesters as Afghan students, but Moscow believed they
included large numbers of Iranians. The Soviet Union responded with a stiff
warning.

Since then, the authorities in Teheran have largely ignored Soviet pressures for
an end to Iranian support and sanctuary for Afghan guerrillas.

An Iranian Mission to Moscow

Despite the differences, an Iranian delegation led by the Energy Minister, Hasan
Ghafuri-Fard, recently ended a visit here that was notable for the positive tone
struck by both sides.

The delegation, which was greeted warmly in the Soviet press, signed an accord
for accelerated cooperation on the construction of two gas-fired power plants.
They are among nearly 50 Soviet-Iranian projects underway in Iran.

Construction of the plants, at Isfahan and Ahwaz, was interrupted in 1979 by the
Iranian revolution. The Iran-Iraq war kept the work from resuming.

The Soviet Government newspaper Izvestia marked the delegation's visit with a
detailed chronicle of the growing trade between the two countries. The article
said Soviet-Iranian trade last year reached a record 800 million rubles, the
equivalent of $1.1 billion.

A Doubling of Trade

The figure was barely a fifth of the Soviet Union's trade with its leading
non-Communist trading partner, West Germany. But it was double the level for
Soviet-Iranian trade in 1980, and substantially higher than the 671 million
rubles in 1978, the last full year of the Shah's rule.

The 1981 figure was especially notable because it was was accomplished without
resumption of the sale of Iranian natural gas - Iran's largest export item to
the Soviet Union under the Shah.

The pipeline carrying the gas has been idle since shortly after the Shah's
ouster. At that time, the Iranians demanded a substantially higher price for the
gas, and the Russians refused.

The Soviet Union, the world's second largest producer of natural gas, had been
using the imported Iranian gas to free supplies of its own for export to Western
Europe.

Soviet Buys Iranian Oil

The most striking new element in the trade was the Soviet purchase last year of
2.2 million tons of Iranian oil, the first oil that the Russians have bought
from Iran in modern times.

Izvestia gave no details, but diplomats here speculated that the Soviet Union,
the world's largest oil producer, bought it for shipment to one of its allies,
possibly Vietnam.

As though to signal that the Kremlin still has serious differences with Teheran,
the Soviet Government paper stressed the businesslike nature of the trade.

''The cooperation of the Soviet Union and the Islamic Republic of Iran is an
objective necessity stemming not only from the geographical proximity of our two
countries but also from the fact that it complements the economic interests of
both nations, '' it said. ''This cooperation develops further each year because
it is based on a mutually profitable foundation.''

No Treaty of Friendship

At a news conference here, Mr. Ghafuri-Fard was equally careful to define the
limits of the relationship.  He described the Soviet Union as one of 25
''friendly'' nations to which Iran sent delegations on the third anniversary of
its revolution.

But he commented negatively on a report in Time magazine last month that the
Soviet Union had offered Teheran a treaty of friendship of the kind that binds
Cuba, Vietnam and other allies to the Kremlin.

The Energy Minister said he saw ''no ground'' for such an agreement since a
basic principle of the Islamic revolution was that Iran should never again
''depend on another country to survive.''

The Minister said Iran believed that the two nations' differing ideologies would
not be a hindrance to relations so long as both adhered to the principle of
nonintervention in each other's internal affairs.

Iranians Visit Soviet Moslems

As if to ease Soviet concern about the contagion of Islamic nationalism, he
reported favorably on a visit by the Iranian delegation, including a stern-faced
clergyman, to Moslem regions of the Soviet Union close to Iran. He said the
Moslems there were free to practice their religion and content with their lives
under Soviet rule.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of demonstrators in Iran

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW DELHI PARLEY FINDS COMPROMISE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 686 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Feb. 24


The issue of starting global negotiations with the world's industrialized
nations nearly capsized the three-day meeting of 44 developing countries that
ended here this evening.

After having achieved an appearance of harmony in their consultations on
improving cooperation among their own countries, the delegates worked into the
night to find a formula that could paper over sharply conflicting points of view
on the global talks.

Specifically, the differences centered on how precisely the socalled Group of
77, which represents the developing countries, should respond to the three
conditions that the United States insisted on when it agreed to the concept of
global talks on establishing a new economic order.

The American position, as stated at the meeting of developed and developing
nations in Cancun, Mexico, last October, insisted that a preliminary conference
would have to be held before any full-scale global negotiations. It also held
that the global negotiations would have no competence to deal with the
structures of such existing international institutions as the World Bank and
International Monetary Fund.

Some Third World Nations Resist

Finally, the United States declared that the legal sanction for negotiations
would not rest entirely on a United Nations resolution calling for economic
discussions between the industrialized and underdeveloped nations.

With a number of third world countries, notably the more ideological ones, so
far refusing to accede to the United States reservations, the mechanics of
getting the negotiations started have stalled.

The hope of the Indian organizers had been that the New Delhi consultations
should as far as possible affirm third world solidarity, generating momentum for
the coming session of the General Assembly where the issue of global
negotiations will be advanced.  The expectation of the planners was that
differences on the global talks could be gently skirted and that the very
diverse developing countries would rally to the cry of collective self-reliance.


Draft Offered by Pakistani

The divisions were elicited by a draft resolution brought to the New Delhi
conference by Naiz Naiq, the Pakistani representative at the United Nations, who
is also a deputy chairman of the General Assembly. Members of some delegations
reported that the document was presented to them with assurances that its
wording was acceptable to the United States and that it would pave the way for
the face-toface meeting between the two sides that virtually every delegation
referred to as ''urgent'' or ''overdue.''

The key innovation in Mr. Naiq's proposal was a call for an ''organizational
conference'' preceding the global negotiations. A number of moderate states were
willing to accept this, with some delegates saying that the issue was becoming
too embroiled in adversary politics. Others, reportedly including those of Cuba
and Vietnam, spurned Mr. Naiq's proposal as being too close to the American
position.

Still other delegations, such as Tanzania's, were reportedly unsatisfied with
assurances that the United States would accept the modification and suspected
the maneuver as a new delaying tactic.

The officials charged with drafting an expression of consensus at the parley's
end tonight struggled to find a formulation that would define the limited common
ground. This is what they arrived at: ''It was emphasized that the Group of 77
should remain firm and flexible - firm in its commitments to the basic
objectives of global negotiations as contained in U.N. Resolution 34/158 and
flexible in its approach and strategy.''

The jockeying over words involves more than hair-splitting and goes to the heart
of what the respective countries view as the proper shape of talks designed to
alter basic relations between industrialized and developing countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Rebuffs U.S.  On Missing G.I.'s

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 138 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 24


A Reagan Administration delegation left Hanoi today after a two-day mission that
apparently failed to gain Vietnamese cooperation in the search for 2,500
Americans listed by the Pentagon as missing in action in Indochina.

But the five-member delegation, headed by Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
Richard L. Armitage, received a Vietnamese promise to resume talks between
specialists on the issue from both sides ''when necessary.''

United States-Vietnamese talks on technical matters related to locating burial
and crash sites of missing Americans were suspended last summer by Vietnam after
Washington accused Hanoi of holding back bodies. A week earlier, Vietnam had
returned the remains of three American airmen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AID PLAN GENERALLY PRAISED BY LEADERS OF BOTH PARTIES

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 929 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


Congressional leaders from both parties today generally praised President
Reagan's plan for increased aid to Latin America, but some predicted that the
$350 million package would have trouble passing Congress at a time of tight
budgets and rising deficits.

They also said that any proposals for more military aid, particularly to El
Salvador, would face intense scrutiny from lawmakers who oppose the
Administration's policies in that country.  Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. urged
the Administration to withhold any request for Salvadoran military aid until
after elections for a constituent assembly have been held there next month.

The President's speech came at a moment when many legislators have been hearing
a rising chorus of criticism toward the Administration's Salvadoran policies
from the voters back home.

''Most people don't know where El Salvador is,'' said Representative Bill
Alexander of Arkansas, the Democrat's deputy whip, ''but the ghost of Vietnam
hangs over every instance of military support or action in a foreign country.''

Economic Program Unpopular

As a result, the issue threatens to become a political liability for Mr. Reagan,
just at a time when legislators report that his economic program is also losing
support among voters around the country.

''El Salvador is becoming one of our key issues as Democrats,'' said
Representative Tony Coelho of California, chairman of the House Democratic
Campaign Committee. ''The fear that this guy will get us into an international
conflict is rampant.''

Praise for the President's proposal focused on the traditional theme of a ''good
neighbor policy,'' laced with concern for increasing Communist influence in the
region. ''I truly believe the President is on the right road,'' said Mr.
O'Neill. ''They are our neighbors here in the Western Hemisphere.''

''The President is saying,'' declared Representative Robert Michel of Illinois,
the Republican leader, ''that the forces of Marxism-Leninism, armed and aided by
Cuban and Soviet Governments, cannot be allowed to impose their totalitarian
policies through force and violence.''

Difficulty Seen in Passage

But Representative Clement J. Zablocki, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the
Foreign Affairs Committee, cautioned, ''It will be difficult to win
Congressional passage of another foreign aid request this election year, amid a
slumping economy at home, after we just voted for a global aid bill in
December.''

Representative Dennis M. Hertel, a freshman Democrat from Michigan, said that
the people back home were asking him, ''Why are you cutting school lunches and
sending all those millions to El Salvador?''

The President's program could also face opposition from certain interests, such
as the sugar industry, which feel threatened by the idea of free trade with
Latin America and want to protect their domestic markets.

Mr. Zablocki expressed concern today that the President's program ''may become
engulfed in the increasingly polarized debate over U.S.  policy toward El
Salvador,'' and many lawmakers say that debate is starting to infect voters who
seldom voice concerns or opinions about foreign affairs. In Columbus, Ind., for
instance, a woman got to her feet at a town meeting last week and told
Representative Philip R. Sharp, a Democrat: ''Don't get us involved in El
Salvador.  I don't want my 15-year-old son to go and fight.''

A Report From Arizona

''People are very much opposed to any involvement in El Salvador, even in
conservative Arizona,'' said Senator Dennis DeConcini, a Democrat who represents
that state. ''This feeling is strongest amonmg Hispanics, but business people
said that, too. I don't think people in Arizona want a war.''

To some voters, legislators report, Mr. Reagan is simply fulfilling a campaign
promise to get tough with the Soviet Union and strengthen America's influence in
the world.

''The majority are anxious about El Salvador, but aren't certain about what we
should do,'' said Representative Gregory W. Carmen, Republican of Lomg Island.
''Clearly people are not interested in allowing the Soviet Union to gain a
foothold in the Western Hemipshere.''

And Representative Lawrence Coughlin, Republican of Pennsylvania, said that most
complaints he received were coming from ''a combination of church and peace
groups'' who he said had always opposed American foreign policy. ''You can
almost trace the personalities back to the Vietnam era,'' he said.

Stand of Catholic Church Cited

But others say that the concern about El Salvador is spreading far beyond the
traditional corps of peace activists, and one reason cited is the active
opposition to Administration policy mounted by the Roman Catholic Church.

''The church,'' said Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado,
''has stirred up a new group we've never heard from before.''

This growing anxiety has been further aggravated by the suspicion that Mr.
Reagan lacks experience in foreign affairs and might not be in command of the
situation.

''A Republican friend,'' said Representative Ed Jenkins, Democrat of Georgia,
''came up to me in church Sunday and said: 'I just never felt the President was
strong in foreign affairs. I'm extremely worried about what might happen.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Salvador Communist Says U.S. Will Lose

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 78 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 24


The United States is facing defeat in El Salvador, the leader of the country's
Communist Party said in a interview carried today by Tass, the official Soviet
press agency.

''The situation that has emerged is similar to that in Vietnam in the early
1970's, when the Saigon puppet troops failed to put up any serious resistance to
the Vietnamese patriots,'' the Communist leader, Jorge Shafic Handal, was quoted
as saying.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
IT'S NOT VIETNAM, BUT...

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 860 words


''The decisive battle for Central America is now under way in E l Salvador.'' In
that portentious language the Assistant Secretary o f State for Inter-American
Affairs, Thomas O. Enders, explained to C ongress the Administration's plans for
greatly increased military a id to El Salvador.

''This is not Vietnam,'' Mr. Enders said when worried members raised the
analogy. ''It is not on the other side of the world.'' No, El Salvador is not
Vietnam. But the very language used by Mr.  Enders to justify the growing United
States involvement shows that there are some similarities - and some reasons to
worry about the analogy.

From the beginning in Vietnam, officials who justified the American intervention
spoke in apocalyptic terms. This was the decisive battleground for freedom in
Asia, they said. Communist China was the real force behind the so-called
guerrilla war, and it would sweep through all of Southeast Asia if we did not
draw the line in Vietnam.

From that Manichean view of Vietnam as an ultimate confrontation between the
forces of darkness and light it followed that there could be no compromise. For
years negotiation was rejected because ''victory'' was at the end of the tunnel.

Tom Enders is a perfect symbol of that policy, then and now. He was deputy chief
of the U.S. Mission in Cambodia. He is best remembered for having guided
American bombers from a secret room in the embassy, in violation of U.S. law,
and for trying to deceive reporters about the extent of civilian casualties. But
his most important policy contribution was to fight all talk of negotiating.

In 1974, as Cambodia bled away, the U.S. Ambassador, John Gunther Dean,
recommended secret talks with a Khmer Rouge diplomat traveling in Europe. Mr.
Enders vigorously opposed the idea, and it was killed. The war went on for
another year, to its terrible end. And the failure to negotiate may well have
intensified the vengeful savagery of the Khmer Rouge.

Now in El Salvador the United States rejects negotiations. It reacts coldly to a
peace initiative from a crucially placed friend, President Lopez Portillo of
Mexico. It says the way to a political solution will be opened by elections next
month: elections that do not impress our allies and that many experts believe
will make El Salvador less rather than more governable.

As in Vietnam, our policy is based on ignorance of history.  Washington sees in
El Salvador a sudden threat, mounted from outside, that is susceptible to
instant military remedies. But what is happening is a response to decades of
oppressive history in El Salvador, and no American policy can neatly determine
the result.

As in Vietnam, the search for military victory leads U.S. officials to take an
absurdly over-optimistic view of the local army. Robert E. White, the former
U.S. Ambassador, says: ''The army of El Salvador lacks the will, not the means,
to defeat the insurgents. The military avoid combat whenever possible.
Ninety-five percent of the killing by the armed forces consists of dragging
unarmed people from their houses and slaughtering them in cold blood.''

As in Vietnam, the United States has somehow put itself in the position of
seeming to side with the forces of reaction. We support President Duarte. But
Representative Jim Coyne, a Pennsylvania Republican who visited El Salvador last
week, said it was a ''misconception'' that Mr. Duarte controls the military or
affects its terror tactics. And the military evidently believe the United States
will support them because there is no alternative.

As in Vietnam, reports of failure lead some to attack the reporters: to blame
the press. The Wall Street Journal did this in a massive editorial recently.
Then, to its credit, it printed a devastating piece by David Halberstam showing
that the correspondents who reported military failure in Vietnam were giving not
their own views but those, in confidence, of the best U.S. field officers.

As in Vietnam, we have a misconception of what our power is and how it can be
applied. We think we can fight a land war in dense and alien terrain. The
Administration says we are only going to help, not fight ourselves. But
Presidents did not mean to use American soldiers when they began the incremental
involvement in Vietnam.

As in Vietnam, the end is likely to be unsatisfactory. Those who are critical of
U.S. policy should have no illusions about the nobility of the insurgents if
they win. The question is whether the United States is wise to raise the stakes
by ever deeper military involvement - wise to make this a test for itself.

But I do not think it will be Vietnam, because the American public will not let
it be. Congress is much more skeptical now. Just about every Congressional
visitor has been unhappy at what he saw in El Salvador. Representative Coyne, at
the end of his trip, said he would urge President Reagan ''to come down here and
look at this regime.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1078 words


Soviet-Iranian ties improve since storming of Soviet Embassy A2
Accord on starting global talks eludes third world parley A3
State Dept. issues limited visa to the top Soviet expert on U.S.  A4
North Koreans' guerrilla training worries the South A6
France seeks balance in Middle East policy A7
Israeli Parliament takes up the foreign-press issue A8
Ugandan guerrillas attack army barracks in Kampala A9
U.S.-Soviet polemics at Madrid parley continue A11

Government/Politics
Norman Lear gets Jane Fonda and Barry Goldwater on stage A26
Voice of America told to ''make the truth more attractive'' A29
Prior relationships called a factor in felony cases B6
Bruce Caputo given until tomor- row to clarify stories B10

Washington Talk
Briefing B14
Q.&A.: Gen. David C. Jones B14
Quotations from General Jones B14
The State Department's Latin American team B14

General
Around the Nation A18
Panel says many women need not continue caesarians A20
Violent robberies prompt citi- zens' patrol of neignborhood B12
Drive opens to end Connecticut tolls B13
Harvard's ''old girl network'' renews ties B13

Obituaries
Dr. Edward C. Franklin, immu- nology specialist at N.Y.U.  B16
Robert Lowe Kunzig, judge and ex-General Services chief B16

Home Section
Home The tile alternative: new design schemes C1

Adapting a house for Itzhak Perlman C1

Debate on safety of urea foam and plastic tubing C6
Women reconsider childbearing over 30 C1
Hers C2
Home Beat: furniture for those of changeable mind C3
In children's books, favorites en- dure C3
Home Improvement: the care and repair of Venetian blinds C4
Carnival in Rio: festivities are shifting indoors C10
Gardening: planning for the sum- mer vegetable crop C12

Arts/Entertainment
Harold Pinter's ''The Caretaker'' is revived C15
Christo says Majority backs his Central Park ''gates'' plan C15
''The Dining Room,'' stage vi- gnettes of family and food C15
I.M. Pei quits project in Beau- mont acoustic dispute C15
Joseph Chaikin's ''Trespass'' re- viewed C16
Grammy for Yoko Ono stirs awards ceremony C17
Gary Wills's ''The Kennedy Im- prisonment'' is reviewed C19
Jerzy Kosinski's novel ''Pinball'' is reviewed C20
U.S. premiere of Wagner's 'Die Feen'' at the City Opera C22
Bridge league, former members settle dispute out of court C30
''Muggable Mary,'' television movie of decoy policewoman C31
Film academy refuses Poland's bid to withdraw ''Man of Iron'' C32

Sports
Gretzky breaks N.H.L. goal-scor- ing mark B19
Dave Anderson on Wayne Gret- zky's genius B19
Nets fall to Bucks, 113-106 B19
Pacers rout Knicks, 118-87 B21
St. John's subdues Setn Hall B21
Leon Spinks wins 10-round deci- sion as cruiserweight B22

News Analysis
Stuart Taylor Jr. on the case of John W. Hinckley Jr.  A24

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A30

Caribbean vision or nightmare Mr. Koch plays with Playboy Bank reform needs a
nudge Questions for Mr. Richmond Letters A30
Flora Lewis: basic policy tug-of- war A31
Anthony Lewis: it isn't Vietnam, but ...  A31
Cynthia A. Roberts: we must reinstate the draft A31
Judith Kipper: P.L.O., take the step A31

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: index

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 47 words


''Most people don't know where El Salvador is, but the ghost of Vietnam hangs
over every instance of military support or action in a foreign country.'' -
Representative Bill Alexander, on Reagan aid plan for Latin America. (A16:2.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: quote

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRESSURE GROWING ON CAPUTO TO QUIT

BYLINE: By MAURICE CARROLL

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 350 words


As pressure grew yesterday for Bruce M. Caputo to quit his race for the United
States Senate, he was given until tomorrow to ''straighten out'' accounts about
inaccurate claims that he had been a draftee and an Army lieutenant.

The Republican state chairman, George L. Clark Jr., who set the deadline, did
not specify what he wanted straightened out, since Mr.  Caputo has apologized
for making such claims. Mr. Caputo, who had said earlier that he could not
recall making the claims, repeated his apology yesterday.

But Mr. Clark said that, if Mr. Caputo did not ''clarify'' the situation, ''then
he's got a problem with me.''

Served in Pentagon

Mr. Caputo served as a civilian assistant in the Pentagon, but on two or three
occasions described himself as a Vietnam-era draftee or a lieutenant. Until the
stories came out last week, politicians believed Mr. Caputo would be
unchallenged for the Republican, Conservative and Right to Life nominations.
That has changed.

Two Republican county leaders, Jack R. Muratori of Queens and John D. Calandra
of the Bronx, called on him to quit the race against Daniel Patrick Moynihan,
the Democratic incumbent.

There were renewed rumors of pressure on Lewis E. Lehrman, a wealthy businessman
who is a declared candidate for Governor, to switch and take on the Senate
campaign instead.

Mr. Lehrman declined.  ''Under absolutely no circumstances would I run for the
Senate,'' he told a telephone caller.  In the lobby of the building at 733 Third
Avenue where Mr. Moynihan has his city office, Mr. Caputo held a news conference
to criticize the Senator for ''questioning my patriotism.''

Reminded that what was under question was his accuracy, Mr. Caputo replied: ''I
have accepted the responsibility and apologized. I hope that New Yorkers accept
my apology.''

He said that many party leaders had promised to stick with him.  Someone asked
if his support remained as strong as it had been.  ''No, it's not as solid as it
was,'' Mr. Caputo said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A TEAM AT STATE IS KEY TO EL SALVADOR POLICY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


Who is making Administration policy on El Salvador?  President Reagan, of
course, along with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., Secretary of
Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and numerous officials at the Agency for
Intenational Development, the National Security Council and the Central
Intelligence Agency. Some Congressional committees and a number of private
individuals and study groups also are involved.

But for day-to-day development of El Salvador policy, the place to look is Mr.
Haig's Latin American team at the State Department. Its members deal with the
problem almost hourly, produce many of the public statements and documentation
and appear before Senate and House committees. They were instrumental in
formulating the Reagan Administration's new Caribbean Basin development plan,
unveiled today in a major speech by the President to the Organization of
American States.

The El Salvador policymakers at State, from Deane R. Hinton, the United States
Ambassador in San Salvador, to Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs, are mostly career diplomats with considerable
foreign experience. However, only a few have served in Central America.

Confidence of Haig

By growing consensus, the most powerful of the group, not only on policy but
also on how it is documented and presented to the public, is the 50-year-old Mr.
Enders. He has served as Ambassador to Canada, as charge in Phnom Penh during
the American bombing of Cambodia and as Assistant Secretary of State for
Business and Economic Affairs.

Mr. Enders has the confidence of Secretary Haig, officials say, and that
apparently has allowed him something of a free hand in Central America while Mr.
Haig and the President have been preoccupied with Poland, the Soviet Union and
the Middle East.

He does not speak Spanish and had no direct experience in Latin America or the
Caribbean before assuming his present position. Yet he has managed to bring
Central America to the forefront of American policy issues and, as a frequent
Capitol Hill witness, has impressed members of Congress with his quick
intelligence and self assurance.

He was largely responsible for framing the new Administration policy that
envisions Central America not just as a little known area between North and
South America but as an intregal part of the Caribbean Basin, geographically
close to the United States and economically and strategically critical to it.
Within the basin, he has identified Cuba as an adversary to the east and
Nicaragua as an adversary to the west.

Two Deputy Assistants

There are two Deputy Assistant Secretaries of State who are deeply involved in
El Salvador matters, Stephen W. Bosworth and Everett E.  Briggs. Both speak
Spanish fluently, have experience in Latin America and are well respected, even
by critics of Administration policy.

Mr. Bosworth, who is responsible for advising Mr. Enders on economic policy, is
said to have organized the day-to-day work on the Caribbean Basin plan. He was
assisted by Robert J. Ryan Jr., director of the Latin American bureau's Office
of Regional Economic Policy, who was upgraded to ambassadorial rank to give him
greater authority.

Mr. Briggs is regarded as particularly well-informed. His responsiblities
include following the progress of the electoral process in El Salvador and he
makes regular trips there. In Washington, he meets with a wide range of
Salvadoran poltical figures, including the representatives of guerrillas
fighting the Salvadoran Government.

Gordon Sumner Jr., a retired Army lieutenant general, serves as a special
adviser to Mr. Enders and travels with ambassadorial credentials. He recently
served as chairman of the Center for Inter-American Security, a conservative
foreign policy group, and was an outspoken critic of the Panama Canal Treaties.

Controversial Appointment

Mr. Enders can also call on the services of Vernon A. Walters, a retired Army
lieutenant general and former Deputy Director of Central Intelligence who was
named an ambassador-at-large by Secretary Haig. The appointment of General
Walters provoked controversy among some Latin American policy groups because he
had lobbied in Guatemala for an international oil consortium and had made public
statements favoring a resumption of United States aid to the Guatemalan
Government, despite the State Department's own unfavorable report on the human
rights situation there.

Another State Department official concerned with El Salvador is L.  Craig
Johnstone, director of the department's Office of Central American Affairs. He
is new to the region, having served in Vietnam, Laos and Canada.

The State Department's Latin American Affairs department, unlike several other
regional bureaus, has its own policy planning staff.  The chief policy planner
is Luigi R. Einaudi, a veteran Latin American specialist who served as a policy
planner for the entire State Department under the Nixon and Ford
Administrations. He spent four months last year at the Woodrow Wilson Center as
a resident scholar before being called back on Jan 1. by Mr. Enders.

Mr. Einaudi is the author of ''Beyond Cuba: Latin America Takes Charge of Its
Future,'' a collection of essays in which he wrote: ''Economically, politically
and culturally, South America is a most challenging part of the new
international scene. Current needs are for trade, not aid, and for
understanding, not preaching.''

United States policy, he argues, will have to reflect even greater awareness of
''the revolution behind the scenes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of El Salvador photo of Thomas Enders photo of Deane
Hinton

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

Book: Camelot's Failure By John Leonard
THE KENNEDY IMPRISONMENT. A MEDITATION ON POWER. By Garry Wills. 310 pages.
Atlantic-Little, Brown.  $14.95.

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


NO wonder Garry Wills quotes so often from Norman Mailer and Murray Kempton.
Like them, he is a sort of intellectual outlaw. He brings strange books - by
Machiavelli, Hume, Clausewitz, Tolstoy and Veblen - to bear on the quotidian.
His soul may be full of what John Cheever calls an ''unrequited melancholy,''
but his style, even as it seeks to extol American institutions, has a bandit's
flair; it wears a romantic beret.

In ''The Kennedy Imprisonment,'' Mr. Wills would ''deconstruct'' Camelot.
Camelot, in his opinion, ''was the opium of the intellectuals.'' John F. Kennedy
inherited from his father ''no ideology but achievement,'' and made of his brief
Presidency a kind of Hollywood version of a fictious Whig England starring
''aristocratic rakes,'' ''inspired amateurs'' and ''gentlemen saviors of their
country.''

These rakes, amateurs and saviors included professors from Harvard and Yale and
mobsters from Chicago and Las Vegas. The court they served was ''based on the
special gifts of a single ruler'' whose ''cult of courage'' led him to
''delegitimate Government.'' Enjoying power, a macho President would subvert the
State Department and the Joint Chiefs of Staff to ordain a Bay of Pigs, a Cuban
missile crisis and a Vietnam complete with Green Berets.

If Richard Nixon was obsessed by the Kennedys, then, according to Mr. Wills, the
Kennedys were obsessed by Fidel Castro; Camelot was a game of chicken. If the
''honorary Kennedys'' - name your favorite historian and your most loyal,
congenial ''gofer'' -brought what Veblen described as ''charisma,'' then
charisma degenerated into ''totemism, protecting the sacred object as an
endangered relic, not rallying to it as the center of an active leadership.''

Mr. Wills is talking now about Edward Kennedy, whose campaign for the Presidency
in 1980 was doomed because he wasn't as tough, or witty, as either of his older
brothers and because ''his life was a constant labor with death.'' Teddy
couldn't be the ''prince'' so adored by the ''honorary Kennedys.'' He went to
Chappaquiddick in the first place, Mr. Wills suggests, not for an orgy but
because he was ''compelled to attend, it was part of his extended death watch or
permanent floating Irish wake.'' The ''boiler-room girls'' at Chappaquiddick,
after all, had worked for Bobby and deserved an anniversary celebration. Teddy
was the totem.

As for ''Bobby,'' who hated to be called Bobby, Mr. Wills is kind and severe at
the same time. Robert Kennedy moved from right to left on social issues, much as
Mr. Wills himself has moved. In the mirror, they are equally sincere. Would Jack
have had breakfast with Cesar Chavez? Mr. Wills thinks Jack would not and should
have. After the Dallas assassination, Bobby's ''was not only a government in
exile, but also a kind of revolution in the hills, his own personal Sierra
Maestra.''

Castro, again. If Camelot hadn't been a movie, it would have been a novel,
conspired at by John Buchan and T.H. Lawrence and Ian Fleming, full of history
and sex and ''personal authority.'' Kennedys, like Mr. Wills, wear berets. (Jack
wanted Warren Beatty to play the Jack part in the movie version of ''P.T.-109'';
Beatty declined.) Teddy has made his best speeches in the peculiar light of
knowing that he would lose. Mr. Wills is willing to admire a failed prince, so
long as the prince is guaranteed to fail.

His point is that ''charismatic'' leaders inevitably fail; that Government,
necessarily sluggish, is preferable to mountains full of guerrillas, where the
berets - a radical-chic purple these days in El Salvador - are so many M & M's;
that sanction and legitimacy belong to institutions and not to those individuals
who would, heroically, break the rules and then, after establishing libraries,
romanticize rule-breaking. On the whole, Mr. Wills prefers Dwight D. Eisenhower.
He likes Ike because Ike didn't enjoy himself as President; he was dutiful and
committee-minded; there were no guerrillas in his mountains.

This preference puts Mr. Wills in an odd position; perhaps he can be comfortable
only in a position that is odd. Ike, after all, invaded Lebanon, subverted Iran
and Guatemala, and fiddled unsuccessfully with Indonesia and the Congo. Mr.
Wills excuses him because Ike didn't brag about it. He will not excuse the
Kennedys, much as he sympathizes with Teddy and identifies with Bobby, because
they were overt. They turned politics into ''High Noon,'' and every President
since Jack has wanted to be Gary Cooper, with a Sinatra instead of a Chavez for
breakfast. Except for the C.I.A. and the F.B.I., Mr. Wills likes bureaucracy. He
wants John F. Kennedy to have been Martin Luther King Jr.

If, since J.F.K., American politics have been merely symbolic, what about the
symbolic politics of other countries? Mr. Wills is surprisingly parochial. If,
since J.F.K., ''counter-insurgency'' is glamorous and American, how do we
explain the French in Indochina and Algeria, their parachutes and their berets?
Mr. Wills is silent.  If, since J.F.K., the United States has played global
chicken, name the game of the Soviet Union? Mr. Wills seems to think that we
invented charisma; never mind the subversions of a Moscow gerontocracy. If,
since J.F.K., there have been social revolutions among blacks and women, why not
assign some credit to that Kennedy charisma? Mr. Wills would say those
revolutions were ''inadvertent.'' One wonders whether, instead, a certain amount
of symbolic politics unclogs the social drain.

Mr. Wills has wonderful things to say on Eugene McCarthy, Richard M. Nixon,
Henry Kissinger, David Cecil, ''libidinous imperialism'' and Addison's disease.
His problem, after monographs on everything from Roman culture to Catholic
malaise to American civil rights, is that he permits only himself to be the
Augustan renegade, an outlaw who would kill his own, various fathers with a
brilliant book.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

Because of a transmission error, the review of Garry Wills's book ''The Kennedy
Imprisonment: A Meditation on Power'' yesterday included two incorrect
references to the author Veblen. They should have read ''Weber.''

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Garry Wills

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY'S TREATMENT OF FILIPINO CIVILIANS CRITICIZED

BYLINE: By PAMELA G. HOLLIE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1213 words

DATELINE: DAVAO CITY, the Philippines, Feb. 25


Brig. Gen. Alfredo S. Olano, in jeans and short-sleeved shirt, sat in the lobby
bar of the Cuison Hotel drinking Johnny Walker Black Label and soda and holding
a microphone that he gladly accepted from a young female singer.

''Autumn Leaves,'' he said to the band before easing into the ballad with
exaggerated feeling. His tablemates, some of them fellow officers, applauded
enthusiastically as he finished crooning his first tune and slipped into ''Blue
Moon.''

''I am notorious, you know,'' the general joked. ''Everybody thinks I'm Idi
Amin.'' The short, middle-aged general is commander of Region 11, an area in
Eastern Mindanao where farmers have been involuntarily relocated, an action that
has provoked outrage among lawyers, clerics, and human-rights activists.

General Takes Responsibility

But the general seems willing to take the responsibility. ''I am the regional
commander,'' he declared.  To stem increases in the activity of the insurgent
New People's Army, the military, according to General Olano, felt it necessary
to move farmers living in ''sensitive areas'' into strategic settlements or
hamlets to protect them from the Communist rebels and to keep them out of the
fighting. There are about 100,000 people living in at least 35 such strategic
settlements in Mindanao.

The action, started here in the late 1970's, is similar to policies used in
Malaya in the 1950's and in South Vietnam in the 1960's.

''The idea of forcing people from their farms is a violation of what we all
consider a human right,'' said Dionisio C. de la Serna, a member of the newly
organized human rights commission of the Integrated Bar Association of the
Philippines, which is expected to issue a report soon denouncing the policy.

'Going All the Way'

''We are going all the way with his,'' said Mr. de la Serna. ''That means not
only dismantling the hamlets,'' he said. ''We are thinking that the people
should be adequately compensated.''

The treatment of the farmers in Mindanao has increased controversy over human
rights in the Philippines. Since the lifting of martial law in January 1981,
President Ferdinand E. Marcos has worked to give the impression that basic
freedoms have been reinstated. But reports of military abuses, including the
detention and torture of suspected subversives, have undercut Mr. Marcos's
assertions of progress. And the relocation issue, which has attracted the
attention of Amnesty International and the American Embassy in Manila, has
further embarrassed the military.

The Government says that there are more than 2,500 guerrillas of the New Peoples
Army, the military wing of the outlawed Communist Party of the Philippines. To
eliminate the dissidents, the Government appears to have greatly increased
garrisons, patrols, arrests and, according to critics, abuses of personal and
property rights. Around Davao, there is much talk of the ''lost command'' a
mysterious paramilitary unit that has been accused of extreme brutality. The
Government denies such a group exists.

The relocation situation has led many Filipinos, ordinarily hesitant to talk
about abuses by the military, to speak up. In testimony collected by church
workers, dozens of farmers told of beatings and torture. Remigio Jainar, a
farmer, said he was clubbed when he refused to say that he was an officer in the
New People's Army. Aurelio Canete, also a farmer, said he was was stabbed in the
right arm for refusing to confess.

Villager Reports Abuse

Arguilino Maghanoy said he was picked up in San Vicente in northern Davao
province and accused of taking part in rebel ambushes of military vehicles.
During his interrogation soldiers took turns stamping on his stomach, he said.
At night, his hands were tied behind his back with a rope attached to the
ceiling. Eventually he signed a confession.

The Government says that thousands of insurgents have surrendered, though many
of these are suspects. In one case, 7,000 residents of the farming community of
Laac in the mountains of Davao Province obeyed requests by army officers to
pledge allegiance to the Philippines. When they obliged, this oath-taking was
interpreted as a wholesale surrender ceremony and national newspapers carried
reports of it as a mass surrender.

Laac is now the largest strategic settlement in Mindanao. Since December, more
than 3,500 people have been settled at a spot along a rutted, muddy road. From 5
o'clock in the morning to 5 in the afternoon, the farmers are allowed to return
to their small farms.  Because some farms are distant from Laac, many have been
abandoned, leaving the farmers without work or food. Huddled in temporary
shanties, lacking medicine, water or sanitation, they suffer from malnutrition
and disease.

''They had to leave everything,'' said Sister Thelma Pena, one of the nuns of
the diocese of Tagum. ''Everything they have worked for is now lost.''

Development Policy for Island

Most of the farmers in the forested areas of northern Davao are squatters who do
not own the land they farm. Many of the nowdisplaced farmers suspect that the
relocation policy is connected to the Government's ambitious development plan
for Mindanao.

The program calls for large-scale forestry, palm oil production and perhaps
mining. Several farmers said they were told by Col. Alejandro Cruz that their
farms were to be planted in rubber trees and that they would be given land
elsewhere. Colonel Cruz denies having told farmers that. Nevertheless, farmers
now assume that their claims are lost forever and that the land will be
developed by multinational companies.

Caught between the Government and the New People's Army, the farmers wonder from
whom they have more to fear. The rebels are sometimes referred to as ''nice
people.'' And the affect of the relocation program may be to make them seem even
more attractive.  ''They are more afraid of the military than the New People's
Army,'' said a translator for a young mother in the hamlet of Asuncion on the
road to Laac. ''She is not N.P.A., but she likes the military less,'' he said.

''It is a tremendous mistake to treat these people like this,''said Laurente C.
Ilagan, a Davao City lawyer who heads a Mindanao humanrights group. ''They will
fight back.''

Sitting with friends in a Davao bar, General Olano is unimpressed with the
arguments against the policy and seems genuinely surprised by the criticism it
provoked. He insists that the program was sensible and voluntary.

And yet, with embarrassed Government superiors disassociating themselves from
relocation and saying that the whole program was unauthorized, General Olano
sometimes sounds like a man whose position is in jeopardy. He speculated about a
transfer, about an early retirement. Then, with colleages applauding, he took
the microphone to sing ''My Way.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Filipino guerillas

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADORANS' U.S. CAMPAIGN: SELLING OF REVOLUTION

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Feb. 25


A few minutes before midnight, the two guerrilla leaders from El Salvador and
their Mexican host broke off the conversation and switched on the video
recorder.

The opening scenes from the NBC News ''Today'' show flashed on the screen,
recorded earlier from a widely available cable television link to the United
States. As Bryant Gumbel and Jane Pauley previewed the program, the two
insurgent leaders watched expectantly. Then the event they wanted to see came
on, an interview with one of the guerrillas' military leaders, Cayetano Carpio.

When the camera panned back to show a guerrilla, dressed in battle fatigues,
holding an automatic rifle, the Salvadorans groaned. When Mr. Carpio said
everyone in North America should consider Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader, an
inspiration, one covered his eyes and shook his head in dismay.

A few minutes later, the videotape jumped to images of the ''NBC Nightly News,''
with Roger Mudd talking about developments in El Salvador. The Salvadorans
watched intently.

The Selling of a Revolution

This somewhat incongruous scene, which took place here last night, represented a
small part of the selling of a revolution. In recent months, with increasing
sophistication, the leaders of the guerrilla movement in El Salvador have
mounted a public relations campaign directed at world opinion in general, and at
American public opinion in particular.

''We have to win the war inside the United States,'' said Hector Oqueli, one of
the rebel leaders who viewed the American news broadcasts last night. His
colleague, Ruben Zamora, added, ''We have tried to change our public image.''

By drawing on advice from American and Mexican friends and employing the latest
technology such as video recorders, the insurgents have brought a little bit of
Madison Avenue to the violent business of waging revolution.

Their primary goal, the rebels said, was to overcome the pronouncements of the
Reagan Administration that have portrayed the guerrillas as Soviet and Cuban
puppets.

Vietnam Example Cited

The guerrillas began with the example of Vietnam. ''The American media,
especially television, turned public opinion against the war,'' said Mr. Zamora.

About six months ago, he said, insurgent forces in El Salvador, known as the
Faribundo Marti National Liberation Front, decided to try to improve their image
abroad and make known their willingness to end the civil war by negotiation.

One step was to invite American reporters in El Salvador to visit rebel
strongholds in the countryside. These visits, which began late last year,
generated a series of newspaper articles about the rebels and their supporters.

At the same time, the leaders began to contact editorial writers at major
American newspapers, hoping to persuade them to write more sympathetically about
the insurgents.

The most important papers, according to Mr. Zamora, are The New York Times, The
Washington Post, The Los Angeles Times, The Miami Herald, The Wall Street
Journal, The Boston Globe and The Chicago Tribune.

Dozens of smaller papers were approached by American supporters of the
Salvadoran revolution, Mr. Zamora said.  Television, Mr. Zamora and his
colleague said, was more difficult to handle. ''Television is most important,
but it was also our biggest problem,'' said Mr. Zamora. He explained, ''They
just weren't interested in us for months.''

A Change in Attitude

That attitude has changed in recent weeks, he said. The guerrilla leaders are
now trying to capitalize on the change, they said. This Sunday, for example,
Manuel Guillermo Ungo, the president of the Democratic Revolutionary Front, the
political arm of the guerrilla movement, is scheduled to appear on the NBC News
program ''Meet the Press.''

Before he flies to Washington on Saturday, Mr. Ungo will be coached by several
Salvadoran and Mexican friends in Mexico City. ''We will ask the kind of
questions we expect he will be asked on the program,'' said one.

''Opposition to the Reagan Administration policy in El Salvador was not started
by us,'' said Mr. Zamora. ''The Catholic Church, for instance, has played an
important role. All we have tried to do is make sure the American public
recognizes we are human beings, not monsters.''

The rebels said they are considering using a computer to store and organize the
names of reporters and editors in the United States with whom they have regular
dealings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET IS SCOFFING AT CARIBBEAN PLAN

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 432 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 25


The Soviet press agency Tass charged today that ''anti-Communist paranoia'' in
Washington was behind the stepped-up program of aid to Caribbean nations that
President Reagan announced on Wednesday.

Tass used the word ''absurdity'' to characterize the Reagan statement that there
was Soviet-backed subversion in El Salvador.  In two commentaries on Mr.
Reagan's address to the Organization of American States, Tass said that the
President's allegations about a Soviet-backed, Cuban-managed bid to impose
Communist regimes in Central America were a bid to mask Washington's own
ambitions in the region. These, it said, are to buttress ''blood-stained
repressive regimes'' and to protect American business interests that have
flourished under them.

Insurgencies Called Indigenous

Tass charged that, by attributing insurgencies in El Salvador and elsewhere to
external intrigues, ''the American President slurs the honor and dignity of
millions of people and puts the United States in the way of the inexorable
advance of history.''

The Tass statements were part of a counteroffensive focusing on American policy
in El Salvador and neighboring countries that has been undertaken by the Soviet
Union, which has long been denounced for the troops it has in Afghanistan and
for events in Poland.

A spate of articles in recent weeks have described United States backing for the
Salvadoran junta as reminiscent of the steps that led to the debacle in Vietnam.
The articles have accused Mr. Reagan of ''hypocrisy'' for condemning martial law
in Poland while aiding the Salvadoran authorities.

The party newspaper Pravda compared events in El Mozote, a Salvadoran village
where Government forces were reported to have slain large numbers of civilians,
to killings at Lidice in Czechoslovakia and Khatyn in Byelorussia during World
War II and at My Lai during the Vietnam War.

In its response to Mr. Reagan's speech, Tass noted his pledge to oppose efforts
to impose what he called ''Marxist-Leninist dictatorships of the Cuban model''
on the Caribbean region.

''The absurdity of such allegations,'' Tass went on, ''has been pointed out at
the highest level on more than one occasion.'' The inference was that Soviet
assurances had been offered in official exchanges, possibly at the meeting in
Geneva last month between Secretary of State Alexanxder M. Haig Jr. and Foreign
Minister Andrei A. Gromyko.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JAILED VETERAN'S CASE BRINGS POST-VIETNAM PROBLEM INTO FOCUS

BYLINE: By REGINALD STUART

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1399 words

DATELINE: SHREVEPORT, La.


The fate of a young Vietnam veteran has become the focus of concern in this Deep
South stronghold of American patriotism as it seeks to reconcile itself with its
Vietnam War veterans after a decade of trying to ignore them and forget the war.

Charles Gean Heads, 34 years old, a Marine Corps combat veteran of Vietnam, has
undergone two trials for the shooting death of his brother-in-law, and the
second jury found him not guilty of murder because of temporary insanity
stemming from his war experiences.

His second trial brought testimony from several veterans about stress born of
war. And the process of gathering that testimony has led to the movement here to
deal with long-term problems of the area's many other Vietnam veterans.

Veterans Administration's Stand

But just as local plans are being made for a Vietnam memorial and for counseling
facilities for veterans of that war, the Veterans Administration has declared
that ''as a matter of long-standing policy,'' it cannot provide the psychiatric
custody and care that Mr. Heads needs to get out of jail.

Without that help, Mr. Heads may remain imprisoned indefinitely.  He has already
been incarcerated since August 1977, when his postwar civilian life shattered in
a hail of gunfire.

The second trial's jury decided that the fatal shooting of his brother-in-law
was the result of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (P-TSD), which psychiatrists
say is likely to be found in Vietnam combat veterans. Mental health experts
explain it as a temporary state of mind that could result in extremely
irresponsible behavior by an otherwise normal person, with the cause traceable
to a traumatic experience, such as combat, that the person has never fully
accepted.

The story of Mr. Heads, as presented at the trial, began when he left his native
Houston to volunteer for the Marines at the age of 19. He was sent to Vietnam in
January 1967 and joined a special reconnaissance forces unit. Within 15 months
he had been on 26 missions deep into enemy territory, had killed at least six
people, had been wounded in an ambush on his battalion and had been discharged
with 30 percent disability.

Once resettled in Houston, he began putting together what many would consider a
normal life. From 1970 until 1977, he worked at the Post Office and was able to
buy a three-bedroom house, marry and begin raising a family. He also bought a
luxury car, a customized van, a motorcycle and a home entertainment center. He
was never in trouble with the law and was admired by his friends and fellow
workers.

The flaw in this new life was his violent nightmares about the war, some of
which overwhelmed him with rage and frightened his wife and children. He always
kept a pistol at his bedside and eventually bought a rifle as well. On one of
those nightmare-ridden nights, his wife fled in fear, taking the two children
with her, bound for home: Shreveport.

Mr. Heads began a search for his family that ended here at the home of his
brother-in-law, Roy Kenneth Lejay. It was just after 1 A.M. on a Sunday and no
one answered his pleas for entry.

The Conviction in 1978

Mr. Heads began to leave, gazed into a fog-laden field across the street,
abruptly stopped, turned around and stormed the house. In the next five minutes,
he and his brother-in-law, with whom he had been on good terms, exchanged at
least 25 shots, one fatal to Mr. Lejay.

When the police arrived they found Mr. Heads walking dazed in the house, holding
a rifle in one hand and a pistol in the other, both weapons pointed toward the
floor.

A Louisiana state trial jury convicted Mr. Heads of first-degree murder in May
1978, rejecting his plea of insanity and accepting the prosecution's
characterization of the shooting as merely domestic violence. He was sentenced
to imprisonment for life, but won a new trial when the United States Supreme
Court ruled that the trial judge had made an error in instructing the jury.

''The insanity defense never got off the ground because no one had heard of
post-traumatic stress until February 1980,'' said his attorney, Welborn Jack Jr.
''I always figured there was a Vietnam connection, but had no way of determining
how that was a mental disorder.''

After reading in 1980 that the American Psychiatric Association had determined
the existence of such a disorder and the likelihood that Vietnam veterans
involved in combat missions might experience it, Mr. Jack began pursuing it as a
possible new defense.

Shreveport Veterans Questioned

He searched Shreveport for war veterans, seeking to find exactly what it was
like in Vietnam. He found that most of the people he interviewed were telling,
for the first time, the details of their experiences in Vietnam and its bitter
aftermath in their own lives: nightmares, alienation, loss of sex drive and, for
many, the feeling that they might explode someday, as Mr. Heads did.

The more he heard, the more Mr. Jack was convinced he was on the right track.
At the second trial last fall, before a trial judge, Gayle Hamilton, 56, a
combat veteran of World War II, Mr. Jack called five of the members of Mr.
Heads's platoon, including its leader. They came in from all parts of the
country. They gave two days of testimony, recollecting publicly for the first
time the agony they had experienced in the war and since the war.

The members of the jury, including a Vietnam veteran, were persuaded that Mr.
Heads was not guilty by reason of insanity and suffered from post-traumatic
stress.

Under Louisiana law, such a finding requires that Mr. Heads be institutionalized
for ''care, custody, and treatment.'' In the trial, psychiatrists for the
defense recommended that, if he was found not guilty by reason of insanity, Mr.
Heads be given treatment at a Veterans Administration facility and released.

However, the V.A. has maintained in correspondence with the trial judge here,
''We have neither the legal authority or capability to incarcerate individuals
or to insure custody.'' The agency can accept individuals for treatment, wrote
John P. Murphy, general counsel of the Veterans Administration, ''only when
there is no obligation placed on the V.A. to exercise custodial restraint, or
assure the return of the veteran to custody upon completion of treatment.''

Meanwhile, local veterans who were questioned by Mr. Jack as he prepared his
case found that talking about their war experiences had stirred them into
actions on behalf of Mr. Heads that subsequently grew into the other projects
now being planned.

A committee of citizens, most of them veterans of World War II and the Vietnam
War, have announced plans to construct a permanent memorial for the military
veterans of the Vietnam era. They are also planning to establish a counseling
center that many Vietnam veterans here say is badly needed by those experiencing
postwar emotional adjustment difficulties. The closest center is now in Little
Rock, Ark.

A public seminar has been scheduled for early spring to let Vietnam veterans and
health-care professionals explain more to the public about emotional health
difficulties experienced by some Vietnam veterans. Those range from the agony of
rejection by American society to post-traumatic stress.

''I see this effort as twofold,'' said Roy Cascio, a World War II Army veteran
and the commander of the Lowe-McFarland Post No. 14 of the American Legion.
''It has let vets know that they are not forgotten after all and salve the
conscience of those who did treat the veterans like they did.''

But Mr. Heads is still in the Caddo Parish Correctional Center, and his growing
band of supporters say the V.A. is simply throwing up a stumbling block before a
process of reconciliation and help for veterans that is inevitable.

''It's pathetic that he can't get treatment,'' said Mr. Cascio, ''and ridiculous
to keep him incarcerated. They might as well have sentenced him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Charles Gean Heads Photo of Roy Cascio

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ON OFF BROADWAY IT'S THE SEASON OF CHARACTER ACTORS

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1853 words


THE art of acting is, or should be, immutable, whether one is playing
Shakespeare or Sam Shepard: the use of one's self as an instrument is an act of
theatrical transformation. Something magical must happen even before the actor
walks on stage, and perhaps it is as simple as Pablo Casals's instruction,
quoted in Robert Lewis's book ''Advice to the Players'': ''Now that we've
learned the notes, please forget them.'' Otherwise, technique will vanquish
virtuosity.

Virtuosity, in several guises, is in evidence this weekend on a variety of Off
Broadway stages. In a few instances, actors are playing a regiment of characters
- Bob Gunton sets the records with 20 in Amlin Gray's ''How I Got That Story.''
In others, actors are playing one fully developed character with a
perceptiveness that can sometimes outweigh the contribution of the author.

In common, the performers under consideration are men (although there are also a
number of excellent performances by women). Most of them are not leading men but
character actors with a gift for playing comedy. Though a few are venturing into
movie careers, they are still short of stardom. They are, first of all,
dedicated stage performers, who draw nourishment and achieve definition playing
before a live audience.

With the exception of such plays as ''Crimes of the Heart,'' ''The Dresser'' and
''Othello,'' this season on Broadway has not been dramatically rewarding for
actors or for theatergoers.

Now, with costs rising and box-office grosses sinking, producers are even less
likely to take chances. As a result actors are increasingly looking to Off
Broadway for venturesome opportunity, especially in the area of creating roles
in new plays. Experienced professionals are joining promising newcomers on Off
Broadway stages.

Looking at the schedule of coming openings, the theatergoer can anticipate
seeing Kenneth McMillan and Rose Gregorio in ''Weekends Like Other People,''
March 4-28, at the Phoenix Theater, William Hurt and Lindsay Crouse in ''Richard
II,'' opening March 10, and Peter Boyle in ''Snow Orchid,'' opening next
Wednesday, both productions of the Circle Repertory Company. And Al Pacino
returned last night to Circle in the Square downtown, 159 Bleecker Street
(254-6330), in ''American Buffalo,'' a performance that could stand as a model
to all hopeful character actors.

Of all the more recent performances on the New York stage, the most daring and
bizarre is given by Bob Gunton. He first entered our awareness as Juan D. Peron
in ''Evita.'' With his slickened hair and manner, he seemed an ideal Peron. It
was, as we came to realize, very much an invented performance. One guesses that
Mr. Gunton is about as much like Peron as he is like his sinister Madame Ing in
''How I Got That Story'' at the Westside Arts Theater, 407 West 43d Street
(541-8394).

In this subversive comedy about America's entanglement in Southeast Asia, Mr.
Gunton is cast as an inclusive character called The Historical Event. He is
Vietnam, or Amboland, as Mr. Gray has dubbed his limbo of deceit. Barely
changing his costume, the actor leaps between disguises. He is a callow editor,
a gung-ho paratrooper, and an entire extended family of natives.

Setting up a stand like a sidewalk salesman, he boosts the wonders of a
defoliant. To prove its harmlessness, he takes a sample - a glutinous liquid
that looks as if it could kill at the touch - and uses it to wash his face, as a
sauce for his rice and, finally, as a thirst quencher drunk straight from the
bottle. What makes this sales pitch so hilarious is that the actor never alters
his supercilious expression; he could die smiling.

In an instant, the actor is vamping as a prostitute - Peter Sellers in drag - or
turning into Madame Ing, a Machiavellian amalgam of all those dragon and spider
ladies of our cinematic youth. Each of his roles retains a tinge of Gunton, the
actor as commentator. Watching his performance and remembering his singing in
''Evita,'' one realizes that he would have been a logical choice to play all the
roles in the revival of ''Little Me.''

More than half of ''How I Got That Story'' is Mr. Gunton, but one should not
overlook his co-star, Don Scardino, who plays one role with becoming modesty. He
is The Reporter, and the play is about how he got the story and was consumed by
it. The role is single edged, all innocence, which Mr. Scardino manages to
project without resorting to whimsy.

Chameleons in 'Dining Room'

A.R. Gurney Jr.'s ''The Dining Room,'' at Playwright's Horizon, 416 West 42d
Street (279-4200), calls for a company of chameleons, actors who can
quick-change ages and temperaments in order to play a crosssection of WASP
parents and children. The entire cast is appealing - including Pippa Pearthree,
Ann McDonough, Lois de Banzie and W.H. Macy - and it is not intended as a slight
to the rest of the company to focus on Remak Ramsay and John Shea.

In plays by Tom Stoppard and more recently in Terence Rattigan's ''The Winslow
Boy,'' Mr. Ramsay has offered impeccable portraits of uppercrust Englishmen. He
is an American actor who acts as if he had just been transferred to the British
Foreign Office. As we see in ''The Dining Room,'' underneath that ramrod
exterior there is a small inquisitive boy. In Mr. Gurney's play, the actor
switches with comic dexterity from a stuffy American father to a nosy
adolescent, and, as a fillip, also plays an autocratic grandfather.

Mr. Shea has achieved his considerable reputation by playing boyish, often
headstrong young men in works as diverse as ''Yentl,'' ''The Sorrows of
Stephen'' and as Jack Lemmon's son in the current Costa-Gavras film,
''Missing.'' ''The Dining Room'' unveils another edge to his talent. In it, he
plays youngsters and also a narrowminded father, who refuses to acknowledge his
grown daughter's desperation; he prefers not to become involved. Mr. Shea is an
exception to our initial premise; he is a character actor who is also a leading
man.

O'Connor in 'Chucky's Hunch'

Kevin O'Connor must be one of the most prolific and peripatetic actors on the
stage. Scarcely a week goes by without his acting in a new role or directing a
play. More than anyone else, he is identified with playwrights who emerged Off
Off Broadway, creating roles in plays by Sam Shepard, Lanford Wilson, Leonard
Melfi and others. At the same time, he has been honored for acting in David
Storey plays and would also be a natural in plays by O'Neill. Until such time,
he has ''Chucky's Hunch,'' the first in a minirepertory season of plays with Mr.
O'Connor at the Harold Clurman Theater, 412 West 42d Street (594-2370).

Chucky, as written by Rochelle Owens, is a relic of the 1950's, an Abstract
Expressionist painter and self-styled failure as artist, son and husband. The
play is his confessional about a rambling reckless life, described in a packet
of letters to his second exwife. The play is filled with fragments of
recrimination and accusation; the actor deepens it in performance.

Like Mr. O'Connor, Beeson Carroll is a graduate of Off Off Broadway, best known
for his swaggering portraits of western heroes, such as Blue Morphan, a peer of
the James boys, in Sam Shepard's ''The Unseen Hand'' at the Provincetown
Playhouse, 133 Macdougal Street (777-2571). Fittingly, Mr. Carroll recreates his
role in the revival of that Shepard fantasy and undergoes a startling act of
rejuvenation. He begins this romp as a grizzled Gabby Hayes, but then - in a
flash - stands as tall as Clint Eastwood. It is a transformation of old to young
in a class with that performed by John Wood in ''Amadeus.''

Fuller in 'A Soldier's Play'

Charles Fuller's ''A Soldier's Play,'' about a killing in a World War II black
regiment, features a close-order drill of ensemble performances. At the center
is Adolph Caesar, who plays a strongwilled top sergeant, with spit, polish and
professionalism - and a voice that resounds with command. Mr. Caesar is an
authoritative actor. The play is at Theater Four, 424 West 55th Street
(246-8545).

Instead of waiting for a role to suit his special talents, Harvey Fierstein
writes plays for himself. In ''Torch Song Trilogy,'' he plays a gallant free
spirit in search of lasting love, lacquering his hand-crafted dialogue with his
Tallulah voice and manner. At the Actors Playhouse, 100 Seventh Avenue South
(691-6226).

Charles Ludlam, author, director and star, is the kingpin of his Ridiculous
Theatrical Company of clowns. In his ''Secret Lives of the Sexists,'' a farcical
war on sexism, he plays a macho masseur shoved onto a window landing by an irate
husband who thinks he is being cuckolded. Teetering high above traffic, Mr.
Ludlam frantically waves for help, then pratfalls and finally loses his toupee
to a passing pigeon - all with the grace of a silent movie comedian. At 1
Sheridan Square (691-2271).

Josef Sommer in 'Lydie Breeze'

Joseph Sommer is a fine actor who is often cast as a professional man -doctors,
lawyers and diplomats (as in E.L. Doctorow's ''Drinks Before Dinner''). In the
movie ''Absence of Malice,'' he is Sally Field's opportunistic editor. He can
now be seen on stage in John Guare's ''Lydie Breeze,'' as a man forced to face
the sins of his past. Sharing the stage and acting honors in ''Lydie Breeze'' is
Robert Joy, who first attracted attention in an Off Broadway revival of ''The
Diary of Anne Frank.'' Last year, he gave several striking movie performances
-as a young drug dealer in ''Atlantic City'' and as Harry K. Thaw in
''Ragtime.'' Appearing in the Guare play as well is Ben Cross of the British
film ''Chariots of Fire.'' ''Lydie Breeze'' is at the American Place Theater,
111 West 46th Street (869-9350).

Also making their mark Off Broadway are the British actor Daniel Gerroll as the
sadistic Mick in ''The Caretaker'' at Roundabout-Stage One, 333 West 23d Street
(242-7800); Gavin Reed as a suicidal musician in ''The Potsdam Quartet'' at the
Lion Theater, 422 West 42d Street (279-4200), and Mark Blum and Ben Masters as
romantically inclined cyclists in ''Key Exchange'' at the Orpheum Theater, 126
Second Avenue (260-8480).

Acting Off Broadway can be evanescent: blink, and a play has closed, or an actor
has marched on to another challenge. Two of the strongest performances in recent
plays were David Rounds's incarnation of an insect in a stage version of Kafka's
''Metamorphosis,'' and Dann Florek's ebullient Vietnam veteran in ''Strange
Snow.'' Both closed after a limited engagement.  Theatergoers as well actors
should guard against missed opportunity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Al Pacino photos of Remak Ramsay, John Shea,
Kevin O'Connor, Beeson Carroll photos of Adolph Caesar, Bob Gunton, Don Scardino

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 27, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

G.O.P. AND CONSERVATIVE LEADERS SUSPEND ENDORSEMENT OF CAPUTO

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 680 words


Republican and Conservative Party leaders yesterday ''suspended'' their
endorsement of Bruce Caputo as a candidate for the United States Senate because
statements he had made saying he had served in the armed forces were not true.

The leaders said privately after the meeting that the move was designed to put
pressure on the Westchester County Republican to step out of the race
voluntarily.

Serphin R. Maltese, the Conservative Party executive director, said that it was
also designed to encourage other candidates to emerge.  But George L. Clark Jr.,
the Republican state chairman, noted, ''I can't stop him from being a candidate
for our nomination.''

Leaders Explain Decision

Mr. Clark, Mr. Maltese and J. Daniel Mahoney, the Conservative state chairman,
met over breakfast with Mr. Caputo at the Crawdaddy Restaurant in the Roosevelt
Hotel.

''Because of the objections of county chairmen and because the question of his
background hasn't been adequately explained, I suspended my personal support,''
Mr. Clark said.

'' We indicated we were suspending our support because of the situation,'' Mr.
Maltese said.  However, Mr, Caputo said in a statement: ''The race is ahead of
us. We will continue fighting to earn the nomination of both parties.'' Mr.
Caputo acknowledged that his support among Republican county leaders had dropped
from an overwhelming majority of the 62 leaders to fewer than 20. He told the
state leaders, according to Mr. Clark, that he would devote the next few weeks
to meetings with county chairmen in an attempt to regain their support.

No other Republican or Conservative candidate has emerged for what most
politicians believe will be a difficult campaign against the Democratic
incumbent, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.

The lack of competition had virtually assured Mr. Caputo of the Republican and
Conservative nominations until it was disclosed last week that in at least three
instances he had said that he was an Army lieutenant or a draftee during the
Vietnam War when he was actually a civilian employee in the Department of
Defense and thus deferred from military service.

Mr. Clark said that Mr. Caputo had attempted to explain the misstatements at
yesterday's meeting.  Had Mr. Clark accepted the explanation?  ''Not enough to
support him,'' Mr. Clark said.  ''No question that he's been hurt,'' Mr. Maltese
said. ''Whether or not it's irreparable depends on developments. He has to
reconvince the political leaders. It's a start-from-scratch situation.''

To qualify for the Republican primary in September, Mr. Caputo would have to win
the support of at least 25 percent of the Republican State Committee at a
meeting in mid-June or obtain the signatures of 10,000 Republicans on
designating petitions.

Potential Replacements Call

Conservative Party leaders could deny him their nomination by merely refusing to
allow Mr. Caputo to enter their primary.  Mr. Clark said several potential
replacements for Mr. Caputo or their supporters had contacted him during the
week that Mr. Caputo has been under fire. Mr. Clark declined to disclose any of
these prospects, adding, ''I don't intend to go shopping around.''

He had sounded out a Republican gubernatorial prospect, Lewis E.  Lehrman, a
wealthy businessman who is supported by the Conservative Party leaders for the
nomination for Governor, but Mr. Lehrman rejected the offer.

Mr. Clark was hoping to avoid a gubernatorial primary between Mr.  Lehrman and
State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, who is supported by most Republican leaders
for the governorship nomination.

Mr. Clark said he did not intend to approach two other Republican gubernatorial
prospects, James L. Emery, the Assembly minority leader, and Richard M.
Rosenbaum, the party's national committeeman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bruce M. Caputo (page 21)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 27, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PEACE CORPS, REVIVED, SEEKS NEW CHALLENGES

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26


Some months after proposing the Peace Corps in spring 1961, President Kennedy
remarked, ''I gave Sarge a lemon and he made lemonade.''

The lemon was the difficult task of translating an idea into reality. The
resulting lemonade was Sargent Shriver's carefully constructed framework for a
workable Peace Corps, one of the true innovations of the Kennedy Administration.

Now, after more than a decade of low visibility, the Peace Corps has regained an
independent status it had lost when President Nixon, seeking to downgrade
programs inherited from his Democratic predecessors, folded it into an umbrella
agency called Action. Last December Congress voted to separate the corps from
Action, effective last Monday.

More to the point, Loret Miller Ruppe, a moderate Republican chosen by President
Reagan to be director of the corps, declared that the agency was alive and well
and looking for new challenges and ways to solve them.

Idealism of Early Days

Independence alone does not insure the recapturing of that very special aura in
which the Peace Corps basked in its earlier years, a time when young people,
full of idealism and eager to serve, volunteered by the tens of thousands to be
of service to the poor of developing nations.

Much of that idealism was shattered by American involvement in the Vietnam War.
Being relegated to obscurity as part of Action, without even stationery bearing
the words Peace Corps, was another blow to the corps.

The Peace Corps also came under attack from political critics who felt that the
presence of volunteers in countries ideologically opposed to the United States
was counterproductive. And recent cuts in funds by the Reagan Administration
trimmed the ranks of volunteers to a low of about 5,000, from a high of more
than 15,000 in 1966.

Despite its newly acquired independence, the Peace Corps faces other problems.
Critics charge that Mrs. Ruppe has been under heavy pressure from some within
the Reagan Administration not only to politicize her top staff in Washington but
also to choose only Republican loyalists as corps directors overseas.

New Directors Appointed

Until recently there were a number of vacancies in these country director posts.
But a spokesman for the corps says that all but two of the country directorates
have now been filled by ''very qualified peoole, many of whom are apolitical.''

Mrs. Ruppe is hoping for greater visibility because she says that Mr. Reagan is
totally committed to the corps.  President Reagan himself underscored his
support of the Peace Corps on Wednesday when he said in a speech to the
Organization of American States that he would seek the active participation of
the business community in improving the economic conditions in the Caribbean
nations, in concert with the Peace Corps.

''The Peace Corps already has 861 volunteers in Caribbean Basin countries,'' the
President said, ''and we'll give special emphasis to recruiting volunteers with
skills in developing local enterprise.''

Shriver Hails Efforts

Mr. Shriver, now a Washington lawyer, is the first to applaud Mrs.  Ruppe's
efforts to rejuvenate the Peace Corps that he headed in its first six formative
years. ''She's the kind of Republican we tried to recruit into management when
we first started out,'' Mr. Shriver commented.

But Mr. Shriver is not convinced that even Mrs. Ruppe can restore the zeal that
characterized the Peace Corps in its earlier years.  Noting that Mr. Reagan had
repeatedly criticized big government and the bureaucracy, he said, ''It's a
tragedy that our own Government has been made the enemy.''

There was certainly no government-as-enemy atmosphere at the time the first
Peace Corps volunteer, Tom Livingston of Woodale, Ill., reported for duty as an
English teacher in a school in Dodowa, Ghana, on Sept. 12, 1961.

Since those early beginnings, more than 80,000 Americans have served tours of
duty in the Peace Corps.

Advocate of Independence

Much of the credit for the Peace Corps' newly regained independence from Action
goes to one of those early volunteers, Tom Scanlon, now an independent
Washington consultant on international development. In the last 10 years or so,
he has as made repeated apperances before Congressional committees, urging that
the Peace Corps be removed from Action so that it could once again be the
effective agency he had once known.

As a young volunteer, just shortly out of Notre Dame, Mr. Scanlon became
something of a model for Peace Corpsmen of those early years when Kennedy,
speaking to a group of Government interns in the summer of 1962, remarked:

''Recently, I heard a story of a young Peace Corpsman named Tom Scanlon who is
working in Chile. He works in a village about 40 miles from an Indian village
which prides itself on being Communist. The village is up a long, winding road
which Scanlon has gone on many occasions to see the chief. Each time, the chief
avoided seeing him.''

The President then continued telling this story: Finally, the chief agreed to
see the young Peace Corpsman, who asked what he would have to do to help. The
chief replied that the snows would come in a few weeks and the volunteer would
have to park his jeep 20 miles away and walk.

''The Communists are willing to do that,'' the chief told the young volunteer.
''Are you?'' A few days later, a friend saw Mr. Scanlon and asked what he was
doing.  ''I'm waiting for the snow,'' the Peace Corpsman replied.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Loret Miller Ruppe photo of Peace Corps pin

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 27, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
Maryland Governor Draws the Line on Hospitality

BYLINE: By Albin Krebs and Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 202 words


A follow-up: Gov. Harry Hughes of Maryland has refused to allow a member of the
state's House of Delegates, David Shapiro, to bring a prison inmate as one of
his guests at a party in the Governor's Mansion.

The Governor had told members of the Legislature that they could each invite six
constituents to one of his weekly parties, and Mr.  Shapiro chose his guests
based on essays they wrote on why they would like to meet the Governor.

Mr. Hughes apparently has no objection to five of Mr. Shapiro's guests, who
include a 6-year-old girl, a crippled Vietnam veteran and Robert Wechsler, who
is serving a 12-year term for burglary at Stockbridge Prison Camp.

Mr. Hughes put his foot down Thursday and said, ''We're simply not going to have
this man in attendance.'' He noted that Mr. Wechsler had a record dating from
1948.

Well, said Mr. Shapiro, if Mr. Wechsler could not go to the party, he would not,
either. But he said he was urging his other essaywinning guests to attend.
Albin Krebs Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 27, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAID TO EASE SOUTH AFRICA CURB

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 2; Page 30, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 494 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26


The Reagan Administration, apparently overcoming some second thoughts, has
relaxed American export restrictions to allow shipments of various items to
South Africa without subjecting them to a strict licensing procedure.

The decision, not formally announced but described today by several sources on
Capitol Hill who have been briefed by officials of the State and Commerce
Departments, allows South African police and military organizations to obtain
such items as small computers and word processors that they had been denied.

Several Congressmen were swift to denounce the new policy. Howard Wolpe, a
Michigan Democrat who heads a House subcommittee on African affairs, called it
''a tragic mistake'' and further evidence of a ''tilt'' toward South Africa.

''There are huge new loopholes,'' Mr. Wolpe declared, including one that allows
other countries to ship goods with American-made components to South Africa,
provided that the United States content does not exceed 20 percent. Until now
all United States goods were subject to the restrictions.

Directed at Apartheid

One of the purposes of the original restrictions was to prevent the United
States from helping South Africa to carry out its policies of racial separation.
Mr. Wolpe said the relaxation would be regarded across Africa and elsewhere as
more evidence of ''a major accommodation'' with the forces of suppression.

Many items are still subject to the licensing process, including aircraft, large
computers and items covered by the United Nations arms embargo.

But under the new regulations, American companies may freely ship nonmilitary
food, clothing and personal hygiene items; general nonstrategic industrial
chemicals; calculators, personal computers, copying machines and word
processors, and any item that may be sent to Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea and
Cambodia.

The final category embraces such things as humanitarian parcels of food worth no
more than $200.  The Secretary of Commerce, Mal@colm Baldrige, said after a news
conference Thursday on trade relations with Japan that the final decision had
not been made about the change in the export regulations for South Africa. He
said his department and the State Department were still discussing the issue.

But Congressional aides who were briefed during the week said House Speaker
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. was notified of the modifications today and that they had
also been forwarded to the Federal Register.

Despite the briefings, it appeared that Congress had been caught off guard.
Under the Export Control Act of 1979 the restrictions list expires at the end of
every calendar year, but it had been extended for 60 days and there was some
expectation that another 30-day extension, to the end of March, was likely.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BUSH PRIZES HIS BEHIND-THE-SCENES INFLUENCE

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2834 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 27


After the Reagan Administration decided last month to award tax exemptions to
schools that practice racial discrimination, a group of White House officials
who felt the decision had been a mistake reached out for help to a key official:
Vice President Bush.

Mr. Bush then worked closely with James A. Baker 3d and Michael K.  Deaver, the
White House chief of staff and deputy chief of staff, to have President Reagan
meet with black officials at the White House.  The advice of Mr. Bush, in turn,
helped lead to Mr. Reagan's decision to seek legislation to reverse his original
position.

For more than 13 months, Mr. Bush has served the President in public as
cheerleader, occasional director of study groups and liaison agent with
organized labor and other disaffected groups. But civil rights, according to
knowledgeable officials, is only one of many areas in which Mr. Bush has played
a much more influential role behind the scenes as confidant to Mr. Reagan.

'Voodoo' Line Keeps Returning

Mr. Bush's staff winces when only his gaffes seem to become news.  For example,
he denied recently that he had ever used the term ''voodoo economics'' to
describe Mr. Reagan's policies. After a television network found a videotape of
Mr. Bush using the term in 1980, the Vice President said the denial had been
voiced in jest.

In private, Mr. Bush has experienced what some people close to him would
describe as frustrations. Two aides resigned recently, in part because they had
too little to do. The Vice President is known to have been disappointed at his
failure, as a high-level expert on regulations, to effect an early
Administration position revising the Clean Air Act while retaining the support
of pro-environmental Republicans in Congress.

Yet by all accounts, Mr. Bush is happy in his job. He feels he has succeeded at
the one task he sought most: to serve as an influential adviser without posing a
political threat to Mr. Reagan.

''The President looks at George Bush as somewhat different from his other
advisers or friends,'' said Mr. Deaver. ''Sometimes he worries that one or the
other of us may have an ax to grind or show some prejudice. He prizes George for
his loyalty, sincerity and objectivity.''

Influence Can't Be Paraded

Indeed, for Mr. Bush the confidential nature of his role has contributed to the
influence he enjoys.  ''It's a funny role, because you can't make it into
something it's not,'' he said in a recent interview. ''You shouldn't worry about
whether other people understand. I don't spend any time worrying about it. If
somebody comes to me and says, 'Well, prove you've got influence, give me some
examples of where you've got influence,' I'm very sorry - I can't do it.

''If the price of that is obscurity, or anonymity or allegations that you don't
have any clout, fine,'' he went on. ''But I want enough confidence from the
President so I can go in and say, 'I feel very strongly about this, Mr.
President,' or 'I agree on this, sir,' or 'I disagree on that.' And he'd know he
could discuss it with me and know for a fact certain that I wouldn't discuss it
with his staff, my staff, the press, my family or anyone else.''

Mr. Bush is so careful in this regard that he almost never speaks up in Cabinet
meetings, lest his views be disclosed to the news media. He reserves advice for
his weekly lunches with Mr. Reagan.  White House aides have speculated that it
is there, for instance, that he has advised the President about heeding
Republican protests in Congress on the Federal deficit.

Conservatives Remain Suspicious

Aides to Mr. Bush, who campaigned hard against Mr. Reagan in 1980, say further
that he remains especially sensitive to conservative fears that he may have too
much influence over Administration policy. As a Reagan aide acknowledges, ''The
right wing needs a whipping boy, and Bush is convenient.''

Some of Mr. Bush's problems with the conservatives are based on his conscious
effort to be an Administration ambassador to hostile political forces. For
example, he is reported to have argued strongly that the Administration should
pay attention to its difficulty with labor leaders so as to gain potential
support for its foreign policy.

Mr. Bush got involved in the controversy over tax exemptions for racially
discriminatory schools, officials said, because of his belief that revitalizing
the Republican Party must include efforts to enlist support from blacks.

The White House ''salvage operation'' on the tax-exemption issue culminated
Thursday when the Administration asked the Supreme Court to decide whether
racially discriminatory private schools are entitled to tax exemptions.

Public and Private Efforts

Last year Mr. Bush spoke at the commencements of four black colleges and
conferred with black leaders and entertainers. A few months ago, without
publicity, he spent part of a weekend afternoon at the home of a young diplomat
from the Cameroon who had had a cross burned on the lawn of his house in Silver
Spring, Md., a Washington suburb.

Yet on the Voting Rights Act, according to White House officials, Mr. Bush and
others were overruled by Mr. Reagan when they made the argument for a simple
Presidential statement endorsing the act's extension.

Instead, Mr. Reagan is said to have bowed to the wishes of his Attorney General,
William French Smith, in endorsing weakening changes in the House bill.

A more successful instance of Mr. Bush's influence came in November, when the
President's inner circle was in turmoil over whether to dismiss David A.
Stockman as budget director.

At a meeting called to discuss the matter, White House officials said, Mr. Bush
showed up at the Oval Office with a well-marked copy of a damaging Atlantic
Monthly article about Mr. Stockman. He also brought clarifying advice.

First, reviewing passage after passage in the article, Mr. Bush demonstrated
that, more than the others, he had read and analyzed what Mr. Stockman had
actually said, the officials said.

Then, acknowledging the existence of grounds for dismissing Mr.  Stockman, he
urged Mr. Reagan to ''act fairly'' and grant a reprieve if the President felt he
could personally trust the budget director to carry out the Administration
program. After talking with Mr.  Stockman, Mr. Reagan took Mr. Bush's advice, in
effect overruling other aides who wanted Mr. Stockman dismissed.

Planned Auto Restrictions

In foreign policy, when the Administration was debating its response to imports
of Japanese automobiles, Mr. Bush suggested approaching the Japanese through
Ambassador Mike Mansfield to seek voluntary restrictions on that nation's
exports. His approach was adopted.

It was Mr. Bush who studied the nation's options on Poland and urged Mr. Reagan
to adopt a policy of sanctions against both Poland and the Soviet Union,
followed by tougher action if the Polish crackdown was not eased. The Vice
President undertook this task as chairman of the Special Situation Group, which
handles ''crisis management'' for the President.

The Vice President was also reportedly one of the stronger proponents in the
Administration of selling Awacs airplanes and other air warfare equipment to
Saudi Arabia. Early last fall, he told the President of his fears that unless
Mr. Reagan intervened the sale would be defeated in the Senate. Mr. Bush then
supplemented Mr.  Reagan's efforts with his own energetic lobbying.

Again, as chairman of Mr. Reagan's study group on regulatory relief, Mr. Bush is
reported to have pushed for a consensus or a decision on numerous matters. At
one meeting, according to a participant, he directed Labor Secretary Raymond J.
Donovan to ''do some more homework'' before the panel took action on a job
safety regulation Mr. Donovan was advocating.

Intervened for Latin Refugees

A few weeks ago, in another instance of Mr. Bush's willingness to intervene in
Cabinet matters, he telephoned Richard S. Schweiker, the Secretary of Health and
Human Services, to seek a delay in a cutoff of welfare and health benefits for
Haitian and Cuban refugees. The delay was granted; Mr. Bush announced it in
Miami on a visit there as chairman of a study group on crime in South Florida.

More than anything else, however, Mr. Bush endeared himself to the White House
last March 30 in the moments after Mr. Reagan was shot in the chest and in the
weeks when the President was recovering.

Returning from a political trip in Texas, Mr. Bush refused a suggestion from
White House aides that he land at the White House South Lawn in his helicopter.
He also declined to sit in the President's chair while presiding over Cabinet
meetings in Mr.  Reagan's absence.

''He had a perfect touch,'' said a Reagan loyalist. ''In the moments after the
shooting, you know that the situation was not exactly harmonious among some of
the rest of the people in the Administration. But Bush came through like a
star.''

On Capitol Hill, where Mr. Bush has the official task of presiding over the
Senate, the Vice President is well-liked. He is also used extensively as a
sounding board and go-between for both Republicans and Democrats. But several
knowledgeable aides and legislators said that his role has been secondary in the
lobbying for key legislation. In the Senate he defers carefully to Howard H.
Baker Jr., the majority leader.

More at Ease With House Members

Mr. Bush, who lost in a race for the Senate in 1970, is said to feel more
comfortable among his former House colleagues than in the Senate. He tries to
play paddle ball once a week in the House gym, and he is besieged there by
members with messages to pass on to the White House or favors to ask. He
responds, listening and taking notes.

''Sometimes I know he's gone to the President when he's had concerns,'' said
Representative G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery, a Texas Democrat who is one of Mr.
Bush's paddle ball partners. ''But I've never heard him say anything
uncomplimentary about the President.''

Mr. Bush has had problems bringing his own staff into the thick of things.
Although he gets a copy of every piece of paper Mr. Reagan receives, his staff
does not attend every White House meeting on relations with Congress.

Nor was there a representative of the Vice President present earlier this month
when 16 aides to the President huddled at Camp David, Md., for a strategy
session on long-term Administration public relations.

Two Aides Sought More to Do

As a result, two of the Vice President's top aides have resigned, because,
according to one aide, ''they didn't have enough to do.'' The aides who left,
Richard N. Bond, former deputy chief of staff, and Robert V. Thompson, chief
Congressional liaison, were also said by others to have been involved in
disagreements with Jennifer Fitzgerald, who handles the Vice Presidential
scheduling.

The Vice President's staff acknowledges that Mr. Bush has been embarrassed over
some gaffes. Among them was his enthusiastic toast last June at the inauguration
of President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines, a nation Mr. Marcos has
ruled under martial law for more than a decade. In that toast, he spoke of the
''love'' Americans have for ''your adherence to democratic principles and to the
democratic processes.''

But the biggest flap of his time in office, according to leading aides, occurred
when the Vice President handled preparations for the economic summit conference
in Ottawa last July.

Mr. Bush was widely praised at the White House for assembling briefing materials
for Mr. Reagan's participation in the summit. But some Presidential aides were
incensed that the State Department negotiated a working draft of the summit
communique without their being told about it by Mr. Bush.

Others were reportedly upset that the Vice President had not been careful in
meshing his own preparations with the White House system of paper flow before
the summit. A Bush aide called the Ottawa preparations ''an innocent bust,'' and
maintained that they led to better coordination between the Presidential and
Vice-Presidential staffs.

Broad Experience Respected

Mr. Bush is said to command Mr. Reagan's respect on foreign policy matters
because of his past experience as Director of Central Intelligence and as
American delegate to the United Nations and Ambassador to China. He has taken
five overseas trips as Vice President, three of them to Latin America.

As chairman of the Special Situation Group, Mr. Bush has presided over meetings
on three crises in addition to the one on Poland. One of these was said by aides
to have covered a situation that has not yet become public.

The Vice President's aides, meanwhile, say that they are reconciled to two
things: First, that he will never be the favorite of the Republican right wing,
and, second, that the public will not forget that in 1980 he denounced Mr.
Reagan's prescriptions as ''voodoo economics.''

''It comes up every time, yet again,'' Mr. Bush said wearily the other day.
''It'll never go away.'' But whatever misgivings he may once have had about the
Reagan economic program, Mr. Bush is one of its most enthusiastic defenders now.

He lobbied hard in Congress last summer for the full Reagan tax cut, the very
thing he had criticized in the 1980 campaign as potentially inflationary. More
recently, Mr. Bush has publicly stated his faith in the tax cut, despite moves
by some Republicans to rescind or defer portions of it.

Sought Support of Labor

After a recent meeting with A.F.L.-C.I.O. executives in Miami, Mr.  Bush
recounted with relish how he had opened up the session by telling the leaders
they were wrong to criticize the President.

''I said, 'Let's get the gripes out of the way first,' '' he recalled in an
interview. ''Then I went into areas where they should support us - Clean Air
Act, certain objectives on foreign policy. I said, 'I haven't heard you guys on
this whole allegation that El Salvador is Vietnam.' I said, 'For God's sake,
look at Vietnam today! You want that in Salvador? Come on, let's go, we need
your help!' ''

''I loved it,'' said Mr. Bush, sounding as if he had emerged from the lion's
den. ''It was good, good stuff.'' Whether he wants it or not, Mr. Bush is also
constantly aware, his aides acknowledge, that he is being tested in this job for
a possible future run for the Presidency.

A Congressman who is a close friend of Mr. Bush and asked not to be identified
said he put the question to the the Vice President not long ago. Just what are
Mr. Bush's political intentions? The Congressman said Mr. Bush replied firmly
that he expected Mr. Reagan to run for re-election, and that he could not afford
now to make political plans.

Nevertheless, Mr. Bush has spoken in the last year at countless political
affairs, raising $3.5 million for Republican Party candidates. He has also
helped the party raise another $5.5 million through direct mail appeals.

Proud of Administration Role

He is certain to try to cash in on his tireless work for local Republicans
should he run for President in 1984 or 1988, as most aides expect him to do.

As for whether Mr. Bush is happy in his work, his friends say that he has found
genuine fulfillment. ''He sees himself as playing the greatest role he's ever
played,'' said Victor Gold, Mr. Bush's former speechwriter.

''George was very nervous about what kinds of problems he was going to have as
Vice President,'' said another friend of Mr. Bush. ''But George really does not
feel competitive, and Reagan does not insist on George doing anything he doesn't
want to do.''

But even those closest to him agree that if Mr. Bush were experiencing
frustrations, he would keep them to himself. Not even the President is said to
be sure that Mr. Bush's highly disciplined style as ''team player'' doesn't mask
disappointments nursed in private.

At a Kennedy Center event last fall, for example, Mr. Reagan endeared himself
forever to Mr. Bush and his wife, Barbara, and left Mrs. Bush close to tears,
when he drew Mrs. Bush aside and said, according to a friend, ''I want to ask
you a very serious question: Is George happy? If he isn't, I want you to tell
me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Herman Wiley, V.P. Bush signing concrete block
photo of V.P. Bush in his Capitol office

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. MARKS DECADE OF PEKING TIES BUT THE CHINESE MAINTAIN SILENCE

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 27


The United States said today that despite unresolved problems with China over
the Taiwan issue, it believed that ''shared global and regional interests'' with
Peking far outweighed any of the differences.

In a statement issued in conjunction with the tenth anniversary Sunday of the
Shanghai Communique that opened the way to formal ties, the State Department
said that President Reagan had sent a personal letter to Prime Minister Zhao
Ziyang commemorating the event, but that no similar message had yet been
received from the Chinese.

The two nations have been engaged for more than a month in intensive discussions
in Peking on trying to find a formula to overcome China's outspoken opposition
to continued American arms sales to Taiwan. China says the sales infringe on its
sovereignty.

'Extremely Sensitive' Talks

Arthur W. Hummel Jr., the American Ambassador to China, has been conducting the
talks with senior Chinese officials with a maximum of secrecy. Secretary of
State Alexander M. Haig Jr., in an interview this month, called those talks
''extremely sensitive.''

In one of many signs of deep official resentment over the Taiwan issue, the
anniversary of the Shanghai Communique is being virtually ignored in China.
(Page 12.)

Today Mr. Haig defended the relationship with China in an appearance before the
Conservative Political Action Conference, a group whose sympathies are with
Taiwan.

''Too frequently today, we neglect to take full weight of the strategic
importance of the People's Republic of China,'' he said.

Attacks Hanoi Government

In particular, he noted that the Chinese had been what he called a ''restraint''
on Vietnam. Mr. Haig drew applause for his attack on the Hanoi Government, which
he termed ''an international pariah'' for occupying Cambodia.

Well-placed Administration officials said that there had been thought of trying
to resolve the Taiwan issue so that a joint Chinese-American statement could be
issued this weekend in time for the Shanghai anniversary. But this proved
impossible, officials said.

There is hope within the Administration that if Mr. Zhao responds favorably to
Mr. Reagan's letter, the two documents might be published in lieu of a joint
statement.

The Chinese, warning that they might cut back on relations if an agreement is
not reached, have sought a commitment from the United States to put limits on
the quality and quantity of arms sold to Taiwan, as well as a pledge to phase
out the program in a set period of time. The Administration has responded,
officials said, that it cannot agree to any such limits because of previous
pledges, embodied in the Taiwan Relations Act, to provide whatever is needed for
Taiwan's legitimate defense needs.

According to officials, the United States has suggested to the Chinese that they
be patient and recognize that as Peking-Taiwan relations improve in the future
there would be diminishing need for American arms. In that respect, some experts
on China have pointed to the significance of plans for a Chinese women's
softball team being invited to go to Taiwan for an international tournament this
summer.  This would be the first such official group that has gone to Taiwan if
the trip goes ahead as now seems likely.

In the statement today, the United States did not go into the details of the
negotiations, except to say that it was making ''a good faith effort'' to
resolve the differences.

''Assuming our good faith is matched on the Chinese side, we believe we can
anticipate a substantial degree of further advance in United States-Chinese
relations over the coming decade,'' it said.

Put Situation in Positive Light

The State Department sought to put as positive a gloss on the situation as
possible, with the stress on the strategic and regional convergence of views. It
said that although there were ''disagreements'' between the two countries,
''these kinds of disagreements are normal between two friendly, nonallied
sovereign states.''

''Our shared global strategic and regional interests far outweigh any of these
other differences,'' the statement said. It cited, as examples, the two
countries' equal concern ''over the regional instability engendered by the
Soviet military occupation of Afghanistan and the Soviet-backed Vietnamese
military occupation of Kampuchea.''

''No matter what may happen on other issues, our basic strategic compatibility
is a fact of international relations,'' the statement said.

But it conceded that ''of course, the further development of our strategic
relationship - at least in the short term - may at any time be affected by other
aspects of our relations.''

Trying to Resolve Differences

As to the current negotiations, the State Department said, ''of course, there
are areas of disagreement between us and Peking.'' But it said that ''as we
enter the second decade since the Shanghai Communique, we are in the midst of a
good faith effort to resolve these differences.''

The Shanghai Communique was issued on Feb. 28, 1972, at the end of President
Richard M. Nixon's visit to China at a time when the two sides lacked diplomatic
relations. As a result of that trip, the two sides opened up quasi-diplomatic
missions.

On Dec. 15, 1978, the United States and China formally established diplomatic
relations and the United States severed official ties with Taiwan on Jan. 1,
1979. But the United States and Taiwan have maintained unofficial missions in
both capitals, and Washington has continued to supply Taiwan with arms. It
announced last month that it would allow Taiwan to continue to coproduce F-5E
fighters, but it ruled out more advanced aircraft as a concession to Peking.

The Chinese, however, have refused to see the Reagan Administration's moves as a
''concession'' and have continued to protest, on principle, any sales to Taiwan.


Shared Interests Cited

The State Department, in its comments today, said ''the historic opening to
China started by former President Nixon in 1972 has had an important and lasting
impact on the global strategic balance and a positive influence on regional
peace and stability.''

''The United States values good relations with China,'' it continued. ''The
United States and China share a number of vitally important global and regional
interests and objectives, above and beyond our mutual interest in productive
bilateral relations.''

''Tremendous progress has been registered in United States-China relations in
the decade since the Shanghai Communique,'' the State Department said. ''We are
determined to do all we can to preserve and expand these achievements. Since the
beginning of this Administration, we have taken a number of important
initiatives to advance the relationship.''

The statement did not detail those ''initiatives,'' but at the time that Mr.
Haig went to China last June, the Administration announced it was taking a
number of steps to end discrimination against China such as allowing China to
buy certain military equipment normally barred to Communist nations. But the
Chinese have so far refused to take advantage of the offer. Mr. Haig said
earlier this month that plans to discuss military sales to China had become
''hostage'' to the discussions about Taiwan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Alexander M. Haig Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

927,000 SOUGHT FOR DRAFT ROLLS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 318 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 27


More than 900,000 young men have still not registered for a possible military
draft, according to the Selective Service.

The grace period for signing up officially ends Sunday, but an agency spokesman,
Joan Lamb, said the deadline would be informally extended a few days.

Despite the large number who have not signed up, Mrs. Lamb said the Selective
Service did not expect mass prosecutions. Failure to register is a felony
punishable by up to five years in jail and a $10,000 fine.

President Carter reinstituted draft registration in July 1980, and 7,126,496
men, born from 1960 to 1964, have registered, Mrs. Lamb said. She said that 11.5
percent of those eligible, or 927,000 men, have not signed up.

Mrs. Lamb said the Selective Service believed that ''a vast majority'' of those
who had not registered would sign up once they realized that they must comply
with the law. She said the agency did not view the situation as a mass protest,
noting that even in the massive demonstrations over the Vietnam War, ''we never
had less than 98 percent registration.''

Uncertainty Over Registration

She said many men had not registered because of uncertainty touched off by
reports last year that President Reagan might abolish the program. Mr. Reagan
announced last month that he had decided to continue registration.

Mrs. Lamb said men must register at post offices either 30 days before or after
their 18th birthday. Although the grace period ends Sunday, she said, men who
sign up early next week will be considered to have complied with the law.

Mrs. Lamb said the Selective Service would begin referring cases to the Justice
Department for possible prosecution in April or early May. Attorney General
William French Smith said on Feb. 16 that the department expected to prosecute
hundreds of men.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CARIBBEANS WEIGH NEW OFFER AGAINST EXPERIENCE

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1529 words


MEXICO CITY AFTER months of delay and soul-searching, President Reagan last week
unveiled his plan to promote economic development and fight Communism in the
Caribbean basin. It was new, he said. Instead of the ''good neighbor'' policies
of the past, Washington would be ''a true friend and brother'' to the region.

But to Latin Americans in the Washington audience and south of the border,
including the many who publicly praised the program, the speech had a familiar
ring. In 1823, President Monroe warned Europeans that attempts ''to extend their
system to any portion of this hemisphere'' would be considered a hostile act. On
Wednesday, Mr. Reagan warned that ''a new kind of colonialism...has established
footholds on American soil.''

Between the Monroe Doctrine and the emerging Reagan doctrine, the touchstone of
United States policy has been its refusal to allow any outside power to
challenge its domination of the region. The people of Central America and the
Caribbean have learned over the last 150 years that Washington pays most
attention to their countries when alarmed at extra-regional intervention.
Present policy is built on the premise that the roots of the area's conflicts
lie in the Soviet Union.

In the most practical sense - putting aside humanitarian impulses - the area has
little intrinsic economic value for the United States.  It does, however, have
great strategic importance. Mr. Reagan's strong language last week, promising to
do whatever was ''prudent and necessary'' to ensure stability in the area thus
revived the specter of two dozen past United States military interventions. The
President insisted, however, that Washington would not ''follow Cuba's lead in
attempting to resolve human problems by brute force,'' but would promote
democracy and fight ''totalitarianism'' with economic aid and incentives as well
as military support.

Washington's offer ''to help our neighbors realize freedom, justice and economic
progress'' comes at a time when rebellions against dictatorship and poverty are
well under way in Guatemala as well as El Salvador. Critics of the policy argued
that Mr. Reagan's package was too little, too late, and addressed neither the
main causes nor the main symptoms of the region's crisis.

The package of aid and investment incentives is aimed at the private sector and
its success depends on investors' ability and willingness to create new exports.
But civil war in El Salvador and political uncertainty elsewhere in the region
are hardly enticements to risking capital. Not surprisingly, the governments of
the region feel they need assistance more urgently. They must cover the
balanceof-payments deficits brought on by high interest rates, large oil import
bills and low world prices for coffee and sugar. Costa Rica, for instance, with
a population of

2.3 million, has outstanding debts of $2.6 billion. The six Central American
nations estimate that they need $5 billion in emergency financial aid plus $15
billion in medium-term development assistance. Most of the island nations are
hardly in a better position, although there are differences in degree. While
Washington is hopeful that things are looking up in Jamaica, aid has done little
for Haiti, which has a per capita annual income of $260 and a male illiteracy
rate of 68 percent.

The disadvantageous terms of trade and financial crises that afflict these
countries were not addressed in the Reagan plan. The plan also skirted the
social roots of unrest. Charles A. T. Skeete, Ambassador from Barbados, said,
''We cannot accept the thesis that any one approach can solve all our problems.
Development is a little more complex than that.''

Caribbean observers also noted the political selectivity of Mr.  Reagan's
examples. He made a passing reference to El Salvador's ''unprecedented land
reform'' but did not urge the junta to carry out the reform's stalled second
phase. He omitted mention of Nicaragua's land reform and health and education
programs. Similarly, Mr. Reagan reiterated support for next month's elections in
El Salvador and criticized the postponement of elections in Nicaragua, in both
cases wielding elections as a weapon against the left. He made no call for free
elections in the region's numerous rightist dictatorships.

Such distinctions worry Mexico's President Jose Lopez Portillo, an important and
increasingly vocal leader in the area. ''The Central American and Caribbean
revolutions are, above all, the struggles of poor and oppressed people to live
better,'' he said last week. ''To say they are something else and to act as if
they were is counterproductive: You finish up achieving what you wanted to
avoid.''

To some Caribbean leaders, however, any offer of United States help is better
than the neglect with which Washington has periodically treated them.

Excluding oil from Mexico, Venezuela, and Trinidad and Tobago, the area provides
neither crucial raw materials nor a significant market for the United States. It
is strategic because it is next-door. Half of United States trade and two-thirds
of its oil imports pass through the Panama Canal or the Gulf of Mexico.

Such concerns have been the focus of American interest from the beginning. When
the Monroe Doctrine was promulgated, it was not seen as a threat by a Latin
America still struggling for independence from Spain. Only after the
Spanish-American war of 1898, when the United States freed Cuba and annexed
Puerto Rico, did Washington assume the right to dictate the destiny of the
Caribbean basin. President Theodore Roosevelt laid out the philosophy behind the
''big stick'': The United States was obliged to ''exercise an international
police power'' to keep order ''in instances of wrongdoing and impotence.''
Between 1898 and 1920, United States troops landed in the region on 20
occasions, three times in Nicaragua alone.

When Franklin D. Roosevelt took office in 1932, he disavowed armed intervention
and proclaimed the ''Good Neighbor'' policy. A series of pro-American dictators
emerged to take the place of the Marines as guarantors of stability. When their
regimes began to collapse, so did the ''Good Neighbor'' policy. In 1954,
Washington, prompted by the expropriation of United Fruit Company properties in
Guatemala, trained and armed a force to oust the left-leaning President, Jacobo
Arbenz Guzman.
Cuba Was the Turning Point

The watershed for contemporary United States attitudes toward the region was the
Cuban revolution. After the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961, a
permanent sense of frustration and irritation set in at the survival of a Soviet
beachhead so close to home.

President Kennedy sought to promote an alternative to Cuban-style revolution.
His ''Alliance for Progress'' inspired a new sense of hope across much of the
region. But after the President was killed, economic support for the program
faded and only the determination to prevent ''another Cuba'' remained strong. In
April, 1965, President Johnson sent 20,000 Marines to the Dominican Republic to
smother a rebellion by suspected leftists in the army.

Vietnam drew away United States attention and a new period of neglect toward the
region set in.  President Carter came into office espousing a human rights
policy that challenged Central American dictatorships to ease repression.  The
policy encouraged opponents of the Nicaraguan regime, and Washington eventually
acquiesced in its downfall. The Administration also took steps toward restoring
normal relations with Cuba. But events outside the hemisphere - Cuban
intervention in Africa and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan - froze
Soviet-American detente and began to harden United States attitudes toward
social revolution in its own backyard. Washington also became alarmed at the
course of the Nicaraguan revolution. In El Salvador, Washington kept up support
for the junta that ousted a right-wing dictatorship in 1979 even after reformers
resigned or were forced out and the regime's emphasis turned from land reform to
crushing leftist guerrillas.  Meanwhile, guerrillas were gaining strength in
Guatemala. And Cuba had resumed its export of revolution, sending weapons
through Nicaragua to arm the Salvadoran left for its unsuccessful ''final
offensive'' last January. That set the stage for the Reagan Administration's
tough policy.

A year later, Washington is deeply involved in sustaining the Salvadoran junta
and seems intent on further isolating - and perhaps undermining - Cuba,
Nicaragua and Grenada. Latin Americans wonder whether the policy will defeat
leftist insurgencies or wind up defeating itself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of orphans in El Savador map of Caribbbeans chart
of U.S. aid to Carib. photo of laborer in Haiti

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
The Politics of Missing Soldiers

BYLINE: By Milt Freundenheim, Barbara Slavin and William C. Rhoden

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 208 words


Time does not heal all wounds. Seven years after the last American troops left
Vietnam, Washington and Hanoi continue their war of words over the whereabouts
of American soldiers killed or captured in the fighting.

A Reagan Administration delegation returned from Hanoi last week after an
apparently unsuccessful attempt to get Vietnamese cooperation in the search for
the missing. Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard L. Armitage, the
delegation leader, said the Vietnamese promised to resume talks between
specialists on the issue ''when necessary.''

The Pentagon lists 2,500 American soldiers as still missing in Indochina.
Vietnam says it is holding no United States prisoners and accuses Washington of
using the issue as a political weapon. Vietnam suspended talks on procedural
matters such as locating burial grounds and crash sites of missing Americans
last summer after Washington accussed Hanoi of holding back bodies. Vietnam had
returned the remains of three American airmen the previous week.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Milt Freudenheim, Barbara Slavin and William C. Rhoden

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE SCENE--AND OFTEN ON THE SPOT -- IN SALVADOR

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR


El Playon is a lava field 15 miles outside the capital where death squads used
to dump so many bodies that feasting vultures became too fat to fly. Among the
many people who have witnessed this scene aghast is a member of the United
States Embassy staff here.

''It still gives me a funny feeling,'' the officer said.  ''Sometimes I sit here
defending our policy and suddenly I think about El Playon. It gets me sick in
the heart.''

Other American diplomats here have seen such savagery first-hand and then had to
square it with dispassionate claims from Washington that the ruling junta was
making progress on human rights. A number also feel that the Reagan
Administration's emphasis on Soviet, Cuban and Nicaraguan origins for the
revolutionary roiling of this society is simplistic. Some even say the ultimate
solution is negotiations with the Salvadoran left, a forbidden line at the State
Department.

There is a widespread conviction among the diplomats that their views have
little influence in Washington. ''The State Department treats the reporting from
here as if the embassy were filled with people feverish from a local virus,''
said a diplomat who, like most others here, insisted on anonymity. ''I know that
they are answering to a different set of concerns, and I know that none of them
have been to El Playon,'' the first officer said. ''But it puts us in a
difficult position.''

While there is dissent, it is expressed within the perimeters of professional
loyalty and general acceptance that United States support of the Salvadoran
junta is correct. ''This may sound corny, and it might be hard for people to
understand,'' one diplomat said.  ''The people in the Foreign Service are
special people. Most of us have lived through a number of different
administrations, and the one job is to carry out American foreign policy.
Sometimes you do it with less relish than others, but you do it.'' An example of
this continuity is the presence of three officers who held important positions
under Ambassador Robert E. White, now a vigorous opponent of American policy in
El Salvador.

His successor, Deane R. Hinton, is credited by staff members with making a
difficult assignment professionally rewarding. In particular, they mention his
unquestioned personal command of the operation and his tolerance for contrary
views.

Tough and very demanding on the job, Mr. Hinton, who was born in Montana and
calls Illinois home, settles into a Midwestern backporch informality after
hours. His voice, a near monotone in speeches, spins off into a high register in
private, like a gyroscope freed from its axis.

The same officer who described his boss's gruff office manner by saying, ''he
doesn't speak, he barks,'' said people had no reluctance to walk up to him and
say, ''Ambassador Hinton, I think you're wrong about that.'' He permits minority
reports to accompany his own in the cable traffic to Washington, and he
reportedly has resisted informal suggestions from the State Department that he
curb his staff from talking to journalists.

Those who work in the fortress-like embassy are the conduit between an
Administration that has centered a great power dispute in a tiny country utterly
unprepared to handle undertakings of great-power dimensions. The embassy's
influence with the local authorities is unquestioned, but its officers say they
are often frustrated by the regime's inefficiency and unresponsiveness.

A recent faux pas by Ambassador Hinton provided a metaphor.  Emerging from his
limousine at a San Salvador hotel for a speaking engagement, he pressed his way
through a clutch of reporters and strolled purposefully toward what appeared to
be an open door to the lobby. It wasn't. The Ambassador collided head-first with
a glass wall.

Working in the United States mission in El Salvador is like that.  It often
rewards those who think they've found a normal way out with a sobering slap in
the face.

San Salvador is one of only two places in the world officially considered both a
hardship post and a dangerous one. The other is Kabul. Staff members get a 40
percent salary increase during the time they work here, but they cannot bring
dependents. If the dependents live in the United States, the staff members are
entitled to visit them three months after arriving and every six months after
that. A normal Foreign Service tour is two or three years. In spots like this,
the contract is for 18 months.

The initial reaction to the outbreak of violence three years ago was to reduce
the size of the embassy staff, but the greatly steppedup American presence since
then has brought in so many more diplomats that a new floor is being built on
the mezzanine level to accommodate them.

Most of the Americans are unmarried. The 58-year-old Ambassador is a widower
with five children and five step-children, at least one of whom is reported to
be an activist in opposition to American policy here. Despite the tension in the
country, he has managed to travel more than his immediate predecessors. He even
made an appearance with a woman he is dating at the opening of a San Salvador
discotheque.

Employees are urged to travel to and from work in an armored shuttle bus
provided by the embassy. In addition to the physical fortification of their
building - a 12-foot-high concrete wall, ringed by sandbags and patrolled by
Marines in combat gear - they are protected by roving patrols of uniformed
Salvadoran soldiers and plainclothes contract security men in armored vehicles
with gun ports in the bullet-proof windows.

There have been at least eight machine gun or rocket attacks on the embassy
building since October 1980. Most are presumed to have come from leftists,
though one, on March 4, 1981, was attributed by embassy officials to Roberto
D'Aubuisson, now the candidate of the rightist Nationalist Republican Alliance
in the March 28 elections that are the centerpiece of United States policy.

When an alarm bell sounds inside, employees have to throw themselves to the
floor and crawl to interior rooms away from windows. ''I once told the cleaning
people they'd have to clean the rug more if I was going to spend so much time
with my nose in it,'' a woman employee said. Three months ago, an embassy
officer, unaware that the gunfire and rocketry that filled the night sky was
prompted by the national soccer team's World Cup elimination-game victory over
Mexico, called the Marine guard and reported that his neighborhood was under
guerrilla assault.

The American diplomats in El Salvador come for a variety of reasons including
loyalty to former bosses, career advancement, the extra pay and the feeling of
being in the midst of the action. One officer here at the specific urging of
Ambassador Hinton disputed the idea that the assignment would enhance his
resume. ''This a suicide mission,'' he said. ''Someone's got to be nuts to be
here. How many people do you think profited from having worked in Vietnam?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a visitor being frisked at U.S. Embassy in San
Salvador

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MORE THAN AN 'HONEST ARGUMENT' OVER THE VIETNAM WAR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 659 words


To the Editor:

After reading Roger Hilsman's bewildering letter (Feb. 7), one is forced to
wonder whether he actually saw the CBS documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy, a
Vietnam Deception'' that he so pointedly criticized.

he issue was not - as Mr. Hilsman defined it - only an ''honest argument'' over
which Vietcong should be included in official estimates of enemy strength. To
make such a claim is incredible in the face of the testimony of a half-dozen
distinguished former intelligence officers who stated that their reports had
been manipulated, suppressed and altered.

Those officers bore witness to the perversion of American intelligence in the
midst of the only war we ever lost. They didn't come forward eagerly. They were
moved by the hope that their testimony might help prevent this from happening
again.

If Mr. Hilsman's point is that the actions documented in this program represent
business-as-usual in the councils of government, then we truly have reason to be
concerned.

As to Walt W. Rostow's letter of the same day, it is understandable that Mr.
Rostow, as one of the architects of Lyndon Johnson's Vietnam policies, would
differ with the conclusions of the documentary. But it should be noted that Mr.
Rostow does not challenge the testimony of any of the former intelligence
officers who appeared in the documentary.

Instead, he criticizes the broadcast for its suggestion that the President
himself may have been victimized by dishonest intelligence reports and persists
in his claim that the President was fully apprised of the enemy's capabilities
and intentions.

Could Mr. Rostow then explain this apparent contradiction:

* We state in the documentary that reports of a massive increase in infiltration
from the North in the fall of 1967 were systematically blocked.

* General Westmoreland acknowledged on our broadcast that there had, in fact,
been a massive infiltration throughout the fall ''in the magnitude of about
20,000 a month.'' He said he could not explain why the higher numbers had not
been included in any official reports (they indicate no more than 7,000). And he
said he had been wrong in November 1967 when he used the figure of 5,500 to
6,000 a month on ''Meet the Press.''

* After our filmed interview, General Westmoreland changed his position again.
Since then he has maintained that the massive infiltration in the fall of 1967
never took place.

* Mr. Rostow, however, in a Jan. 25, 1982, memorandum for the L.B.J. Library (a
copy of which he sent to me), maintains that this massive infiltration in the
fall of 1967 did take place and attacks our suggestion that the President didn't
know about it. It was, he wrote, ''a quite massive invasion of South Vietnam by
fresh, regular North Vietnamese units ... The infiltration rate may well have
been higher for a few months than 25,000. Everyone concerned, including
President Johnson, knew this.''

The problem is that this infiltration is not registered in any official records.
Beyond this, Mr. Rostow and General Westmoreland cannot seem to reconcile their
very differing recollections.

We stand by our account, based on interviews with a variety of intelligence
officers, that there was a massive infiltration that fall and that reports of
this infiltration were blocked.

I would suggest that Mr. Rostow and General Westmoreland may want to get
together and decide exactly what they believe happened and what they told the
President. It's not an unimportant question.  GEORGE CRILE Producer, CBS Reports
New York, Feb. 12, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM AND THE MILITARY MIND

SECTION: Section 6; Page 78, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 296 words


Drew Middleton states, ''The commanders on the scene may have been right in
thinking that the Chinese would not intervene'' against ''an American invasion
of North Vietnam''in late 1966. Although what would have happened ''if'' can
never be proved one way or another, the facts argue against such conjecture.

Beginning in September 1966, Peking deployed up to 50,000 troops to North
Vietnam. Between then and their withdrawal, in mid-1968, after the United States
bombing was drastically reduced, two and later three antiaircraft divisions
rotated deployment every six months to protect main communications lines,
bridges and other targets.

Peking wanted its military presence to be known both to the Vietnamese and the
Americans as a token of commitment to Hanoi's defense should Washington invade
the North. For nearly three years, American pilots and Chinese forces fought a
secret war, with casualties on both sides. Last year, Peking revealed that
''thousands'' of People's Liberation Army (P.L.A.) troops were killed with
''more than 1,000 still buried in Vietnam.''

It is inconceivable that, having signaled its commitment, the P.L.A. would then
have turned tail and run back across the border if faced with an American
invasion of Haiphong and Hanoi. Abandoning North Vietnam to ''United States
imperialism'' would have destroyed Peking's claim to great-power status, both as
a socialist ally and as successor to the Middle Kingdom.  ALLEN S. WHITING
Professor of Political Science University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Mich.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam and the Military Mind

SECTION: Section 6; Page 78, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 183 words


As a former marine, who served in Vietnam in 1967-68, I was heartened to see
Drew Middleton's article about our military involvement there (''Vietnam and the
Military Mind,'' Jan. 10).  However, I think Mr. Middleton makes an incorrect
assumption regarding military dissatisfaction with United States Government
''direction'' of the war. He says that the military must accept the ''inherent
handicap'' offered by ''a limited war fought for definable political
objectives,'' and he concludes the article by wondering if the military will be
capable of ''subordinating military to political considerations.''

I know of no thinking military man who would dispute the need for military goals
to be subsumed under political aims. The rub which occurred in Vietnam - and
this is what infuriates the military - is that there never were any ''definable
political objectives,'' no demonstrable political aims. In other words, nothing
to subordinate to. It is in the failure to supply the military with a mission
that the Government let down the military.WILLIAM M. DOUGLASS New York City

------

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of soldiers

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM AND THE MILITARY MIND

SECTION: Section 6; Page 78, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 101 words


It was the gradual erosion of credibility in the military reports and
assessments of the war that brought about general disillusionment with the war.
These reports, whether from the Pentagon or from the Saigon command, were so
continually optimistic over such a long period, and so frequently suggested that
the months ahead would bring victory that eventually, I think, they became
largely discounted by most of us.  ROBERT F. HALSTEAD Bridgewater, Conn.

-------

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACKS:NEW AND NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words


THE WHITE HOTEL, by D.M. Thomas. (Pocket, $3.50.) In Vienna, during the fall of
1919, a woman musician goes to Dr. Sigmund Freud complaining of recurring pains
that have no organic cause. The presentation of her case through letters, poetry
and extracts from a journal and Freud's analysis of her sexual fanstasies are
followed by a narrative account of her life. The Book Review's editors named
this novel one of the best books of 1981, observing that ''what it sets out to
perform is nothing less than the diagnosis of our epoch through the experience
of an individual. It comes close to accomplishing that goal.''

EVERYTHING WE HAD, by Al Santoli. (Ballantine, $2.95.) Thirty-three veterans,
ranging from ''grunt'' to admiral, from gunner to POW, from medic to
interrogation officer, recall their experiences during the Vietnam War. Together
their memories cover the period from the first American involvement in 1962 to
the fall of Saigon in 1975. This ''oral history,'' edited by a man who is
himself a veteran, is a cool indictment of our participation in the conflict.

IN THE SECRET STATE, by Robert McCrum. (Avon, $2.50.) After retiring as head of
C Directorate, Britain's ultrasecret intelligence agency, Frank Strange sets out
to check a suspicion he has about it -that its computer files, assembled to
counteract subversion and terrorism, have made it a state-within-a-state that
practices very dirty tricks. Though very much derived from John le Carre, this
novel is well written and absorbing, its message most chilling.

TROUBLE RIVER. THE PINBALLS. GOODBYE, CHICKEN LITTLE. By Betsy Byars.
(Scholastic, $1.95 each.) Three stories for readers 9 to 13 by a writer with a
knack for creating unique and believable characters confronted by challenging
situations. In ''Trouble River,'' Dewey flees the silent dangers that haunt the
prairie cabin where he lives, taking his Grandma with him on a raft down an even
more peril-filled river. In ''The Pinballs,'' three kids whose family
backgrounds are troubled find the couple who have become their foster parents
very nice but not quite satisfying. They manage to improve their situation. In
''Goodbye, Chicken Little,'' Jimmie Little is almost persuaded by a friend that
his family is a bit crazy. Then, happily, something happens that makes him feel
he's Jimmie, not ''Chicken,'' Little.

RUSSIA IN THE AGE OF CATHERINE THE GREAT, by Isabel de Madariaga.  (Yale
University Press, $14.95.) Our reviewer Anthony Cross described this study by a
British scholar as ''magnificent and authoritative,'' replacing all previous
works on the subject. As a biography, it destroys many of the commonly held
myths about Catherine II, Empress of Russia (1729-96). As an account of her
time, it offers a panoramic view of Russia's social, political, economic and
cultural development and its emergence as a formidable international power
during the 18th century.

KOLYMA TALES, by Varlam Shalamov. (Norton, $4.95.) Two dozen stories about life
in the Soviet forced-labor camps in the Kolyma region of northeastern Siberia,
based on the author's experiences while exiled there for 17 years. According to
John Bayley, ''The best are as good as Chekhov, Babel and Bunin, but some have a
perfunctory quality, and these, oddly enough, have the greatest documentary
interest.'' The expert translations and annotations are the work of John Glad.

HOUSEKEEPING, by Marilynne Robinson. (Bantam/Windstone, $2.95.) For Ruth, a
dreamy girl growing up in rural Washington, life is a series of fleeting
pleasures and losses. First her grandfather, then her mother depart under tragic
circumstances; two dotty great-aunts come and go; a transient aunt arrives to
care for her and her sister and, in the end, converts her to an itinerant life.
Of this first novel, Le Anne Schreiber wrote that its ''language is so precise,
so distilled, so beautiful that one reads it slowly lest one miss any pleasure
that it might yield.''

THE THIRTY YEARS WAR, by C.V. Wedgwood. (Methuen, $9.95.) This thoroughly
researched, well-written work of the distinguished English historian C. Veronica
Wedgwood has long been considered the standard account of the complex conflict
that harrowed central Europe from 1618 to 1648, with profound, long-lasting
political and social consequences for the whole continent. Originally published
in 1938, it has not been available in paperback for some years.

THE OFFICERS' WIVES, by Thomas Fleming. (Warner, $3.95.) Through the eyes of
three women who marry three West Point graduates one sunny June day in 1950,
Thomas Fleming depicts the changes of the past 30 years - in the fortunes of the
Army, the status of women, the ordeals and consolations of marriage, the
permutations of religion and idealism. A diverse cast of characters and such
locales as Japan, Saigon and Washington, D.C., are vividly depicted in this
sprawling, highly readable novel.

THE BEST OF SHOLOM ALEICHEM, edited by Irving Howe and Ruth R.  Wisse.
(Pocket/Washington Square Press, $3.95.) Twenty-two stories by Sholom
Rabinovitch (1859-1916), who under the name Sholom Aleichem depicted, in a tone
that is conversational, breezy and ironic, the often grim life of Eastern
European Jews during the early 20th century. The translations from the Yiddish
by various hands were chosen by Irving Howe and Ruth R. Wisse, who argue
persuasively in their introduction that Aleichem was far more than a ''mere''
spinner of humorous folk tales.

THE ART OF JAPANESE MANAGEMENT, by Richard Tanner Pascale and Anthony G. Athos.
(Warner, $3.95.) Two business school professors - from Stanford and Harvard -
compare the practices of Konosuke Matsushita and his Matsushita Electric Co.,
the world's largest manufacturer of electrical appliances, with those of Harold
S. Geneen and his I.T.T. to show what American industry can learn from the
Japanese. John Brooks found the lesson interesting but observed that it would
not be easy for America to adopt the Japanese model, much of which arises out of
its country's culture.

LANDED GENTLY, by Alan Hunter. (Dell, $2.25.) Merely Hall, an East Anglian
mansion highly renowned for its architecture and as the source of fine tapestry,
becomes a scene of scandal when a brash young American who has been invited for
the Christmas holidays is found lying dead at the foot of the grand staircase.
Peppermintmunching Inspector Gently solves the case in traditional British
style. Our Anthony Boucher liked this 1957 whodunit for its architectural and
tapestry-weaving lore and for its well-created characters - except for one
unbelievable, comically inept ''American.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RETURN TO CANNERY ROW

SECTION: Section 10; Page 43, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1954 words


HERBERT GOLD, who lives in San Francisco, has written a dozen novels; the most
recent, ''Family,'' has just been published by Arbor House.

By HERBERT GOLD

''I f John Steinbeck was to die again tomorrow ...'' My new friend, proprietor
of a shop on Monterey, California's, Cannery Row, put his arm across his chest,
feeling for the heart. ''... I would be grateful to join the funeral corsage
wendling its way down this hallowed street-and-a-half. His p.r. on our behalf
has what I always call Big Mo - Big Momentum - and I don't care what kind of
junk his new movie is, he's a great p.r. man. Cannery Row would be a slum
without Jack Steinbeck -course, I personally didn't know him - plus the
beautiful ocean, beach for the rubber-suit set, sea air, age-old traditions and
2,400 plus hotel-motel rooms coming.''

He found his heart, completed his oath and bought me a drink.  The myth of
Cannery Row belongs to two men, John Steinbeck and the rumpled Bohemian marine
biologist, Doc Ed Ricketts, whom he immortalized - temporarily, at least - by
dedicating four books to him and using him as a character, under a handful of
names, in six.  It's a legend of intrepid science, easy booze and flooze,
goodhearted madames with beautiful girls and such boyish adventures as feeding
rats to reptiles for the purpose of exciting women. (''The Snake'' was the tale
made of that exploit.) In Edmund Wilson's ''The Boys in the Back Room,'' the
critic took Eastern aim at this Western or California vision of the boozing,
wenching, mooching, sentimental life of seafood and beachside vino.

The reality, of course, was poverty. The wine was cheap because people couldn't
much afford it. The place stank of rotting fish. The easy gals may not even have
been beautiful, although not having been there, who am I to judge?

Now the girls wear T-shirts that say, ''My parents went to Cannery Row and all
they bought me was this T-shirt,'' a joke that seems to come to a resort with
the first ''boteek.'' The smell of fish is gone. The shrimp come in cans. It's
Cannery Row Village, Steinbeckland and cameras bouncing on navels.

And yet something of the past remains. When I first came to California in the
early 60's, I used to go ''abalone-ing'' off McAbee Beach at Monterey - donning
wet suit, carrying tire irons, prying the shells off the rocks, frying the catch
on the beach after that heart-stopping moment of pounding the meat with the flat
of the iron until it relaxed. Now, 20 years later, in the light of the new Nick
Nolte movie of ''Cannery Row,'' I thought to visit a place that recalled the
pleasures of my less advanced middle age. I'd eat fish, sniff the air and hunt
for memories.

I spent the better part of two days strolling up and down the street that is now
designated Cannery Row, and right off I had better declare that I took pleasure
there despite all the ''despites'' of a commercial dream, a nostalgia fabricated
by planners, developers and decorators.

Despite Rudolph's Interior Design in the Enterprise Cannery, despite a class of
rubber-suited skin divers with Dayglo orange packs taking lessons in the seas
once teeming with boats and fish, despite the antiques and souvenir shops
selling recycled relics, despite the billboard announcing ''Future Home of the
Monterey Bay Aquarium, Spring 1984.''

Despite the quilt shop and First Cabin Men's Hair Styling which now occupy the
Aeneas Sardine Products warehouse, despite the boutiques and offices in Magnolia
Packing, despite the new chain Casa Maria (''Weekend Brunch with All the Flavor
of Mexico - We Serve Bruncho''). Despite the Gray Line tour buses, despite the
''American Revival - Nostalgia At Its Best'' shop, despite the Japanese paper
fishes and the former labels of sardine cans for sale.

Despite the bust of John Steinbeck in the middle of a parking lot, within range
of the carrousel music from Emporia Restaurant Carrousel and the roar of Atari
space war games (a bench for sitting, pay phones for calling, meters for
parking) ... well, Steinbeck in his sad last years loved the Vietnam war, of
course ... and despite the ''Absolutely No Fires Permitted on McAbee Beach,''
where there used to be fires when I cooked my abalone. And despite the posters
announcing both Glen Campbell and Former President Gerald Ford appearing at a
golf tournament nearby, and speaking of antiques, despite one of the last
surviving Walter Keane paintings of big-eyed waifs for sale nearby...

Something remains. Is it the air? the razed foundations, like distinguished
classic ruins? The people at a twist of sea, sniffing the air for better times
coming, to be built on the famous bad times?

A surprising good feeling of community endures. The raffishness of Steinbeck's
vision is continued in the hangout merchants, dropouts, talkers, loafers,
sidewalk people, bikers and crafts enthusiasts attracted here by the smell of
tourist dollars, and perhaps also by the greater expense of a ticket to Papeete.

The planning people have listed landmarks to be retained, such as the Old
General Store, the Wing Chong Market of the book (''this building has the type
of appearance and character ...'') and the Black Cypress Tree (''In Steinbeck
lore ... should be retained'').  ''Now that the movie is coming out, we'll be
dialectical, evolutionary, a little bit at a time,'' stated a young Hegelian
temporarily working as a salesperson of redwood burl sculpture chainsawed by
gifted, fast-working Filipino carvers. (''We don't have much call for John
Steinbecks,'' she informed me, ''but I could have one done in a jiffy. You want
to put down a little deposit? What they really like to do is St. Francis and the
birds, that's their religious influence, and they can really do it fast. But
they do lots of prospectors and pelicans, too. Never had much call for John
Steinbecks before, but it's an idea.'')

Contemporary Cannery Row has a heavy population of keepers of the flame. One day
I had coffee with Alice Herby De Noon, proprietor of The Old General Store,
formerly Wing Chong's, and herself formerly a folksinger, decorator and art
auctioneer with 18 years of hard duty in Hollywood, who came home to keep a
little Steinbeck museum of manuscripts and memorabilia in her shop, just as she
told her mother she would. Frank Wright, a real estate appraiser, friend and
service buddy of Doc Ed Ricketts, joined us at Alice's table. He keeps the faith
in a local men's club which bought the ramshackle biological lab that housed Doc
Ricketts, and offered to show me the building.  ''Tell the world he didn't drink
as much as Steinbeck said he did, not in my hearing,'' Mr. Wright informed me.

Mr. Wright took me across the street to ''Doc's Lab,'' where earlier I had sat
on the salt-weathered stairway, rubbing rust from a joint. Bootscarred, with
split planks, stained and tattered green shades on the windows, it turns a nice,
cool, blank eye to the street. It has not been restored as a museum. Mr. Wright
showed me the little library, the wall collaged with cartoons and drawings, the
posters, records, the kitchen where the boys of the club make a meal once a
month. (Every club member has a key for those moments of private meditation
required in a thinking man's life.) ''It's our tree house, our dugout,'' he
said. ''Hank Ketcham's a member, Eldon Dedini. We got cartoonists, writers, good
people.''

Behind Doc's house, the sea rumbles and spills. There is a rusting still and
cement tanks. Yonder Steinbeck laughed and cried -''a hulk in his coat.'' One
member of the club knows his sister, who keeps all his books untouched in a
vault, unread for fear of dirtying them. Others know one of his widows, the one
with that funny wiry dog of hers.

Now Mr. Wright was explaining to me, as men have done forever in their
clubhouses, about philosophy, art, love, life, hope, dreams and fish culture -
the very subjects discussed by John Steinbeck and Doc Ricketts. He told me his
stories about Flora, the madam who existed both in real life and in the books
(she is called Dora Flood in ''Cannery Row''). Flora maintained her business
just around the corner, where there is now a bar dedicated to her memory.

Flora's bar is furnished in her style, with mirrors, flocking and Tiffany-style
glass. A life-size mannequin of Flora reclines in a bed in a little raised
alcove, and I negotiated permission to climb up on the bar for a peek. I knocked
over a drink, bought a round to remedy the situation and made friends with Mad
Dog and Cyclist and Oh No!  his lady friend.

''Why are you called Oh No!?'' I asked. ''For your pleasure,'' she said, lisping
on the ''s'' in ''pleasure,'' making it sound almost French.

In Steinbeckland, where his sources and scenes are memorialized with an
endearing clumsiness, I can't swear to the accuracy of all the stories about him
and his guru. Maybe Doc Ricketts really did drink a lot. Who knows the truth
about Donald Duck and Mickey Mouse, or even if they really existed or are merely
the figments of a theme park?

R eality is not necessarily really real.  The legend of Cannery Row, palpable if
invented, is still present and resonating on a short stretch of beach from which
the sardines, the sardiners and the sardineries have passed away into fish-out
heaven. Steinbeckland -Doc and Flora and the booze and crustaceans and
philosophy and the overarching memory of the silvery fleet little pilchards -
has returned a purely invented metareality to a place where a few got rich and
picturesque hordes packed and cleaned and struggled and remained poor.

Now people expect a boom - they do -everyone promised me this, even the
62-year-old ponytailed motorcyclist with his shirt off, washing up in the men's
room of Sly McFly's saloon. (''I'll live forever, I'll be forever young, buy me
a dinner at the Steinbeck Lobster Grotto and I'll tell you my secret.'') The
planners, architects, designers, barkeeps and boutique owners have discovered
the secret of hanging out, like so many drifters, grifters, stay-at-homes,
slugabeaches, writers, biological lab researchers. In the future, with good luck
and a growing leisure economy, they can all be rich, famous and sad, or perhaps
bankrupt, just like artists.

Below the bust of John Steinbeck in the central parking lot, the opening
sentences of ''Cannery Row'' have been set in a metal plaque: ''Cannery Row in
Monterey in California is a poem, a stink, a grating noise, a quality of light,
a tone, a habit, a nostalgia, a dream. Cannery Row is the gathered and
scattered, tin and iron and rust and splintered wood, chipped pavement and weedy
lots and junk heaps, sardine canneries of corrupted iron, honky tonks,
restaurants and whore houses, and little crowded groceries, and laboratories and
flophouses.''

No censorship required, no editing performed. There is still something raffish
here. And there is still fresh fish, abalone and that salt Pacific wind.
Something remains on Cannery Row. I don't care about the wax museum. The sea is
still busy, and so are the people.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Cannery Row map

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN IS GETTING GLOOMY ESTIMATES ON SALVADOR VOTE

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1087 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28


President Reagan's senior advisers say they are not optimistic about the chances
of a successful election next month in El Salvador, or about the Salvadoran
Government's ability to achieve a military victory over the rebels.

But the advisers say they are not sure what the United States should do next to
help the authorities in San Salvador.  The elections for the Constitutional
Assembly, scheduled for March 28, have been regarded by United States officials
as crucial to bolstering the Christian Democratic Party, which is headed by Jose
Napoleon Duarte, head of the military-civilian junta.

But Administration officials said President Reagan had been receiving
increasingly pessimistic reports that the guerrillas would succeed in reducing
participation in the elections by threats and in some cases by confiscating
voter identification cards at gunpoint.

Little Chance of a 'Just Society'

''Unless something occurs, I don't think there is a lot of optimism that we're
going to see a just election and therefore a just society in El Salvador,'' a
high Administration official said. He said Mr.  Reagan was reviewing options on
how the United States should respond.

The official said the President speeded the review because of ''the success of
the El Salvador insurgents in the past couple of months.'' He said the elections
had been regarded as ''the next turn in the road.'' He added that American
officials still hoped it would be ''a good turn in the road,'' but they ''simply
don't know whether it's going to be possible.''

The official said Mr. Reagan had definitely ruled out any lessening of the
American commitment to El Salvador.

Military Aid Increasing

Military aid is actually increasing. And officials spoke in blunt terms about
what they saw as threats to the United States if the guerrillas were to seize
power in El Salvador.

''If El Salvador does go to the insurgents, Nicaragua will be heartened, and we
can look to the fall of Guatemala in the not-toodistant future,'' the
Administration official said.

His comment was reminiscent of the ''domino theory'' put forward by President
Dwight D. Eisenhower about the danger of Communism spreading in Southeast Asia.

President Reagan, in his speech on the Caribbean last Wednesday, endorsed such a
position on Central America. He also said the United States would do ''whatever
is prudent and necessary'' to prevent the overthrow of the Salvadoran Government
and other governments in the Caribbean region.

The President has emphasized that there are no plans to use American troops in
El Salvador or elsewhere in the region. In separate interviews, White House and
other Administration officials said Mr. Reagan's problems in dealing with El
Salvador were compounded by strong public sentiment in the United States against
a military effort to help the Salvadoran Government.

The officials acknowledged that the Reagan Administration had failed to make a
convincing public case for aiding the Salvadoran Government. A Presidential aide
said White House mail was running more than 10-to-1 against the President's El
Salvador position, although mail on the subject had not been heavy.

An Administration official said President Reagan was considering a change in
tactics and would likely make public some of the classified information on El
Salvador. The Administration says the information shows that the guerrillas have
received support from Nicaragua, Cuba and the Soviet Union.

''Our intelligence capability has risen in that area in the last few months,''
the official said. ''We have more of a revelation of what is actually occurring
in terms of arms shipments through Nicaragua. The argument about intelligence
is, 'Why get it if you can't use it?' ''

The official said the Administration had not yet determined how and when the
intelligence information would be made public.

A Threat From the Right

In a talk last week to columnists, Mr. Reagan said the Administration was
reluctant to release information about insurgent activities in El Salvador
because ''you can't do that without compromising your sources of information.''

The Salvadoran right wing is also posing a problem for the United States. The
Administration fears that if enough of the population fails to vote the election
could be won by rightists said to be intent on achieving an all-out military
victory against the insurgents. The American position is that there must be a
political, not a military, solution to the Salvadoran conflict.

White House officials say their political problems are compounded further by the
opposition of Roman Catholic church leaders and members of Congress to Mr.
Duarte. Many of the critics have accused Mr. Duarte of condoning human rights
violations in El Salvador. But Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North
Carolina, said Saturday that Mr. Duarte was too left wing.

Administration officials declined to comment on a proposal by President Jose
Lopez Portillo of Mexico for simultaneous negotiations to resolve the fighting
in El Salvador, and the disputes between the United States and Cuba and
Nicaragua.

A Rise in American Aid

An official said Mr. Lopez Portillo's proposal was being studied.  ''I wouldn't
want to pass judgment on it,'' he said.  In announcing his Caribbean Basin
Initiative, President Reagan said he would ask Congress for $60 million in new
military aid to countries in the area in the present fiscal year to supplement
the $112 million already authorized. About three-quarters of the military aid is
going to El Salvador, officials said.

The officials said it had not yet been determined how the new military
assistance would be spent. They said it had also not been determined how the
United States would spend the $106 million in military assistance requested for
the 1983 fiscal year.

In addition to the military aid, the initiative included a broad plan of
investment and trade incentives aimed at improving the economic well-being of
the region.

----

Vietnam Is Said to Aid Rebels

WASHINGTON, Feb. 28 (Reuters) -William J. Casey, Director of Central
Intelligence, said today that El Salvador's guerrilla war was being run from
Nicaragua with the help of Cuba, Vietnam, the Palestine Liberation Organization,
East Germany, Bulgaria and North Korea. He made his remarks in an interview with
the magazine U.S.  News and World Report.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN EMBASSY'S ROLE IN THE 1973 BOMBING IN CAMBODIA

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


To the Editor:

In his Feb. 6 column, Sydney Schanberg charges that Thomas O.  Enders, currently
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, was responsible for an
illegal B-52 campaign in Cambodia in 1973 and tried to cover up when a major
accident occurred.

Mr. Schanberg's charges are unfounded. I was the U.S. commander conducting all
bombing operations in Southeast Asia during 1972-73.  All U.S. air strikes in
Cambodia were directed by my headquarters.

The American Embassy in Phnom Penh, first under Mr. Enders and then under
Ambassador Swank, screened targets proposed by the Cambodian army. Targets
forwarded by the embassy were subjected to further scrutiny by my headquarters.
All B-52 targets were photographed by my reconnaissance aircraft prior to
strike.

These operations were conducted with precision. Post-strike reconnaissance
showed that damage to civilian habitations was in almost every case avoided or
limited. This post-strike photography is available for analysis in military
archives.

As Mr. Schanberg points out, a major accident involving a Government-held town
occurred in early August 1973. Apparently because he could not get there
immediately (the town was cut off by land), Mr. Schanberg charges ''cover-up.''
But Cambodian authorities, the U.S. Embassy and my headquarters announced the
tragedy immediately.

Mr. Schanberg says the bombing campaign was illegal, but neither the Attorney
General nor the courts found it so.  I make no apologies for having attempted to
prevent the Khmer Rouge from coming to power. When they did, they committed
genocide on a scale unsurpassed in the post-World War II period.
JOHN W. VOGT, General, U.S.A.F. (Retired), Annapolis, Md., Feb. 15, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN EMBASSY'S ROLE IN THE 1973 BOMBING IN CAMBODIA

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 250 words


To the Editor:

Sydney Schanberg places a false interpretation on the Cooper-Church amendment
when he says in his column that it prohibited American military personnel in our
embassy in Phnom Penh from coordinating American air strikes and that,
accordingly, the bombing was ''in direct, brazen violation'' of that law.

In 1969-70, I was counsel to the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on
military commitments, and as such followed closely the enactment of the
Cooper-Church amendment. As finally enacted, it permitted American bombing in
Cambodia and the provision of American military supplies to the Cambodian
Government forces.

Those who drafted and guided that legislation through the Senate were well aware
of, and influenced by, the then-existing American military program in
neighboring Laos. They well knew that bombing would require, as in Laos,
American coordinators on the ground. And in Laos they were out in the field, not
back in the embassy, as in Cambodia. These senators also knew that the supply of
equipment would require the stationing of some Americans in the country to
process this flow of materiel.

Finally, in his outcry against the number of civilian casualties and refugees
caused by the bombing (he lumps together those killed and those displaced and
comes up with ''thousands''), I hope he is not ignoring the millions killed in
Cambodia by the other side after the Congress chose to terminate the bombing.
ROLAND A. PAUL, Westport, Conn., Feb. 10, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 2, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE AND DEBATE;
NEW AID FOR SALVADOR: IS IT WISE AND WILL IT WORK?

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2135 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


The Reagan Administration, believing that the ''decisive battle for Central
America'' is being fought in El Salvador, is preparing to ask Congress for about
$35 million in additional military aid and about $100 million in new economic
assistance.

Further requests may follow.  The decision to pump more money into El Salvador
in support of the military-civilian junta led by Jose Napoleon Duarte has raised
questions in Congress about the wisdom of supporting what many believe is a
small and shaky political center in a country where the extremes of both left
and right seem to be gaining strength.

Increased aid is also becoming a public issue as human rights groups and church
organizations contend that the Salvadoran security forces are violence prone and
uncontrolled and that human rights abuses against civilians are frequent.

The debate over aid has also become a debate over El Salvador's political
future. Opponents of continued aid - particularly military aid -say that a
settlement of the civil war must be negotiated now or American aid will do
little more than prolong the killing.

U.S. Supports Election

The Administration, opposing a negotiated political solution, is backing an
election scheduled for March 28 for a Constituent Assembly to write a
constitution and select an interim President. The Administration contends the
guerrillas' political organizations are free to demonstrate their strength at
the polls, a course the rebels say is too dangerous.

Supporters of the Administration view say that to bring the guerrillas into the
Government through negotiations would be to turn over to them what they cannot
win on the battlefield or through the ballot box. Citing the example of
Nicaragua, the Administration believes that the most extreme leftists in the
guerrilla front would eventually gain control of a coalition Government and turn
the country into a totalitarian nation.

The proposed aid increase, which the Administration intends to draw from funds
being requested for the President's Caribbean Basin development plan, would
raise military aid to El Salvador in the fiscal year ending Sept. 30 of this
year to about $116 million from $81 million.

Only $26 million has been allocated by Congress, but the Administration last
month added $55 million in military materials under an emergency order that did
not require Congressional approval. The decision was made after guerrillas made
a series of attacks, including one on a Salvadoran air force base Jan. 27 that
destroyed more than a dozen aircraft.

If the Administration is able to win the supplemental aid from Congress,
economic assistance will increase to about $210 million from $110 million. Mr.
Duarte has said that without more American economic support, his Government can
not survive.
The Background

Jose Napoleon Duarte, the man in the middle of the Salvadoran political storm,
was a left-of-center Christian Democratic reformer in 1972 when he won a
presidential election. Mr. Duarte, however, was barred from assuming office and
forced into exile by the military.

He did not return to political life until a coup in October 1979 overthrew the
rightist Government of Gen. Carlos Humberto Romero. Mr. Duarte joined the
five-member junta ruling the country in March 1980, by which time more radical
leftists were charging that the oncemoderate Government was moving to the right.
A succession of moderates left the junta.

Some of Mr. Duarte's former political allies have gone over to the guerrilla
side - most notably Guillermo Ungo and Ruben Zamora, both now in exile in
Mexico. The guerrillas encompass a range of left-ofcenter polticial groups,
including Communists.

The Carter Administration, represented by Ambassador Robert E.  White, continued
to support Mr. Duarte - who became President of the junta in December 1980 -
while pressing for promised social and economic changes. Banks and certain
businesses were nationalized and an extensive land redistribution program was
begun in an effort to break the almost total economic and social power of a
landed oligarchy.

2 U.S. Administrations Agree

Because of his commitment to these changes, Mr. Duarte is regarded by rightist
military and political leaders as a Communist.  Two Administrations have taken
the view that only American support can allow the center, represented by Mr.
Duarte, to fend off the excesses of both right and left.

The Carter Administration cut off aid briefly in December 1980 after four
American churchwomen were murdered by what were widely assumed to be members of
the security forces. The aid was resumed before Mr. Carter left office.

The Reagan Administration, responding to a guerrilla offensive early in 1981,
increased assistance. It requested a further increase for the current fiscal
year, which Congress granted. But Congress stipulated that for the aid to
continue, the Administration would have to certify every six months that the
junta was making progress on human rights and in improving control of its armed
forces.

In late January, the White House issued its first certification, supported by
the State Department's new Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs, Elliott Abrams. The decision brought a storm of protest from church
groups and some Democratic Senators and Representatives, who have been seeking
to have the certification rejected, a procedure Congressional aides say is
without precedent.
For Increased Aid

The Reagan Administration has consistently contended that the influx of weapons
to the guerrilla forces from Nicaragua and Cuba must be countered if the junta
is to survive. In a white paper last winter the State Department offered what it
called its proof of the complicity of Soviet-bloc countries in the guerrilla war
in El Salvador.

Subsequent statements and public testimony by Administration officials have
reiterated that belief. In January the State Department said a new rebel
offensive was being backed by shipments of ''several hundred tons'' of military
equipment a month -about the level of shipments sent to guerrilla forces just
before another major offensive almost exactly a year ago.

On Feb. 24, Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs, said the level of arms entering El Salvador had risen. The
Administration has not revealed the basis for these assessments.

Economic assistance is viewed as strategically important by the junta and by the
Reagan Administration because guerrilla forces have struck at economic targets
such as power plants, factories, bridges and transportation facilities.

Other Cash Requirements

Salvadoran banks are facing severe problems and the nation's communications
systems must be improved, according to Mr. Duarte, to insure stability and
maintain a sense of national unity. Mr. Duarte and other members of the
Government insist that economic aid is more crucial than military assistance and
that the country does not want American troops.

The land-redistribution program also needs cash for credit for farmers and
cooperative organizers who need supplies and equipment to use their new land
effectively. Furthermore, not all former landowners have been compensated for
their land, which strengthens the opposition on Mr. Duarte's right.

The Administration contends that not all the killing and other abuses of human
rights are the work of security forces. Statistics from guerrilla-held areas are
difficult to obtain. There is no organization monitoring the guerrillas, as
several do the Government, on human right.

Further, the Administration says much of the violence there is probably not
political but the product of a lawless society with an inadequate system of
justice.
Against Increased Aid

Requests for sharply increased foreign aid for any nation would meet opposition
when stringent budget cuts have eliminated or sharply curtailed domestic
programs in the United States.

The case for more aid is made doubly difficult by reports of brutality by
Salvadoran security forces - not so much by the army as by the treasury police
and local militias. Church groups and some human rights organizations have been
lobbying Congress and campaigning publicly to force a curtailment of American
assistance because of these reports.

Disturbing if conflicting reports about the human rights situation have prompted
such Congressional leaders as Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. and Senator
Claiborne Pell, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
to visit El Salvador or send delegations for first-hand information.

Not all members of Congress concerned about the nature of the Salvadoran
Government are Democrats. Senator Charles H. Percy, the Republican of Illinois
who is chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, expressed his concern
to Mr. Enders when the Assistant Secretary testified recently at a committee
hearing.

Representative Jim Coyne, a Pennsylvania Republican, joined in calls for a
negotiated settlement and in criticism of the junta's human rights record when
he returned recently from a visit to Central America.

How Great a 'Loss'?

Several senators and representatives have said they feared a repetition of the
Vietnam experience, when the United States became more and more involved in
support of the Saigon Government and Congress waited too long to question the
process.

Doubts have also been expressed about the Administration's view that El Salvador
is militarily important to the United States or that its ''loss'' to a leftist
government would prevent the United States from dealing with it. Critics of the
view cite the examples of China and several Eastern European nations with which
Washington has workable relations.

Opponents in Congress range from those who want to stop military assistance and
arrange for negotiations between the guerrillas and the junta to those who are
critical or at least uncertain of continued aid but who are willing to withhold
a decision until after the election.

The election, intended by the junta as a first step toward eventual
democratization, will select a 60-member Constituent Assembly empowered to name
an interim President while framing a new constitution, leading to elections. The
guerrilla opposition is not taking part in the election.

If the extreme right should emerge from the voting in control of the
constitutional process, Senator Pell and others have said, the United States
should then re-examine very carefully its commitment to that nation.
The Outlook

The Administration has said it will send its Caribbean Basin programs -a package
of trade, investment and aid measures - to Congress in the next few weeks.
Senator Percy said he intended to open hearings on the proposals as soon as
possible. The House Foreign Affairs Committee is also prepared to schedule
hearings quickly. But it is doubtful how far Congress can proceed with the
program before Salvadorans vote this month.

That gives opponents of continued aid time to prepare for several possible
eventualities. One possibility is the emergence of a reactionary rightist
assembly with members who have publicly campaigned against all the Duarte
programs of change and who have the backing of the rightist exiles in Miami and
the more conservative elements of the armed forces.

Another possibility is that the election will be inconclusive or that voting
will be so seriously disrupted as to render the results meaningless. In either
of these two cases, Congressional critics say, the opposition to continued
military if not economic assistance will grow and will become bipartisan.

If the Christian Democrats win decisively, the pressure for an immediate aid
cutoff will be reduced. But there will still be calls for a negotiated end to
the conflict, and opponents could continue to try to hold aid requests hostage
to wider policy decisions.

Congressional aides believe there will be attempts to separate military aid for
Central America from the full Caribbean program and that the Administration is
likely to fight the move. This could tie the Caribbean Basin plan to a
resolution of the aid question.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jose Napoleon Duarte and Jose Guillermo Garcia

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 2, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TEAM OF OBSERVERS FOR SALVADORAN VOTE ANNOUNCED BY U.S.

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 484 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


The State Department announced today that Senator Nancy L. Kassebaum would head
an official United States delegation to observe the elections in El Salvador on
March 28.

At the same time, the department said it was ''convinced that the electoral
process represents an essential first step for a peaceful solution to El
Salvador's political problems.''

In what appeared to be an effort to build up international support for the
Salvador Government's efforts, the department said that the elections ''have
been strongly endorsed within El Salvador by the Catholic Church and the
nation's major peasant, labor, business and professional organizations and
externally, by the overwhelming majority of members of the Organization of
American States.''

Dean Fischer, the department spokesman, said that in addition to an observer
group to be sent by the O.A.S., five countries - Costa Rica, Colombia, Britain,
Egypt and Uruguay - have declared that they intend to send delegations to
observe the elections. He said the United States expected others to do the same,
but declined to comment on reports that most West European governments and Japan
had refused.

He also declined to comment specifically on a report in The New York Times that
said senior advisers to President Reagan were ''not optimistic about the chances
of a successful election.'' He said only that President Jose Napoleon Duarte had
committed his Government ''to fair elections.''

'Cannot Predict' Election Outcome

''We cannot predict how the elections will go,'' Mr. Fischer said, ''but I
should point out that extraordinary measures are being taken to insure that they
are free and fair.''

Mrs. Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, is a member of the Foreign Relations
Committee. Other delegation members include Representative Bob Livingston,
Republican of Louisiana; Everett E. Briggs, Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Inter-American Affairs; the Rev. Theodore M.  Hesburgh, president of the
University of Notre Dame; Clark Kerr, president emeritus of the University of
California at Berkeley, and Richard M. Scammon and Howard Penniman, election
experts.

Mr. Scammon and Mr. Penniman were among the American observers who monitored the
elections in South Vietnam in September 1967.  Mr. Fischer said Mr. Scammon and
Mr. Penniman would visit El Salvador this week to observe preparations and that
the entire delegation would be in El Salvador during the final week of the
campaign to witness the polling and vote counting process.

In another matter, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief American delegate to the
United Nations, told a Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee today that she did
not believe the Administration was contemplating a blockade of Nicaragua to
prevent the flow of arms to insurgents in El Salvador.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 2, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WE NEED REALISTIC GOALS FOR EL SALVADOR

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 192 words


To the Editor:

I don't question the right of Ed Asner and his actor friends, or anyone else, to
speak out about United States foreign policy (''We're on the Wrong Side in El
Salvador'' Op-Ed Feb. 20). It's quite healthy in fact. But their credibility
would be considerably enhanced by a less superficial analysis of conditions in
that country.

Yes, El Salvador is characterized by great disparities of wealth (a feature
hardly unique in the third world). And yes, thousands have died brutally; many,
undoubtedly, at the hands of Government forces.

However, it is a far from inevitable conclusion that an immediate and total U.S.
pullout would change any of this. Violence and injustice preceded American
involvement, and will likely postdate it as well.

I agree that a reappraisal of American policy in Central America is in order.
Realistic goals, and the means to attain them, need to be established (the true
lesson of Vietnam?).

Withdrawal may indeed be appropriate - as long as its purpose is not simply to
self-righteously wash our hands of the violence, even as the violence continues.

RAY PERRY, Staten Island, N.Y., Feb. 22, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 2, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN FEAR IS THE BURGLAR

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1004 words

DATELINE: WILTON, Conn., Feb. 26


With double-cylinder dead-bolt locks secured (check), magnetic window alarms on
(check), passive infrared intrusion detector system activated (check), guard dog
in position, basement windows nailed shut and the remote ''panic button'' in her
purse, a local resident is off to pick up a quart of milk and two green peppers.

She drives to the store on narrow winding lanes past old stone fences and
well-preserved houses of centuries gone by. The ultrasophisticated electronic
security systems being installed in so many of them are unseen, the pastoral
portrait unspoiled. ''The main thing they want is not to see the alarm
devices,'' said an installer in this suburban area. ''They don't want to be
reminded.''

Residents here say they are not gripped with fear over a wave of home burglaries
that has engulfed suburban areas nationwide for the past two years. But a
concern for personal safety has crept into life in this bucolic town, they say,
something that probably has not happened since the British Army retreated.

''It's kind of sad,'' said Lee Reading, whose home has been broken into three
times, twice in January. ''We never used to even lock our doors out here. Now
people call you when they return from a weekend away and say: 'Guess what? We
weren't burglarized.' ''

''It makes you angry,'' she said. ''I came home during the last burglary and it
was foolish, but I chased one of the men down the street.'' She bought a German
shepherd and a complete alarm system, inside and out.

Systems being installed, even in medium-priced homes, are sophisticated, with
many utilizing electronic technology that until recently was available only to
military and other government intelligence agencies. ''These systems are
necessary,'' said Peter W. Orvis, a local security consultant and president of
the Connecticut Security Dealers Association, ''because people are no longer
satisfied to protect their belongings. In the past two years, they have become
worried about their personal safety as well.''

Infrared systems, developed for the Vietnam War, detect body heat, setting off
sirens and lights and alerting central monitoring stations or the local police.
Ultrasonic systems fill a room with high frequency signals and sense changes in
reflection patterns when someone enters. Audio sensor systems are tuned to
discriminate among the sounds of breaking glass and metal and splintering wood.

There are microwave motion detection systems and networks of photoelectric
beams. Some new devices, such as stress sensors that detect flex in the floor
and stair supports, have been developed because burglars too are becoming more
sophisticated, knowing too much about the older security systems, such as
pressure detectors under the carpeting.

There are magnetic window-opening sensors, annunciators that tell a resident
when a car turns into the driveway, seismic sensors that detect footsteps,
multiple pulse sensors for an unusually high number of vibrations of fencing and
sensors to detect when someone jumps into a swimming pool. There are ''panic
buttons'' that can be carried by an individual to trigger the alarm system. And
also becoming popular is a battery backup system or a system that alerts police
when telephone or power lines are cut, something that burglars are doing with
increasing regularity to bypass the alarms.

Prices of these custom home systems range from about $1,000 to $10,000 or more.
Many residents said they viewed this as an unfortunate but necessary new cost of
living in what was once a retreat from the world they saw on the 11 o'clock
news.

Sprouting up with the burglary wave are lock boutiques such as Locks R Us,
discount outlets such as the U-Do-It Alarm Super Market, companies specializing
in ''decorator'' steel doors for homes and a proliferation of franchised alarm
companies taking their places on the strips of franchised restaurants and
muffler installers in suburbia.

Mr. Orvis said there were new businesses videotaping homeowner's possessions for
insurance purposes. At least two concerns are advertising large roller shutters,
long used by shopkeepers in highcrime areas, to cover suburban picture windows.
Ferdy Angelis, a Pennsylvania restaurant owner, is trying to market in New
York's suburbs taped cassettes of his two German shepherds barking, which people
can play while they are away or when they hear a suspicious noise.

Local newspapers carry classified advertisements for house sitters with their
own guard dogs and ads for less-expensive mass marketed alarms, showing women
bound and gagged. Vertronix, a company based in New Rochelle, has sold 45,000 of
its home alarm systems, called the Bug and base priced at $500, in just two
years. Its television ads show a menacing burglar trying to break into a home.

''We believe that our tremendous sales are directly proportional to rising
burglaries due to the bad economy,'' said a spokesman for Vertronix. Mr. Orvis
agreed that burglaries were up because of economic conditions.

''It bothers me,'' said Dr. Stanley Freeman of Westport, who has installed an
alarm system. ''It sure as hell does, to have to live like this. I don't care
about my belongings, they're insured. But what about my family?''

Another suburban resident, whose home has been broken into twice, said he would
never buy an alarm system. ''I won't live like that, with sirens and bars on the
windows of my home,'' he said.

Clark Mulford, who has been in the home alarm business for 13 years in Fairfield
County, said many people once shared that view. ''People hate to buy these
systems,'' he said. ''It's admitting defeat. It's admitting that this is the way
things are.''

''Right now,'' he added, ''business is too good. It scares you.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Kevin Michels

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 2, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

L.M. Powell, Ex-Chief Of Dictaphone, Is Dead

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 213 words

DATELINE: CORAL GABLES, Fla., March 1


Lloyd Maledon Powell, former chairman of the Dictaphone Corporation and an
economic adviser to two United States Presidents, died Saturday. He was 81 years
old.

Mr. Powell was born April 12, 1900, in Michigan City, Ind., and was graduated
from Purdue University in 1921 with a degree in civil engineering.

He joined Dictaphone as a salesman and contracting engineer shortly after the
company's founding. He helped guide the company's expansion in the dictating
equipment industry for more than half a century, first as general sales manager
and then, in 1951, as vice president.  In 1953 he became president, a post he
held until being appointed chairman of the bard in 1966.

He served as chairman until his retirement in 1969, remaining as a director
until 1977.  Under President Eisenhower, he was an adviser in the Office of
Economic Opportunity and in the Administration of President Johnson, he was a
consultant to the National Economic Stabilization Board in the Vietnam War.

He is survived by a daughter, Leonora Jean Brandon, a son, Richard Winston, and
two grandsons. His wife, the former Jewell Maxwell, died in 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 3, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG CLAIMS PROOF OUTSIDERS DIRECT SALVADOR REBELS;
Excerpts from testimony, page A12.

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 2


Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. said today that the United States had
''overwhelming and irrefutable'' evidence that the insurgents in El Salvador
were controlled from outside that country by non-Salvadorans.

Testifying before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Mr. Haig sought to rebut
the contention of the Salvadoran guerrillas that their insurgency was an
autonomous Salvadoran effort without external assistance but he did not specify
who the non-Salvadorans were.

Mr. Haig, in a vigorous defense of the Administration's approach to the Central
American and Caribbean regions and in the face of some skeptical and hostile
questioning, also predicted that Americans would support the Administration's
policies so long as they were convinced ''that we are going to succeed and not
flounder as we did in Vietnam.''

Comments on Poland

On other matters, Mr. Haig made these points:

- The Administration will be ready in a few weeks to open negotiations with the
Soviet Union on strategic arms reduction but will do so only when the ''climate,
the conditions'' for such talks existed, by which he meant after the situation
in Poland improved.

- The United States will not do business as usual with either Poland or the
Soviet Union ''while repression in Poland continues,'' and further sanctions
will be undertaken if the Polish situation did not improve.

- Although selling Hawk mobile antiaircraft missiles to Jordan could poison
relations with Israel, it is important to keep such moderate Arab countries from
becoming buyers of Soviet arms. He did not say whether he favored such sales to
Jordan.

He Denies Plan to Intervene

Although the hearing was supposed to concentrate on East-West relations, much of
the questioning was about the Caribbean region.  Mr. Haig said that preventing
Communist domination of the Caribbean and Central American region was ''in the
vital interest'' of the United States, but he tried to reduce apprehension that
the Administration was planning any direct military move.

When Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, asked if he meant
that he favored using military force to prevent armed Communist takeovers, he
replied: ''No, not at all. I don't know of any official of the executive branch
who has suggested for a moment that consideration was being given for the direct
involvement of American forces in Salvador.''

In answer to a question from Representative Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of
Indiana, Mr. Haig said the United States had ''overwhelming and irrefutable''
evidence that the insurgents in El Salvador were controlled and directed by
non-Salvadorans outside the country.

He declined to provide details, however, saying it would jeopardize intelligence
sources. Later, however, Senator Barry Goldwater, Republican of Arizona,
chairman of the Intelligence Committee, said that on Feb. 25 William J. Casey,
Director of Central Intelligence, and others briefed his committee and ''left no
doubt that there is active involvement by Sandinista Government officials in
support of the Salvadoran guerrilla movement.''

''This support,'' he said, ''includes arrangements for the use of Nicaraguan
territory for the movement of arms and munitions to guerrillas in El Salvador,
the continuing passage of guerrillas in and out of Nicaragua for advanced
training in sabotage and other terrorist tactics and the presence of high-level
guerrilla headquarters elements in Nicaragua.''

Mr. Casey, in this week's issue of U.S. News & World Report, is reported to have
said that the insurgents were being directed from Nicaragua with the help of
Cuba, Vietnam, the Palestine Liberation Organizaiton and the Soviet Union.

The magazine quoted Mr. Casey as saying that ''this whole El Salvador insurgency
is run out of Managua by professionals experienced in directing guerrilla
wars.''

Mr. Haig went to some lengths to rebut the argument that El Salvador would
become ''another Vietnam.'' ''I think much has been done to suggest there are
strong parallels between the American approach today to Salvador and to Vietnam
some years ago,'' Mr. Haig said. ''I think this is a terrible distortion of
reality and one which overlooks a number of fundamental differences.''

He said that ''first and foremost'' was the ''strategic importance'' of Central
America to the United States because of its prominence in American trade and the
fact that half of American oil moves through the Caribbean and the Panama Canal.
In time of trouble in Europe, the area would be crucial, he suggested, to
shipping supplies overseas.

''So this is a vitally important region and it is a region today that is plagued
by two extremely urgent dangers,'' he said. ''One is social-economic resulting
from the inflated cost of energy to those governments, sometimes twentyfold, and
the simultaneous decline in the remuneration for their one- or two-product
economies.

''Secondly,'' he said, ''it is the willingness of the Soviet Union and Cuba to
manipulate these human tragedies in the interest of spreading totalitarian
Marxist-Leninist ideology.''

Mr. Haig said that the trouble during the Vietnam era was that the Government
never decided if that region was or was not vital to American interests. If it
had decided it was, he said, ''I believe they would have taken actions
commensurate with that judgment.''

''If they had concluded negatively, then we would never have become involved in
the first instance,'' he said.  ''Now let me tell you I come down on the side
of, in such an assessment in Central America, that the outcome of the situation
there is in the vital interest of the American people and must be so dealt
with,'' Mr. Haig said.

''Now it is an area of vital interest to the American people and, as I said
recently, I know the American people will support what is prudent and necessary,
providing they think we mean what we mean and that we are going to succeed and
not flounder as we did in Vietnam,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Alexander M. Haig (page A12)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 3, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM TESTIMONY BY HAIG BEFORE HOUSE PANEL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 2


Following are excerpts from Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.'s testimony
today before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, as recorded by The New York
Times:

Vietnam-Salvador Parallel

I think much has been done to suggest there are strong parallels between the
American approach today to Salvador and to Vietnam some years ago. I think this
is a terrible distortion of reality and one which overlooks a number of
fundamental differences.

First and foremost is the difference with respect to the strategic importance of
Central America as a region and the member republics of the region to the United
States today. That region is our fourth largest trading partner; one-half of our
oil moves through the waters of the Caribbean and the canal. Roughly one-half of
our global trade goes through that region. As a nation, we've been plagued
recently to the tune of one and a half million undocumented illegal entries to
the United States in 1980. All of this underlines the strategic importance of
the Central America region. From the standpoint of military capability, at a
time of conflict, it would control the flow of our logistic support for our half
a million Americans positioned forward in Europe to maintain the defense of
those assets, let alone the importance of our ability to defend Western Europe
at large.

So this is a vitally important region, and it is a region today that is plagued
by two extreme, urgent dangers. One is socialeconomic resulting from the
inflated cost of energy to those governments, sometimes twentyfold, and the
simultaneous decline in the renumeration for their one- or two-product
economies. It has had a devastating social-economic impact.

Need for Assessment

Secondly, it is the willingness of the Soviet Union and Cuba to manipulate these
human tragedies in the interest of spreading totalitarian Marxist-Leninist
ideology, to do so with training and arms. I often said about Southeast Asia if
America, in the executive branch, and in its consultation with the Congress at
the time, had included a very careful assessment of whether the outcome in
Southeast Asia was in the vital interest of the American people - had they
concluded affirmatively, I believe they would have taken actions commensurate
with that judgment. If they had concluded negatively, then we would never have
become involved in the first instance.

Now, let me tell you, I come down on the side of, in such an assessment in
Central America, that the outcome of the situation there is in the vital
interest of the American people and must be so dealt with. Now that means not
necessarily some of the horrendous brow-furrowing I now notice in some of the
committee, but a sophisticated long-range approach, an approach that involves
multilateralism, that avoids the danger of big-brotherism from the colossus of
the north. Now we are in the process of doing that.

In style, dealing with it in a multilateral way; in approach, dealing with the
social-economic needs of the region, as well as the security needs, and the
order of magnitude is five to one in favor of the economic development.

Now, it is an area of vital interest to the American people, and I said
recently, I know the American people will support what is prudent and necessary
providing they think we mean what we mean and that we are going to succeed and
not flounder as we did in Vietnam.

Egyptian-Israeli Relations
There are a number of factors that make it a more sensitive period than the one
we have experienced heretofore. What are those factors?

In the Egyptian case, the death of President Sadat is a factor of no mean
consequence, and clearly President Mubarak has to set his own course, establish
his own constituencies, his own support base.  From all he said here in
Washington in his talks with President Reagan, I am very encouraged that the
future will bring continual expansion of good relationships between Israel and
Egypt. But it won't just happen. It is going to need careful tending and
responsible actions on the part of both Governments.

In the case of Israel, Israel is facing a very traumatic benchmark which occurs
in April of this year when the Sinai is returned. This involves not only the
relinquishment of a strategic security cushion, but the more horrendous human
problem of the relocation of settlements.

Sale of Arms to Jordan
There are two sides. One is the clear recognition that it is not in our interest
or Israel's interest to have moderate Arab regimes armed and equipped by the
Soviet Union. It is not in our interest, especially when the technology provided
by the SAM-8 is not only comparable but in many respects better than
corresponding American equipment, and there is no influence, or let's say,
American ability to influence the use of that ability on their use.

On the other hand, one must recognize that states that do not recognize Israel
and maintain an attitude of conflict or state or war - when they receive Western
armaments it must be a source of concern to the Government of Israel and must be
a source of concern to us.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 3, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Is Depression Lurking?

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 934 words


BELOW the surface of daily events, as noted here two weeks ago, deeper anxieties
are growing that the economy is suffering worse ailments than those of a
conventional business cycle. Increasingly one hears the question, ''Could we
have another depression?'' And some businessmen, fighting for their companies'
survival, have started to worry that we already have one.

Many companies are struggling to stay above water by cutting costs - shutting
down plants, laying off workers and managers, trimming outlays on new plant and
equipment, cutting wherever they can. Some areas - the Great Lake states, the
Pacific Northwest - feel that the depression has come.

But it is too early to call this a depression. Nationally, unemployment has
risen thus far to less than 9 percent, far below the peak of 25 percent in 1933
during the Great Depression. But it took a few years of continuous erosion for
the jobless rate to get that high; in 1930, the year after the Crash, the
unemployment rate averaged 8.7 percent. In 1931 it got up to 15.9 percent and in
1932 to 23.6 percent.

Up to now, measured on a year-to-year basis, real gross national product - total
output, adjusted for inflation - has been stagnating, not collapsing as it did
in the 1930's. From 1929 to 1933, real G.N.P. plunged by 30.5 percent. The
year-to-year drops in real G.N.P. were as follows: 1929-30, 9.9 percent;
1930-31, 7.6 percent; 1931-32, 14.8 percent, and 1932-33, 1.8 percent.

By comparison, real G.N.P. declined by just two-tenths of 1 percent in 1980,
rose by 1.9 percent in 1981 (despite the drop in the fourth quarter at an annual
rate of 4.8 percent) and is expected, according to a consensus of 44 leading
economists, to be flat in 1982 (assuming a second-half recovery at an annual
rate of more than 4 percent to make up for the first-half recession.)

Moreover, Paul A. Volcker, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, while
acknowledging in testimony to the Senate Banking Committee yesterday that
''there are risks,'' stressed, ''I wouldn't characterize them as a depression.

''I think the probabilities are very strongly on the side of a recovery later
this year,'' he said.

But what if that second-half recovery does not happen? Many economists, still
holding to the conventional forecast of a secondhalf recovery, have begun to
warn their clients of risks that there might be no recovery this year.

Indeed, many businessmen no longer expect one. The latest Heller/Roper
small-business survey found that of 1,030 chief executive officers, 49 percent
do not expect the recession to end before the close of 1982.

The longer the recession lasts, the higher the wave of business failures will
surge. American industry, generally speaking, is in a seriously strained
liquidity position, hard put to cover its debts and meet its interest payments.
The latest data of the Federal Trade Commission, for the third quarter of 1981,
show a rapid deterioration of corporate liquidity just since the start of 1979,
on top of a more gradual erosion of corporate liquidity during the postwar
period.

Among the reasons for the worsening liquidity squeeze: the recession has driven
down earnings since those third-quarter 1981 figures were compiled, and, despite
the recession, interest rates have moved up again. The picture is particularly
worrisome in autos, nonferrous metals, steel, housing, the thrift institutions,
banks, lumber, farms and farm equipment and even among some oil companies.
While large concerns with strong borrowing power can stay afloat, many small
businesses are going under. One professional who went to an executive-search
firm for help in finding a new corporate job was startled to have his deposit
check returned with ''Out of Business'' written across it.

The combined problems of economic stagnation and the mountainous buildup of debt
have been going on not only in the United States but also throughout the world
since at least 1973, when the oil price explosion aggravated inflation and
arrested productivity growth at the same time.

Is the present phase of stagnation a harbinger of a real depression to come?
Prof. Daniel R. Fusfeld of the University of Michigan notes that every great
depression, such as those of the 1840's, 1890's and 1930's, has come after a
period of relative stagnation in the world economy. He suggested, in August
1978, at the annual meeting of the American Economic Association, that the phase
of relative stagnation was then still in its early stages but could collapse
into depression by 1984.

The present world expansion began with recovery from the depression of the
1930's, developed during World War II and swelled in the 20 years following the
war into the greatest era of economic growth in history. That epoch of stable
growth built to an inflationary climax during the Vietnam War and the subsequent
energy crisis.

The struggle to control the inflation brought on a series of stopgo recessions.
Whenever the recessions threatened to generate a politically unacceptable level
of unemployment, inflationary, fiscal and monetary policies floated the United
States and other nations off the rocks.

But can that process go on indefinitely? Has it now come to an end? How can
disaster be avoided? This issue will be examined in the next column.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 3, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
SEISMIC DATA CONCERN APPOINTS TOP OFFICER

BYLINE: By Leonard Sloane

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 265 words


Frank E. Lasater Jr., 31, has been named president and chief executive officer
of Flare Inc., a seismic data company that provides information to the petroleum
industry in exploring for oil and gas.  He succeeds George J. Dallas 3d, 38, who
continues as chairman of the company, based in Midland, Tex.

''Our industry is starting to feel some of the effects of the worldwide oil
glut,'' Mr. Lasater said in a telephone interview.  ''Some of the oil companies
are starting to pull back a little bit on their exploration budgets in some
regions - for instance, the Rocky Mountains. But west Texas and Michigan are as
hot as ever and staying active. They're planning wells out five years in
advance.''

Mr. Lasater, who served in Vietnam with the Marine Corps, joined Flare in 1976
as a vice president. The following year he was appointed executive vice
president.

Mr. Dallas, a geophysicist, worked for such companies as the Standard Oil
Company (Indiana) and the GTS Corporation before founding his own seismic data
company in 1975. That company merged with others shortly afterward with Mr.
Dallas at its head.

According to Mr. Lasater, oil companies are making more use of outside seismic
data concerns rather than doing the work themselves.  ''Their geophysicists have
shifted away from acquiring data to interpreting data,'' he said. ''Every time a
well is discovered off our data, that creates new ideas.'' Leonard Sloane

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
CONFIDENCE IN THE WEST

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 839 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 3


Underlying the great foreign policy argument, straining the Atlantic alliance
and provoking top-level dogfights in Washington is the question of Western
confidence.

When the big issues are raised at all, they are ducked in fearful terms of the
risk that any flexibility will create new opportunities for Soviet expansion.

Thus, when the State Department insists on soothing European allies, it is in
concern lest too much U.S. pressure drive them toward neutrality and indulgence
of the Russians. And when Defense Department and White House advisers insist on
being tough with allies, it is in concern lest their qualms drag the U.S. into
letting down its guard against Moscow.

Both attitudes rest on an unavowed sense of Western weakness. There is an
element of crusading spirit among the hard-liners, as though Soviet Communism
remained a magnetic dragon drawing unwary peoples around the world like helpless
iron filings.

The argument of Jeane Kirkpatrick, the chief U.S. delegate at the United
Nations, that friendly tyrants must be supported lest their countries fall to
unfriendly ones is based less on amoral realpolitik than on this hidden fear
that the free world has nothing better to offer.

There is an element of historic distress among backers of allied coordination,
reflecting a hidden fear that disunity will enable a war-minded enemy to pick
countries off one by one as Hitler did at the start of World War II.

The tanks and missiles are counted as though battle were imminent and the
hardware were already decisive.  All this neglects the factors in the power
balance that are dominant in peacetime, and help the chances for peace. It is
true that the Russians have a mighty arsenal. But that is their only asset, and
the West seems deliberately to discount its strengths in the rival measurement.

Vietnam and Watergate, recession, lack of leadership have contributed to this
feeling of dangerous weakness, though I am inclined to think it comes from a
deeper bewilderment as societies move into the third millenium and sense change
coming without knowing how to direct it.

A clearer, closer look at the world, however, shows that Communist societies
have even less capacity to deal with change. Moreover, everybody knows it now.
That is the key lesson of Poland's travail, and it must be the inner terror of
the Soviet leadership as it faces the problem of succession without a notion of
how to dare reform.

According to the most credible reports, the Russians outside the biggest cities
are literally hungry. Belief in Communism as the wave of the future has long
since given way to belief in the status quo as the only means of avoiding the
most devastating explosion.

There is no need to overlook economic and social troubles in the West to see
that democratic societies with all their faults have succeeded where others
failed and have a resilience beyond the dreams of totalitarians.

We argue about the best way to deal with inflation and unemployment and
productivity and social justice, and we keep tinkering with one approach and
another in the Western countries. But we argue out loud and we keep trying, and
improvements are made.

One cab driver doesn't make a world, but a Ghanaian named Vincent Austin who
lives in Washington speaks for more people than many imagine. He is a graduate
engineer. His desperate country needs his skills. He went home to try putting
them to work, but he soon found constructive suggestions were taken as dangerous
criticism. ''I can't live in a country where I can't talk as a man,'' he told
me. So he is driving a Washington cab.

His story is typical of many countries. Freedom isn't a handicap.  It is the
greatest strength.  The geopoliticians in Washington are worried lest any
buckling in the East-West line confuse and undermine the democracies. The
suggestion of a nuclear-free Europe, or Central Europe, is rejected on grounds
that the Red Army and Asian-based Soviet missiles would cow Western Europe into
accepting Soviet domination of its politics.

But technology has changed dramatically since Poland put the proposal a
generation ago in hopes of loosening its ties to Moscow.  Why not look at the
idea again, in a new version, with full awareness both of new defense options
(offshore, for example) and of West Europe's achievements in the last 30 years
compared to the East?

An initiative to halt the drift toward war in a nuclear world can only come from
the West. It need not be so dramatic at the start, but it needs to be based on
confidence that the West has far more to gain than to lose in taking the
initiative for peace. European neutralism stems from failure to act with a sense
of the West's real strength, not from lack of missiles.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WEINBERGER AND THE PRESS: POINT, COUNTERPOINT

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


At breakfast with Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, a reporter was
asking a question about news articles when Mr. Weinberger interrupted to quip:
''They're probably wrong.''

Everyone chuckled. But the comment, for all its good humor, had a barb. Although
Mr. Weinberger has long harped on the press, mostly with banter, his remarks
have had more sting lately.

He contends that coverage of his recent trip to the Middle East was marred by
distortion. He says that accounts of new decisions on MX missiles were
''moderately infuriating.'' He criticizes reports on his differences with
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., as ''blowing a simple difference of
opinion about a particular policy matter into a blood feud.''

Mr. Weinberger is not alone. President Reagan has seemed increasingly angry over
challenges from the press about his grasp of facts. Mr. Haig has accused the
press of carrying leftist propaganda on El Salvador. Interior Secretary James G.
Watt said in Congressional testimony: ''They kill good trees to put out bad
newspapers.''

But Mr. Weinberger has become perturbed enough to instruct the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, Henry E. Catto Jr., to find out what's
wrong. Pentagon officials are worried that troubled press relations may weaken
support for the military budget.  So Mr. Catto is consulting with former
Pentagon press officers in an effort to smooth things out.

Mr. Weinberger's personal relations with reporters have been cordial. Many
reporters consider him to be an engaging man of unfailing courtesy who is
accessible and usually forthright. He likes to say he was once a newspaperman
himself, on The Harvard Crimson.

But Mr. Weinberger has expressed surprise that the press holds every word up to
scrutiny. Former Secretary of State Dean Rusk, who had to deal with the press
during the Vietnam War, once said that he kept at least four audiences in mind:
Americans, allies, neutrals and adversaries. Mr. Weinberger, at times, seems
unaware that people all over the world will be examining his nuances.

Indeed, Mr. Weinberger has said that he considers dealing with the press a game
and jokes that nobody paid so much attention to him when he was Secretary of
Health, Education and Welfare in the Nixon Administration.

For a lawyer, reporters who cover him say, Mr. Weinberger is often curiously
imprecise, which tends to erode his credibility. In testimony about the B-1
bomber, for instance, he asserted that the plane would be able to penetrate
Soviet defenses ''until 1990.'' Critics seized upon that to argue that $20
billion would be wasted on planes with limited capabilities. Thereupon, Mr.
Weinberger asserted that the plane could penetrate ''until well into the
1990's.'' And recently, he upped that to ''well into the next century.''

In handling the press in Washington, a veteran press officer says: ''You can
protect or project.'' Around the Weinberger Pentagon, the wagons have been
circled. One of Deputy Secretary Frank C. Carlucci's first acts was to warn
officials to be cautious with the press, especially in discussing confidential
information.

Last fall, the Pentagon press office took great pains to insure that decisions
on the MX missile and B-1 bomber did not become public until President Reagan
announced them. They closed the press area to other officials and made reporters
who were given copies of the decisions sign a pledge: ''There will be no
premature release of this information.'' The area was plastered with admonitions
that reporters ''must agree not to talk with Congressional personnel'' before
release.

More recently, 25 senior officials were asked to take lie-detector tests, after
an account of a meeting of a Pentagon executive committee, reached the press.
That incident left a distinct chill and has been formalized by new rules that
require officials to obtain approval for interviews with Mr. Catto's office,
even on subjects that might favor the Administration's position.

Mr. Catto is an urbane Texan with a ready smile and a quick wit. He is a former
Ambassador and chief of protocol who did not know Mr.  Weinberger before coming
to the Pentagon but who has worked hard at getting to know his boss.

As chief of the Pentagon press operation, Mr. Catto has added several
innovations, such as bringing into the semi-weekly press briefings senior
officials, military officers or specialists to explain policies. Beyond that, he
has instituted a weekly background session, called ''vespers,'' during which he
invites a senior official to meet over a drink and snacks with reporters for
conversation ranging across policy and strategy.

But Mr. Catto seems to have been handicapped somewhat by his inexperience in
military matters and has usually been more a messenger between Mr. Weinberger
and the press than a knowledgeable source. Moreover, lacking experience in the
workings of the Pentagon press, he appears at times to have been hampered in
advising Mr.  Weinberger on how to play information for maximum benefit and how
to avoid trouble.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Caspar Weinberger

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 5, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EL SALVADOR'S LAND PROGRAM: FERVOR ON BOTH SIDES

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1883 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, March 4


It has been two years since the Government of El Salvador, facing a leftist-led
insurrection and under pressure from the United States, announced what President
Reagan recently called an ''unprecedented'' land redistribution program.

Since then, the country's largest private plantations have been converted to
peasant cooperatives and thousands of impoverished peasants have become the
provisional owners of the tiny plots they once rented.

But some 1,700 large farms have not been converted, as the plan originally
envisaged, because what is known as Phase 2 never went into effect. The bulk of
the country's agricultural wealth remains in the hands of a relatively small
number of families.

3 Officials Assassinated

''At present, we are opposed to Phase 2,'' said a United States Embassy
official, adding that it might be carried out ''in five to 10 years.'' American
officials will not allow their names to be used even when citing statistics or
speaking favorably about the land redistribution program, primarily because it
is such a volatile issue here. Two American advisers to the program and the head
of El Salvador's Institute for Agrarian Transformation were assassinated in the
coffee shop of the Sheraton Hotel in January 1981.

The first two phases of the program were announced on March 6, 1980, by the
civilian-military junta. Phase 1 expropriated all estates larger than 1,235
acres, with compensation, and converted them to peasant cooperatives. Under
Phase 2 similar expropriation and conversion would be extended to farms of more
than 247 acres.

On April 29, 1980, Phase 3, which is known as the ''land to the tiller'' law,
was decreed. It permits peasants to buy up to 17 acres of the land they have
been working as tenant farmers or sharecroppers.

Economic Impact Feared

The opposition of United States and some Salvadoran officials to the second
phase is based on political and economic considerations.  The farms that would
be affected are owned by middle-and uppermiddle-class Salvadorans, and the
Government, which is trying to broaden its support, does not want to alienate
them. United States and Salvadoran officials also worry that any interference
with the private ownership of these farms, which generate the bulk of the
country's export earnings, would further damage El Salvador's already battered
economy.

The program has produced both passionate supporters and critics.  The United
States Ambassador, Deane R. Hinton, recently acclaimed it as ''the most
revolutionary land reform in Latin American history.''

A Salvadoran university professor sympathetic to the social and economic
objectives of the leftist rebels countered: ''It is not revolutionary because it
is not designed to benefit the people, but to isolate and destroy the left. I
don't say there is no reform, but it is so insignificant that gigantic
repression is needed against the peasants.''

And on the right, one of the country's major newspapers, El Diario de Hoy,
declared in an editorial that the program would have the same consequences as
the one imposed by the United States in Vietnam: ''A mortal blow to the economy
of the country.''

360,000 Peasants Benefit

The acrimonious charges and countercharges often end up as a debate over whether
the glass of water is half-full or half-empty.  Some 386,000 peasants have
benefited from the conversion of the largest farms under Phase 1, the program's
supporters stress. Critics point out that this is only half of the potential
Phase 1 beneficiaries.

Three hundred and twenty-nine of these large farms, which yielded about half of
the country's sugar, 40 percent of the cotton and 12 percent of the coffee, are
now peasant cooperatives. Of these, 263 were expropriated under Phase 1 and the
rest were sold to the Government by their owners.

The 1,700 farms that had been destined for conversion under Phase 2 and that are
still part of the private sector produced the other half of the sugar, 60
percent of the cotton and 88 percent of the coffee.

About 20,000 peasants have received provisional titles to the tiny plots they
had been working as tenant farmers under the third phase.  But the Salvadoran
Government has estimated there are 150,000 potential land-to-the-tiller
beneficiaries, and to date no one has received a clear title.

Wealth Measured in Land

Defenders and critics of the program agree that one of the most important
yardsticks for measuring it is the extent to which there is now a more equal
distribution of wealth and income.

In El Salvador's farm-based economy, wealth has long been measured primarily by
the amount of land one owns. Coffee, cotton and sugar bring in about 75 percent
of the country's export earnings.

The land program ''has broken the power of the oligarchy, and to that extent has
been successful,'' a United States Embassy spokesman said.

''It is unquestionable that this agrarian reform has moved the country forward
inches, and that is a tremendous feat,'' said the university professor. He
commended the Christian Democrats, who make up the civilian side of the
Government, and said that the leftist revolutionaries generally supported Phases
1 and 3.

But he argued, as do others, that because the second phase of the program has
not been carried out, there has not been a meaningful shift of wealth and income
to the rural poor.

Political Effects Acclaimed

Publicly, senior Salvadoran Government officials say that Phase 2 has been
''suspended,'' that some day it will be put into effect. But with the United
States opposed to Phase 2, Salvadoran officials concede privately that it will
probably not be carried out.

Salvadoran and United States officials frequently extol what they call the
political success of the land program, but not everyone agrees that it has
deprived the leftist revolutionaries of their peasant support.

''The left fears land reform,'' Roy L. Prosterman, an American lawyer who is a
key figure in El Salvador's land redistribution program, told a group of angry
Salvadoran businessmen shortly after it was announced. ''It deprives them of
their most valuable weapon in implementing revolution because they can no longer
appeal to the landless.'' As the editorial in El Diario de Hoy noted, Mr.
Prosterman was also a principal architect of the land redistribution program in
Vietnam.

Landless Poor an Issue

While approximately half a million peasants have benefited from Phases 1 and 3,
a study conducted by a private consulting firm for the Agency for International
Development says that ''the agrarian reform will not solve the problem'' of some
740,000 landless rural poor.

Even those who have benefited have not always become staunch Government
supporters.  ''There is no great enthusiasm'' for the Government among the
peasants ''because the massacres and violations of human rights continue,'' a
senior Roman Catholic Church official said in a recent interview. According to
the Catholic University here, the Human Rights Commission of El Salvador and the
legal aid office of the Roman Catholic archdiosese, peasants accounted for
almost half of the 13,000 civilians these groups say Government soldiers killed
last year.

The church leader compared the land program to a man who gives his wife $2,000
but at the same time continues to beat her. ''She returns the $2,000 and says
treat me like a person.''

Backers and challengers of the program do agree on one thing: It has been
inefficiently administered.  Access to credit and financing has been a major
obstacle to greater success, especially on the Phase 1 cooperatives. Along with
the land redistribution announced in March 1980, the Government also
nationalized the banks. One of the main purposes was to make credit more readily
available to the cooperatives.

Cattle Ranch in Decline

San Cayetano was once a lucrative cattle ranch owned by one of the country's
wealthiest families. Anticipating the Government's expropriation, the owners
rushed some 900 dairy and beef cattle to Guatemala and the slaughterhouse.

Eight months ago, a visitor to what is now a 1,500-acre cooperative managed by
the peasants saw weed-infested pastures and empty stalls inside the crumbling
walls of the milking shed. The cooperative was seeking financing to start a new
herd.

Returning last week, the visitor was told by directors of the cooperative that
six days earlier they had bought 15 cows. Loan requests to allow them to buy 100
more have been pending for more than a year.

A 23-year-old Government agronomist assigned to help the peasants manage San
Cayetano explained that while cattle ranching was profitable, it was not labor
intensive. So Government policy favored credits for seeds, fertilizers and wages
to plant crops whose cultivation generates farm employment.

The former owners of San Cayetano planted only coffee. Now the peasants devote
142 acres to the cultivation of corn and 232 acres to sorghum. The cooperative
would also like to plant 346 acres of sugar cane, but it has not been able to
obtain a loan that would permit it to pay the peasants' wages.

Payment for Crop Awaited

The 31-year-old president of the cooperative, Rene de Jesus Alazan, who like his
parents was born on San Cayetano, said he was worried that the credits that the
cooperative had been granted would not be made available in time to start
planting later this month. And he said that the cooperative had not been paid
for some 60,000 pounds of coffee it delivered to the state coffee institute in
November, or even told the crop's value.

According to San Cayetano's accountant, a 40-year-old father of seven who also
was born on the ranch and who has had only three years of formal schooling, the
cooperative expects a profit for the 1981-1982 agricultural year of $14,000 and
hopes to makes $24,000 next year. ''If we work harder it will be more,'' he
said.

Most of the cooperative's members appear to be still uncertain whether their
lives are better now than they were when they worked for the dueno, or owner,
who paid them a salary, usually about $3 a day.

''We had doctors, medicines, bonuses and vacations,'' said the cooperative's
56-year-old vice president, Victor Manuel Guerra, listing some of their former
benefits.

Sitting in the small farm office, where a picture of the former owner still
hangs over shuttered windows that open onto a tranquil vista of tropical trees
and forested volcanic slopes, Mr. Guerra added: ''Before we worked for a salary.
Now we work for ourselves, so we must work harder. But a lot of the members
don't understand that yet.''

''Little by little, they will recognize this,'' added another cooperative
member. ''Our life will be better.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of a scene in El Salvador

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 5, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

RELEASING INTELLIGENCE DATA: A 'NO WIN SITUATION'

BYLINE: By Philip Taubman

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 994 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 4


For better than a year, the United States has trained the eyes and ears of its
intelligence agencies on the small nation of El Salvador. That effort, according
to top officials of the Reagan Administration, has produced an abundance of
''irrefutable'' and ''unquestionable'' information about arms, money and advice
flowing to guerrilla forces in El Salvador from the Soviet Union, Cuba and
Nicaragua.

The intelligence data, officials say, have formed the basis for the
Administration's policy of providing military assistance to the junta that rules
El Salvador and of issuing ominous warnings about possible future American
action in the area.

But instead of guaranteeing a receptive audience for the Administration's
policy, the data have increasingly become as much of an issue as the policy
itself. And in the process, the Administration has learned a fundamental rule of
governing in Washington: the best secret intelligence information in the world
is useless as a means of building popular support for a policy until the data
are declassified and disseminated.

The Administration discovered that paradox in recent weeks as its repeated
contentions of quality about the intelligence concerning El Salvador have been
greeted by demands in Congress to see ''the evidence.''

''It's a no-win situation,'' said one senior Administration official privately.
''If we go public with the information, we may lose our ability to continue
collecting in the field. If we don't, we may lose our chance to build public
support for the policy.''

Long-Term Damage Feared

The problem has stimulated a lively debate both within the Administration and in
Congress about how best to make use of the intelligence data.

To the protectors of America's intelligence secrets, the idea of making a major
public disclosure of the data on Central America borders on espionage. They
argue that the release of specific intelligence information would probably cause
immediate as well as long-term damage to United States intelligence-gathering
capabilities.

In the short run, they contend, the Soviet Union, Cuba and Nicaragua, by
learning what the United States knowns, could easily determine the means used to
collect the information, and take steps to prevent further collection. In the
long run, they fear that the Soviet Union might gain important knowledge about
American collection capabilities that could stimulate Soviet advances in the
arts of espionage.

''We have learned the hard way that release of information, while helpful as a
public relations tool, has cost us in ways we never anticipated,'' said a
veteran intelligence official.

60's Disclosures Cited

For example, he said, disclosures about Soviet military strength in the 1960's
alerted the Russians to advances in American satellite surveillance
capabilities.

Proponents of declassification argue that the intelligence information about El
Salvador will be useless to the Government if the Administration cannot build
popular support for its policy. As one senior foreign policy official asked,
''What's the use of having all this information if no one believes us?''

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. encountered some of that disbelief
today in an appearance before a House Appropriations subcommittee. Pressed for
specifics about outside intervention in El Salvador, Mr. Haig told the committee
that a ''Nicaraguan military man'' had been captured in El Salvador helping
direct guerrilla operations. Mr. Haig also said that the United States knew of
2,000 Cuban, and 70 Soviet military advisers working with Nicaraguan forces.

The subcommittee chairman, Representative Clarence D. Long, Democrat of
Maryland, was unimpressed. He told Mr. Haig that the subcommittee would not
approve the Administration's Caribbean Basin economic aid plan until he had a
chance to review the raw intelligence data himself.

In a way, Mr. Long's demand represents the legacy of Vietnam and Watergate.
Disclosures about officially-sanctioned deceit during the Johnson and Nixon
Administrations eroded public faith in Government institutions and officials.

Democrats Request Report

''There was a time when it was good enough for the President or Secretary of
State to give his word that a foreign power was opposing American interests
abroad,'' said a senior Reagan Administration official recently. ''Sadly, that's
no longer the case.''

In an effort to resolve what the Reagan Administration knows about outside
interference in El Salvador, several Democratic members of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, which received a top-level briefing on El Salvador last
week, have asked the committee to review the secret data and prepare a sanitized
but detailed public report.

Some members have noted that at the same time the Administration is fighting
disclosure of data on El Salvador, top officials have talked openly about
classified information concerning Soviet military advances, including the
development a new long-range bomber.

''Every year about budget time, there's suddenly a round of disclosures about
Soviet weapons,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont.

Senator Barry Goldwater, chairman of the Intelligence Committee, tried to put an
end to the debate over intelligence and El Salvador last week. Following the
committee briefing on El Salvador, the Arizona Republican announced, ''The
American people deserve to know that the officials charged with developing and
implementing United States policy in this area are doing so on the basis of
solid information.''

But, he added, ''The details must remain secret.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 5, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
REAGAN CHOICE FOR NATION'S TOP MILITARY POST

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 4


On the Anzio beachhead in Italy in May 1944, John W. Vessey Jr. was the first
sergeant of an artillery battery.  Next July 1, after 41 years of military
service, General Vessey is scheduled to become the nation's top soldier as
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

General Vessey, who is currently the Vice Chief of Staff of the Army, has spent
much of his career out of the Washington limelight as a combat commander of
ground forces. He has a particular interest in Latin America, according to those
who know him, and a quiet empathy for allies.

How the 59-year-old general came to the attention of Secretary of Defense Caspar
W. Weinberger, who recommended the nomination to President Reagan, was not
immediately clear. The President disclosed the nomination, which caught
Washington largely by surprise, as he headed for a vacation in California.

As Vice Chief of Staff, General Vessey has had the job of running the Army's
day-to-day operations while the Chief of Staff, Gen.  Edward C. Meyer, has
planned for the Army of the future and dealt with the Defense Secretary as a
member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Praise From Army Chief

Whatever the case, perhaps the officer most enthusiastic about General Vessey's
nomination, which must be approved by the Senate, was the general's boss,
General Meyer. In a brief telephone interview, General Meyer said, ''He's a
selfless individual who really does put nation ahead of self.''

When President Carter reached well down into the ranks of lieutenant generals to
appoint General Meyer Chief of Staff in 1979, the President in effect passed
over General Vessey, then General Meyer's senior. But General Vessey, at General
Meyer's request, took the job as Vice Chief of Staff. ''It was a very selfless
thing for Jack to do,'' General Meyer said. ''I've used that as an example for
all my soldiers out there.''

General Meyer continued: ''He understands the big picture. He understands the
broader issues of policy and interrelationships that are absolutely essential in
that job. He's not going to permit himself to become an operations sergeant.''

''General Vessey will do the kinds of things that the chairman ought to be
doing, which are looking at broad policies and being able to articulate the
issues so that we make the right decisions in the very critical period ahead,''
General Meyer said.

'Cool, Calm and Meticulous'

''He's a very cool and calm man,'' said a general who has worked with General
Vessey. ''He's very meticulous about detail. He has a fantastic memory and once
he reads or hears something, he can pull it out in an instant.''

Said another general who asked not to be identified: ''When he has something to
say, it makes infinitely good sense. He speaks in simple, declaratory sentences.
He has a remarkable capacity to size up a situation with common sense.''

General Vessey's record shows that he was something of a late bloomer. After he
was promoted from first sergeant to second lieutenant for distinguishing himself
on the battlefield, he worked his way up through ranks in the Army. But he did
not get his college degree, a bachelor of science from the University of
Maryland, until he was 41 years old and a lieutenant colonel.

Two years later, he received a master's degree from George Washington
University. He went to helicopter school as a colonel at the age of 48. Most of
the students were young enough to be his sons.

Similarly, his early promotions were routine: five years as a first lieutenant,
seven years as a captain. But after he became a brigadier general in 1971, it
took him only five and a half years to earn all four stars as a full general, in
November 1976.

Fought in North Africa

John William Vessey Jr. was born in Minneapolis on June 29, 1922, and enlisted
in the National Guard in 1939. He was called to active service in February 1941,
before the United States entered World War II, and later fought with the 34th
Infantry Division in North Africa and Italy.

In his more recent career, General Vessey has been mostly a troop commander. He
was commander of an infantry division's artillery; chief of staff of an armored
division; commanding general of the Fourth Infantry Division at Fort Carson,
Colo., and commanding general of the Eighth Army and United States Forces in
South Korea.

He has also been an operations officer here in Washington and was Deputy Chief
of Staff for Operations in 1975 and 1976 when one his principal subordinates was
then-Lieut. General Meyer. General Vessey has been Vice Chief of Staff since
1979.

General Vessey has earned seven major combat decorations, including the
Distinguished Service Cross, the Army's second highest, and the Purple Heart for
a wound in Vietnam.

The general is married to the former Avis C. Funk of Minneapolis.  They have
three children, John William 3d, who is 32; Sarah Ann, 28, and David, 25, a
chief warrant officer in the Army.

General Vessey had been scheduled to retire this summer and his name had rarely
been mentioned as a candidate for the chairman's job in the Pentagon rumor mill.
''The first time I heard Vessey's name,'' said a usually well-informed officer,
''was today.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of John Vessey Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 6, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Is Said to Jail Two Buddhist Monks

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 157 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 5


Two leaders of Buddhism in Vietnam have been jailed in Ho Chi Minh City,
Vietnamese Buddhists in Paris said today.

They said Thich Huyen Quang, acting chairman of the Unified Buddhist Church of
Vietnam, and Thich Quang Do, executive secretary of the church, were arrested on
Feb. 25.

''The two monks were jailed because people in Ho Chi Minh City manifested their
discontent against the Government by attending massively prayer meetings in
temples,'' church representatives here said in a statement.

In recent years, the statement said, the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam has
been ''the only organization that dared to speak out against repression and
violation of human rights in Vietnam.''

''In the present desperate situation, the United Buddhist Church is considered
as a source of hope for the people of Vietnam, just as Solidarity is for the
people of Poland,'' it added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 6, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Observer;
SITTING TIGHT

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 870 words


Everybody wanted the President to do something. There was no agreement on what
the President ought to do, but everybody thought he ought to do - well,
something.

That's what Presidents were for, wasn't it?  And there was the President sitting
tight. It got people's goat.  Sitting tight wasn't what Presidents got paid for.
Presidents got paid for doing something. People began saying, ''The President
can't cut the mustard. All he does is sit tight.''

If you asked, ''What would you like the President to do?'' they said, ''Planning
and operations are not my business; they're Presidents' business; let him quit
sitting tight and start doing something and I'll support him.''

Supporting Presidents when they do something is what citizens do, though
sometimes they don't. Lyndon Johnson discovered that after he started doing
something in Vietnam. And so when everybody started asking Jimmy Carter what he
was going to do about the embassy people held prisoner in Iran, Jimmy Carter sat
tight.

The ever-helpful public opinion polls recorded the crash in his stock. The
television networks began reminding everybody how many days had passed in which
Jimmy Carter had failed to do something.  ''America Held Hostage: Day 118'';
''This is the 122d day of captivity for the Americans held in Iran,'' and so on.

It was the end of President Carter. He was a President who did not do something.
President Reagan is now experiencing the Carter effect. True, the press and
television have been kinder to him than they were to President Carter. TV
newsmen do not yet sign off with ''And that's the news on this 42d day of the
recession.'' There is no nightly news special entitled ''America Held
Insolvent.''

Still the news shows present a nightly display of car dealers, homebuilders,
farmers, shop owners and similar good Republican types talking about bankruptcy.
Sturdy Republican Congressmen and smooth Republican-minded corporate executives
appear in news film and print urging the President to do something.

Like President Carter, President Reagan sits tight. Rome is not built in a day,
hostages not freed in a year, budget bloat not shrunk between autumn and spring.
Thus the President's cool, sittight approach suggests. It is hard to fault him
unless you are a car dealer at the edge of bankruptcy, or a Republican up for
election in the fall.

Politically, however, by going against the popular notion that when things go
badly Presidents ought to do something, he is risking a ride down the Carter
skids to popular contempt.

One assumes, at least if one is American and therefore credulous about the
inevitability of happiness, that the recession will eventually get tired of
itself and give way to renewed prosperity. If so, President Reagan will
doubtless claim credit for his policy of sitting tight.

Eventually can take its time about arriving though, and American patience with
politicians is notoriously short while American perceptions of politicians, once
fixed, seem to last forever. Ask Senator Edward Kennedy. If President Reagan
gets himself perceived as a President who sits tight when there is a dragon to
be challenged, his present decline in the polls may become permanent.

It's harder to say what Mr. Reagan can do that is politically advantageous than
it is to say that he ought to do something - do anything, for heaven's sake. It
always is, as Mr. Carter learned in his efforts to cope with the Ayatollah
Khomeini.

Mr. Reagan has created his own Ayatollah by adopting a radical tax scheme and
betting his - and the country's - future on its success, despite warnings from
conventional economists and businessmen that it is potentially disastrous.

Pushing the tax program through Congress with the help of members now moaning
about its results was the great victory of his first year in office. Though the
victory now looks Pyrrhic it's hard to see how he can satisfy his former
supporters in Congress and business by scuttling the tax program without
conceding that his great victory was a flop.

In short, it's hard to see how he can do anything about the recession except sit
tight. And pray. His best political hope may be that Congress will step in and
reverse the policy in spite of him.

In that event if the economy remains sour he can go to the public with the
charge that it's Congress's fault for not giving his policy time to work. What's
more, most reversals being discussed in Washington would deny voters their
so-called ''Reagan tax cuts.'' Politically, a President with a Congress to blame
for taking his tax goodies away from the folks is a President profoundly
blessed.

This could give him the best of both worlds: freedom from screwball economics
endorsed for campaign purposes and a villainous Congress to blame for heavy
taxation.

Sitting tight may be not just the only thing he can do right now, but also the
best thing. Aside from prayer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 6, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT NEW YORK

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 981 words


This is a story about running, and about altruism, about being handicapped, or
maybe about not being handicapped at all. It is a sports story, and it is a love
story.

Some of the people who live on the quiet side streets around Kissena Park in
Flushing, Queens, already know this story, or at least part of it. They have
seen Joe Pardo, the muscles throbbing in his legs, the rubber soles of his shoes
slapping the ground, running around the stretches of lawn and the golf course.

They have seen Karen Cusack, her arms pumping, running next to him, her face
turning deep pink and the blond hair sticking to her forehead with the
perspiration. They have seen the length of elastic rope stretching between the
two of them, one loop in her left hand, one loop in his right.

''What's the matter, you afraid he's going to get away from you?'' people yell
at Karen, grinning. ''Why do you have him on a leash?'' they'll call. ''There's
the runners,'' others will say, who have seen them doing their eight miles many,
many times.

''And then there's the people I always hear going, 'Whisper, whisper, whisper,
see that man running there,' '' said Karen, cooling off on a bench at the
Flushing Y.M.C.A., waiting for Joe to finish his shower. ' ''See that man, he's
blind.' ''

It has been three years since Joe, who is 58, and Karen, who is 22, started
running together through the streets of Queens with the rope between them. They
knew each other only slightly when they began. Joe can run around a track by
himself, if the track is fairly clear and he knows where to turn, but running
around and around in ovals is boring.

So Karen was pressed into service, to pull him away from potholes, signal bumps
and curbs, nudge him away from cars, to be the eyes sometimes needed to
accompany his strong legs. Even after three years, he gives her a hard time.

''He always complains that I don't do it right, when I tell him a curb's coming
and he doesn't land right, or when he hits the fender of a car that's parked
along the street,'' said Karen, who is a junior at Queens College.

''I keep telling her, don't ever lead another blind man around or you'll kill
him,'' said Joe, who is a masseur and physical director at the Y.

''He's really helped me a lot,'' added Karen. ''I used to run for a week and
then stop for three months, be real enthusiastic and then slack off. But he does
it so consistently that now I do, too. At first he had to slow his pace so I
could keep up, but now I'm faster. Sometimes I start to daydream and then I
remember that I have to pay more attention to the ground. He's fallen. But I've
fallen, too, and I can see.''

It has been nearly 30 years since Joe went blind. At the beginning of his 29th
year, his vision began to fade like the picture on an old television set, and by
the end of the year it had faded to black.  Retinitis pigmentosa, the doctors
said.

''Tell her what you were doing as a career,'' Karen said, sitting across from
him, grinning at him.  ''As a career?'' Joe said, turning his head toward her.
''He was a commercial airline pilot,'' said Karen.  ''I don't think of those
days,'' Joe said. ''I can still picture colors just like you can see them. If
you try to give me a pair of yellow pants with a red shirt and a purple tie, I'd
know I'd look ridiculous.''

It has been many years since Joe began running competitively. He is one marathon
short of 50, a familiar figure on the running circuit, with his grizzled hair
curling around his ears, and his barrel chest. ''I ran my first race when I was
9,'' he said. ''I've always been athletic. That got me in a lot of trouble as a
youngster - late to get to school, late to get home. I started using the rope
13, 14 years ago when I wanted to run through the woods. I don't use it for
marathons. The first couple of marathons I ran, I didn't let them know I
couldn't see. I figured if I let them know, they wouldn't let me run. I run
right in the pack with everybody else. I keep on course that way.''

And it has been a little more than a year since Joe and Karen became something
more than simply running partners, a little more than a year since they fell in
love. In a corridor at the big old Y building on Northern Boulevard, filled with
that familiar smell of chlorine, disinfectant and gym socks, Joe turned his head
and looked embarrassed. Although he looks years younger than his age, some
wellmeaning people who see them running together still ask if Karen is his
daughter. ''I just say no,'' he said. ''I don't want to shock them. I guess I
liked her the first time I ever heard her voice on the telephone.''

''I used to tell this one friend of mine, 'God, I like him so much, I hope it's
not a father fixation,''' said Karen, laughing. ''I wasn't that concerned about
the fact that he was blind, but I was really worried about the age difference.''

''I must know seven, eight couples who wound up getting married through
running,'' said Joe, sounding just a bit defensive. ''It's a special
relationship.''

''I think what did it was when I was having leg problems and he was giving me
leg massages,'' said Karen, turning deep pink again. ''That was the beginning of
the end.''

Now the runners share an apartment in Flushing. Karen said it was about a mile
from the Y. ''Seven-tenths of a mile,'' said Joe, who knows distances.

The two of them will run together in May in the Thomas A. Pardo Memorial Run,
sponsored by the Y and organized by Joe in memory of his son, who died in
Vietnam in 1970, and who shared Joe's apartment before Karen did.

''He says I'd better win or I'm in big trouble,'' said Karen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Joe Pardo and Karen Cusack running

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COLLEGE STUDENTS SQUEEZED INTO CAREER PATHS

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2087 words

DATELINE: COLUMBUS, Ohio


American college students, long a reflection of the country's affluence and
achievement, face a financial squeeze that is increasingly channeling them in a
narrow, career-oriented direction and profoundly altering the university
experience.

''Adolescence has been an American luxury, but we can't afford it anymore,''

First of two articles.
said Paula Schimpf, a junior at Ohio State University here.  ''It's an awful
thing that students more and more have to weigh the cost of every little thing
rather than think, 'Is this something I want to study or to do?' '' she added.
''That's not what universities are for.''

Miss Schimpf, whose father is a butcher in an A.&P. store in Lima, Ohio, is in
many ways typical of the 12,300,000 undergraduate and graduate students on
campuses today. Worried about the job market, she has switched her major from
teaching to public relations. She is paying for college through a precarious
combination of part-time jobs and federally financed grants and low-interest
loans.

Worries About Finishing School

Now Miss Schimpf, the first member of her family to go to college, is concerned
that further cuts in Government aid to education, which President Reagan has
proposed but which will not go into effect unless they are approved by Congress,
may make it impossible for her to finish school.

She was one of several hundred students, teachers and administrators who were
interviewed in the last two weeks at two dozen colleges and universities that
represent a cross-section of the nation's institutions of higher education.
Among the trends in students' attitudes and behavior that were evident from the
interviews were these:

- A dramatic shift away from traditional liberal arts courses to programs in
engineering, business and law that are likely to enable the students to earn
more money. At Ohio State, for instance, enrollment in the Colleges of Business
and Engineering has doubled in the past decade, while the number in the College
of Arts and Sciences has dropped 33 percent.

- A sharp decline in the number and quality of students going to graduate school
in the arts and sciences, those who will be America's future college professors.
At Harvard, the percentage of seniors who graduated summa cum laude, with
highest honors, and went on to graduate schools other than professional schools
shrank from 77 percent in 1964 to 31 percent last year. The number of first-year
students at Harvard's Graduate School of Arts and Sciences has slipped 26
percent in the past 10 years and has slipped 39 percent counting only students
in the humanities.

- A growing number of students must work to meet rapidly rising costs. As many
as 75 percent of the 27,000 students at the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee
have jobs. Moreover, many students find it necessary to take a semester or a
year off to work, and as a result, many fewer students graduate in four years.

- The need to work and study at the same time has created stresses. It has
forced many students to give up such pleasures as fraternity membership, movies
and football games; fewer seem to have cars. Some students report that they do
not have enough money to eat properly or that they fall asleep in class after
working all night.

- More students are politically conservative. A survey done for the American
Council on Education by researchers from the University of California at Los
Angeles found that 24 percent of freshmen last fall considered themselves
conservatives, as against 15 percent in 1971.  The proportion calling themselves
liberals dropped from 37 percent a decade earlier to 18 percent.

Motivation Based on Money

In that survey, conducted at 368 colleges and universities, 67 percent of this
year's freshmen said ''to make more money'' was an important reason for going to
college. In 1971, that opinion was held by 57 percent.

Many college professors and administrators are worried by these trends.  ''I get
a sense of quiet desperation,'' commented Mitchell Livingston. He is dean of
student life at Ohio State, which, with 54,000 students, has the largest campus
in the country after the University of Minnesota.

''It's something that's been growing for 10 years but, with the economy, it's
getting worse,'' he continued. ''The students are constantly up, striving to
succeed, wondering if there will be a job when they finish.

''If there is not an immediate benefit, there's less likelihood they will pick a
course or go out for an activity. They have become more intense and narrow, with
tunnel vision. It's the opposite of what we're trying to do in the university,
to broaden them.''

A 'Fast-Food' Mentality?

Mr. Livingston sees a metaphor in the Ohio Union, the student center where he
has his office. Several years ago the university replaced the school cafeteria,
which was losing patronage and money, with several commercial food stands,
including a McDonald's.

''The fast food mentality can become the fast scholarship mentality,'' Mr.
Livingston remarked. ''This is survival, but at what price?''

At San Diego State University, Ned Joy, the librarian and former vice president
for academic affairs, said he had noted several swings of the pendulum since he
came to the urban campus almost 30 years ago.

Then, he said, ''There was goldfish swallowing literally, a C was considered
altogether respectable and there was little or no political interest.''

In the 1960's, Mr. Joy said, the Vietnam War ''awakened interest in studies but
primarily in areas with politiical content, sociology or political science.''

Pursuit of the Good Life

Now, he said, ''There's a tendency to say students are more conservative, but I
can't agree at all. Certainly they're more concerned with making money, but not
in the way Depression-bred conservatives are, not to save it and invest it. They
want the cars, the houses and travel, the good life, and they tend to choose
courses they believe will get them there more quickly.''

At Columbia University, Wallace Gray, a popular professor of English and
comparative literature, lamented, ''I can't get students to make the connection
between ancient texts and what's going on today.''

''The big word on campus is 'marketable,' do you have a marketable skill,'' said
Michael Norman, a senior at Ohio State and editor of the student paper, The
Lantern. Last month the paper printed a cartoon depicting a skeleton waiting at
an employment office.  Another job-seeker asks the skeleton, ''Humanities
degree, right?''

Mr. Norman says that his roommate, an engineering major, teases him for studying
journalism. '' 'What are you going to do with that?' he asks me.''

Other Courses, Just in Case

Just in case he can't find a job as a journalist, Mr. Norman has prepared
himself by taking courses in business and computer science.  At Dillard
University, a private black college in New Orleans, Eric Nance, a freshman, said
his chief consideration in majoring in business administration was salary. He
said he had been interested in making money ''ever since I learned the value of
money'' and realized that ''money was necessary to live the life style I want to
live.''

The calculations behind this vocationalism are clear. A study of 161 colleges
and universities by the College Placement Council, an organization of directors
of job-placement offices, found this winter that job offers and starting
salaries for graduating seniors varied from $30,108 a year for petroleum
engineers and $18,192 for students in accounting to $14,052 for humanities
majors.

The survey reported that, while placement offices were notified of 1,445 job
offers for accountants, there were only 87 openings for humanities students.

Starting Salaries Likely to Be Low

One reason for the decline in graduate studies is that if a student goes on for
a doctorate, a five-@ or six-year, expensive grind in some fields, he can expect
a starting salary of only $15,000 to $19,000 as an assistant professor.

That is only if the new Ph.D. is lucky enough to get any offer.  Because of an
oversupply of doctorates and slipping university enrollments, there are often
100 applicants for a teaching post.

Rising college costs have also contributed to a new student sensitivity to money
problems. Charges for tuition and room and board are as high as $12,000 a year
at Harvard. At Ohio State, even for students from Ohio, they are $5,000 a year.

Rising tuition has been partly offset by the enormous increase in Federal grants
and loans to college students in the past decade. As many as 82 percent of the
students at Howard University in Washington, D.C., receive financial aid. The
same is true of 96 percent of the seniors at Georgetown College, a private
Southern Baptist-supported school in Georgetown, Ky.

The National Center for Education Statistics calculates that 38 percent of
freshmen in 1980 were employed, up from 29.9 percent in 1970. Freshmen are
thought to be less likely than upperclassmen to work.

Vanderbilt May Be Too Costly

Near Georgetown's neat brick colonial campus in the Kentucky Bluegrass country,
Roger Gibbs works as a night clerk in the Winners Circle Motel to supplement a
scholarship. He wants to attend Vanderbilt Law School after graduation but,
because of that school's $10,000 annual bill, may have to settle for the less
prestigious, less expensive University of Kentucky Law School.

''Money has become the most important factor in my life,'' Mr.  Gibbs said. ''It
will determine where I go to school and whether I can get married this summer.''

It also affects ''little things too,'' he added, such as ''why I take 16 hours a
weekend working in the motel instead of being with my fiance and why I have only
$10 or $15 a week in spending money compared to the $20 to $25 I had as a
freshman.''

Lisa Stromeier, a senior at Georgetown whose father is a truck driver, worries
about the effects of working. ''My friends come in from their jobs and say, 'I'm
too tired to study.' So they skip it.''

''Maybe you could work your way through college when tuition was $50 a year, but
not when it's $5,000,'' she said.

Most Bronx Students Must Work

At Bronx Community College in University Heights, 40 percent of the students
come from families on welfare. Nearly all the students work. Joseph Bacot, a
22-year-old studying electrical engineering, lives in a project and holds two
jobs, one in the morning as a building custodian and another in the afternoon at
a radio station.

His efforts have paid dividends. When he gets his associate degree in June, he
expects to find a job with a starting salary of at least $21,000 a year.

''More of my friends have died than gone to college,'' Mr. Bacot said. ''If
there is one thing that kept me motivated, it's seeing all the people standing
in front of my building doing nothing day after day.''

Mike Smoot, a 27-year-old senior and electrical engineering major at Brigham
Young University, Provo, Utah, said that he and his wife and two children lived
''by blood and sweat.'' Both he and his wife work, ''but each year we fall a
little further behind,'' he said, and ''we do not eat as well as we should.''

A Revival of the R.O.T.C.

The financial pinch has produced other effects. There has been a revival of the
Reserve Officer Training Corps program, which had to shut down on many campuses
because of student protests at the time of the Vietnam War. The Army R.O.T.C.
program alone has expanded from its low of 33,220 students enrolled in 1973 to
72,463 today. Only 7,500 of the students are on full military scholarships, but
at a time when Federal aid to students is falling, the Army is increasing the
scholarships to 12,000 by 1983.

Perhaps the most characteristic change has been the development of job placement
and career guidance offices on campuses. At Ohio State's College of
Administrative Science, or business school, demand for job-finding assistance
became so great that the school authorities had to use a computerized bidding
system last fall to restrict the number of interviews a student might have.

''It got so that we had students lining up at 4 A.M. outside in the middle of
the winter, just to get their names on the sign-up sheet for companies like
I.B.M.,'' said Betty Tom, assistant director of career counselling in the
business school.

Next: Policy changes at the schools.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paula Schimpf (page 44)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EX-SENATOR CLIFFORD P. CASE, 77, IS DEAD

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words


Former Senator Clifford P. Case of New Jersey, a liberal Republican who
championed a wide range of social and civil-rights legislation in more than
three decades in Congress, died of lung cancer Friday night at Georgetown
University Hospital in Washington. He was 77 years old.

Mr. Case, who lived in Rahway, N.J., and Washington, had had a tumor removed
from one lung last summer. He was hospitalized on Feb.  10 in an attempt to
alleviate some new breathing difficulties, and doctors subsequently found that
the cancer had spread, according to his longtime aide, Lucy Fusco. She said he
died about 11 P.M. Friday.

The long political career of Mr. Case, who served 10 years in the House of
Representatives and 24 years in the Senate, ended in 1978 when he was defeated
in a primary election by Jeffrey Bell, a conservative protege of Ronald Reagan.
Mr. Bell was defeated in the general election by the Democrat, Bill Bradley.

Mr. Case, a quiet, scholarly man of erudite oratory who eschewed flamboyant
campaigns and cultivated a reputation for political independence, was an early
leader of the movement to draft Dwight D.  Eisenhower for the Presidency in
1954, and it was in that year that he won his first term in the Senate.

Urged Bipartisan Foreign Policy

In his Senate years, Mr. Case became the ranking Republican on the Foreign
Relations Committee and was a strong spokesman for a bipartisan foreign policy.
In addition to his support for social and civil-rights legislation, he was
strongly sympathetic to labor, whose support helped him win re-election three
times by wide margins.

As a liberal-moderate, Mr. Case often found himself at odds with some colleagues
in the G.O.P., and in his 1954 Senate campaign he angered many New Jersey
Republicans by denouncing Senator Joseph R.  McCarthy, Republican of Wisconsin,
for conducting what he called witch hunts for Communists.

It was a bitter campaign. Assorted right-wing McCarthyites called Mr. Case ''a
pro-Communist Republicrat'' and ''Stalin's choice for Senator.'' Others charged
that one of Mr. Case's sisters had been a member of a Communist-front
organization.

It was only after Mr. Eisenhower, the Republican candidate for the Presidency,
and his running mate for Vice President, Richard M.  Nixon, came to Mr. Case's
rescue that he won the election -doing so by 3,507 votes, the narrowest margin
ever recorded in a New Jersey senatorial election.

Supported by Democrats

In contrast to that race, in which he campaigned 18 hours a day, his subsequent
re-election campaigns were almost leisurely, and he managed to win by impressive
margins - testimony, his supporters said, to his preference for honest
independence rather than political expediency.

Much of his support came from Democrats who admired his seemingly uncompromising
conscience. Asked once why he did not join the Democratic Party, he replied:

''I am a Republican, and I believe in the Republican Party. But I have my own
convictions as to what the Republican Party should stand for, and I intend to
fight for them as hard as I can. And I will not be driven away from my
Republicanism simply because some Democrats happen to agree with me on certain
issues - and some Republicans don't.''

A tall, slender man with reddish-brown hair that turned gray in later years, Mr.
Case was a precise and thorough legislator. Aides said he never signed a letter
without reading it, preferred to write all his own speeches and did much of his
own investigative research.

Strong Supporter of Israel

Like a fellow moderate Republican, Senator Jacob K. Javits of New York, Mr. Case
was a staunch supporter of Israel, and his voting record was consistently
liberal. He favored many civil-rights measures, as well as labor and social
legislation, and was the only Republican who favored bills by the Administration
of John F. Kennedy on medical care for the aged.

He opposed many key programs of the Nixon Administration, three of Mr. Nixon's
six Supreme Court nominees and Mr. Nixon's veto of a bill giving funds to
day-care centers. He also voted against antiballistic-missile systems and
supersonic transports and he was a dove on American actions in Vietnam.

In the early 1970's, he was the only Republican Senator to be given a zero
rating by the conservative Americans for Constitutional Action.

Last year, in one of his final political actions, he served as the co-chairman
of a coalition of private groups that opposed the sale of radar-equipped
Airborne Warning and Control System planes to Saudi Arabia.

Was Chairman of Freedom House

Since leaving the Senate, Mr. Case had been affiliated with the Washington
offices of two law firms and had served for the last three years as chairman of
Freedom House, a 40-year-old private organization dedicated to promoting freedom
in the United States and abroad.

Clifford Philip Case was born in Franklin Park, N.J., on April 16, 1904, the son
of the Rev. Clifford P. Case, a Dutch Reformed minister, and Jeannette McAlpin
Benedict Case. He attended public schools in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and graduated
from Rutgers University with a bachelor's degree in 1925 and from Columbia
University with a law degree in 1928.

Mr. Case joined the old Wall Street law firm of Simpson, Thacher & Bartlett
after graduation, and he and his wife, the former Ruth Miriam Smith, who were
married in 1928, settled in Rahway. He spent the next decade in the
not-always-exciting pursuit of corporation law.

Entering politics in 1938, he was elected to the Rahway Common Council and
served unti 1942, when he was elected to the New Jersey Assembly. In 1944, he
won the first of five terms in the House of Representatives from New Jersey's
Sixth District. His years in the House were marked by support of legislation
favoring labor and a bipartisan constituency.

'Indelibly Defined His Era'

In his Senate years, he served on the Appropriations, Atomic Energy and
Intelligence Committees, in addition to the Committee on Foreign Relations.

On the day of Senator Case's primary-election defeat in 1978, Senator Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, declared on the Senate floor that ''the
inner dignity of this institution has no finer exemplar than Clifford Case.''

Yesterday, Mr. Moynihan said: ''He was a representative of the best of
internationalist and liberal sentiment, a colleague and partner of those giants
who shaped the postwar world in a manner consistent with American tradition and
values. He was among that rare handful of men who indelibly defined his era.''

Governor Kean of New Jersey, a Republican, said in another tribute: ''With the
passing of Clifford Case, New Jersey and the nation have lost a great statesman,
a man of vision, wisdom and courage. And I have lost a close personal friend and
wise counselor.''

In addition to his wife, Mr. Case is survived by two daughters, Mary Jane Weaver
of Rahway and Ann Holt of Annandale, N.J.; a son, Clifford P. Case 3d of New
York City; seven grandchidren, and three sisters: Elisabeth Case of Deep River,
Conn., Harriett Phelps of Camden, Me., and Jeannette B. Gifford of New Haven.

A funeral service is scheduled for 11 A.M. Tuesday in Kirkpatrick Chapel at
Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senator Clifford Case and Jimmy Carter

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK LAWS STYMIE SUITS ON TOXIN AILMENTS

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, March 5


Stan Rosenberg worked in the dusty boiler rooms of ships under construction or
repair in the Brooklyn Navy Yard for 14 years. When he died of mesothelioma, or
cancer of the lining of the lungs, at the age of 48, his doctors and his wife,
Barbara, blamed asbestos fibers that filled the area.

Mrs. Rosenberg wanted to sue the asbestos manufacturers, as thousands of others
have done in the last few years. But the case was thrown out of court because
statutes in New York State - unlike those in most other states - bar victims of
the delayed effects of asbestos, chemicals, drugs and toxic substances from
bringing suit in state courts.

''The laws and the workers in New York State are much worse off than in any
other state in the country,'' said Dr. Irving J.  Selikoff, director of the
Environmental Sciences Laboratory at Mount Sinai Hospital. ''That is a peculiar
thing, we have not lagged behind the rest of the country in helping people in
general.''

Asbestos Has Delayed Effect

In New York, there is a three year statute of limitations on civil suits
-beginning at the time a worker is first exposed to a toxic substance. But in
asbestos cases, and in cases of women who took the synthetic hormone DES during
pregnancy, the toxic effects are often not apparent until decades later.

At a hearing before the Assembly Codes Committee this week, Mrs.  Rosenberg told
how her husband left the Navy Yard when it closed in 1965, but did not show
signs of the illness that would claim his life until 11 years later. He died in
1980.

Mrs. Rosenberg, a teacher from Jackson Heights, Queens, sued for $1 million in
damages, but her case was dismised by the State Court of Appeals last October
because it had not been filed within three years of his exposure to asbestos.

''They took the position that he should have brought the action within three
years, but he wasn't sick then,'' said Norman Landau, Mrs. Rosenberg's attorney.

About a dozen bills are now being considered by the New York State Legislature
to increase protection in personal injury cases. But compromise has been held up
by the concern of some business groups over the length of liability.

Dr. Selikoff estimated that more than 900,000 New York State residents had been
exposed to significant amounts of asbestos between 1940 and 1979. Although he
said the majority of those exposed will not become disabled, he estimated that
about 1,000 extra deaths attributed to cancer will occur each year through the
year 2000, and will gradually decrease thereafter.

Growing Area of Litigation

Litigation over toxic chemicals is one of the fastest growing areas of the law,
with more than 15,000 suits pending on asbestos alone.  In January, a Federal
court in Hartford began hearing the first of more than 300 suits brought by
present and former employees of the Electric Boat plant in Groton, Conn.,
because of injuries attributed to asbestos fibers. The case went to the jury on
Friday.

Those suits were possible only because the Federal courts were required to
follow the more lenient laws in Connecticut, but Mr.  Landau said that 500
similar suits involving the Brooklyn Navy Yard have not been heard in Federal
court because of restrictions in New York State.

Mr. Landau said that he has appealed the state court decision to the United
States Supreme Court, and is seeking to bring suit for Mrs. Rosenberg, under
Federal admiralty law. Another attorney, Fred Baron, of Dallas, said that he had
filed a suit involving the Brooklyn Navy Yard in Texas, in an attempt to
circumvent New York's law.

New York 'Backward'

Mr. Baron said the Texas court would undoubtedly send the case back to New York,
but Texas procedural law, including statutes of limitaions would apply.

''New York is the most backward state in the United States if not the world on
statue limitations'' said Mr. Baron. ''It is the only state among the 50 in
which an injured victim of toxic chemicals has no means of redress.''

Last year, a compromise measure was developed in negotiations involving the
Assembly and the New York State Business Council, a lobbying group representing
4,000 companies.

The bill set up a statute of limitations in product liability cases for the
first time, a measure long sought by the Business Council. It also introduced a
new rule in toxic chemical cases in which the limit would be two years, from the
date of discovery of an illness, its cause, or date of death - whichever is
later. The new rule would have applied only to illnesses discovered after the
bill's passage.  The measure was passed by the Assembly, but died in the Senate.

Both sides have begun negotiations again, but the Business Council is supporting
a proposal that would include a 10-year limit from the time of exposure. Mr.
Perry argued that without this limit, it would be impossible for insurance
companies and manufacturers to assess future liability, even if they met all
state and Federal standards.

But Melvin H. Miller, a Brooklyn Democrat who is chairman of the Assembly Codes
Committee, noted last week that the Legislature had passed a measure last year
to exempt Vietnam veterans afflicted by the toxic effects of Agent Orange from
the statute of limitations on damage suits,

He said it was questionable whether there should be a distinction among victims
of toxic substances.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Koch Backs Monument To Veterans of Vietnam

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 35, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 198 words


A mayoral task force has recommended that New York City honor the servicemen and
women who served during the Vietnam War by building a monument to them in
Manhattan and establishing service programs for those who need help.

The panel said that it hoped to raise $1 million from private sources for the
project and that at least $500,000 would be necessary.

Evan Cornog, a spokesman for the Mayor, said Mr. Koch supported the proposals of
the task force, which he created last November because he felt that the Vietnam
veterans' ''courage and loyalty were too often forgotten.''

In its recommendation, issued recently, the panel offered no suggestions for the
design of the monument, limiting itself to a few requirements about pedestrian
access and the availability of public transportation.

No single park was recommended as the site for the monument, but three were
suggested as possibilities - Foley Square, by the courts in lower Manhattan;
Madison Square Park, at Fifth Avenue and 23d Street, and Jeanette Park, a small
site off the East River in the Wall Street area.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE INTREPID, VICTOR AGAIN, NEARS FINAL BERTH

BYLINE: By SHAWN G. KENNEDY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 43, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 638 words


During World War II, in Leyte Gulf in the Philippines, she appeared on the scene
early in what would become one of the greatest naval battles in history. She
survived attacks from Japanese kamikaze pilots and went on eventually to destroy
80 enemy ships and 800 aircraft.

She served as the prime recovery ship for both the Mercury and Gemini space
missions. Later, she was called back into combat in the Vietnam War, patrolling
the Gulf o Tonkin.

Then the ship, the aircraft carrier Intrepid, was headed for the scrap heap
until a group of Navy buffs intervened.  After persuading the Navy and the
Government to release the Intrepid to their charge, they established a
foundation to turn her into a museum. By July, the 900-foot carrier will be
berthed on the Hudson River in Manhattan, where she will serve as a sea, air and
space museum.

Refurbishing Scheduled

The Intrepid was towed last month from Philadelphia to the Military Ocean
Terminal in Bayonne, N.J., where she will be refurbished.  Members of the
Intrepid Museum Foundation and five of the carrier's original crew members
gathered on her flight deck the other day to celebrate her past and talk about
her future.

Zachary Fisher, the New York City builder who is serving as chairman of the
Museum Foundation. addressed the group, saying, ''After more than three years of
intensive organizational and volunteer efforts, and with the vital help of city,
state and Federal officials, we are proud to announce the arrival of the
Intrepid.''

The cost of the restoration project will be nearly $22 million, Mr. Fisher said.
Funds for the project are being raised partly through a public, tax-exempt $14.2
million bond issue by the foundation, which is to be underwritten by Herbert J.
Sims & Company Inc., and an Urban Development Action grant. New York City will
contribute $2.4 million for the cost of repairing Pier 86, at 46th Street, where
the Intrepid will be berthed.

Ignoring rust stains, peeling paint, buckling deck floors and shattered windows
- the result of six years of neglect - members of the foundation showed visitors
around the ship and discussed their plans.

Five Major Exhibits

''We will restore the navigation bridge and flag bridge for tours of that part
of the ship,'' said William Simmons, a representative of Lynch Exhibits, the
concern that has been hired to design and construct the museum. ''The hangar
deck will house a series of five major exhibits.''

These five exhibits, one of which will use a theater, will highlight episodes in
naval history, the Intrepid's major battles and technological advances in sea,
air and space exploration.

While foundation members and museum planners detailed their scheme, five sailors
from the the Intrepid's ''plank,'' or first, crew recalled with vivid detail
some of the fierce battles in which the ship participated.

''I can't forget the night we were hit for the first time,'' said John Quick, a
former machinist's mate first class. ''The night was clear and warm, so we were
all on the flight deck looking at the stars. We saw a smoking plane fly so low
that it seemed as if we could touch it. A few seconds later we were hit.''

More than 22 men died that night, and before the war ended in the Pacific, the
Intrepid was hit six more times and nearly sank once.  ''I was just sick when I
heard that the Intrepid was going to be made into razor blades,'' said Jack
Kelly, who served as an aviation boatswain's mate third class from 1943 until
1945. ''A lot of good men died with this ship. This museum will be like a
monument to them, to the Intrepid and her men.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN POLITICS, A CARELESS WORD CAN BE A SELF-DESTRUCT BUTTON

BYLINE: By MAURICE CARROLL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 954 words


Fresh out of Harvard Business School, Bruce Caputo became a Pentagon ''whiz
kid.'' Moving to the New York State Assembly, he was known as one of the
Republicans' shrewdest debaters. And when he served in the 95th Congress, he
quickly made a name for himself by pressing the ''Koreagate'' investigation.

So how, many political observers are wondering, could such a bright young man of
38 have done something so dumb? Why had he needlessly characterized his civilian
job in the Pentagon as ''military service'' and volunteered that he had been a
Vietnam-era ''draftee'' and an Army lieutenant when, in fact, he had been
neither - and when the record was not hard to check?

Having no doubt wrestled with these same questions in the weeks since what he
calls his ''misunderstanding'' came to light, Mr.  Caputo has promised to
announce tomorrow whether he will stay in the running to become the Republican,
Conservative and Right to Life candidate against the Democratic incumbent,
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan. He may no longer have much of a choice.

Although George L. Clark Jr., the Republican state chairman, and J. Daniel
Mahoney and Serphin R. Maltese, who run the Conservative party, say they have
''suspended'' support for Mr. Caputo, they have made it clear they view the
action as permanent. ''It's a startfrom-scratch situation,'' Mr. Maltese said.

And of the 53 Republican county leaders whose backing Mr. Caputo captured in
getting his campaign off to an unusually fast start, only a dozen or so still
support him. ''He certainly won't have my help in restoring his credibility,''
said Ronald Starkweather of Monroe County. ''Right now, his chances are less
than nothing.''

The thing about the Caputo affair is that it could easily have been avoided. The
Westchester Republican had simply to say in person what his biographies usually
did - that he had been employed as a civilian in the Pentagon. But over a recent
lunch in Washington with two reporters he began telling some Pentagon stories
about his dealings with Henry Kissinger, prompting one of his companions to
mention that he thought Mr. Caputo's service had ended before the Nixon team
took over. ''Oh, no,'' the reporters recall Mr. Caputo saying, ''I was a
lieutenant. I served a two-and-a-half-year hitch.''

The reporters remembered a detailed analysis of Mr. Caputo's career that had
been distributed by Mr. Moynihan's political operative, Timothy Russert. That
document did not specifically mention the claims of a military career, but it
did indicate that all might not be as Mr. Caputo said it was. Further checking
quickly turned up the facts.

He Who Hesitates...

In hindsight, political consultants say, Mr. Caputo ignored a cardinal rule:
When facing embarrassment, it helps to be the first to admit it.

One New York campaign professional insists that clients go off alone for a
weekend to ponder their pasts. ''Think of everything - everything - anybody
could possibly dig up against you,'' the consultant tells them. ''I want to know
every bad thing right down to a parking ticket - arrests, marital troubles, past
political attacks, anything. Write it down for me.'' Then, the consultant says,
if something of disabling proportions does turn up, the candidate at least has
the option of disclosing it himself, early enough in a campaign so any harm
might be minimized.

In Mr. Caputo's case, though, not only did he allow reporters to disclose his
embarrassment, he followed up the revelation with a news conference at which he
expressed his apologies without admitting in so many words that he had said the
things he was apologizing for.

''Now if I ever said I was in the Army, I apologize,'' the candidate said.
''That was a mistake.'' But asked whether he had ever called himself a
''draftee,'' Mr. Caputo said he had ''no memory of doing that.'' And asked about
the claims of military service made over lunch, he said, ''I'm not sure it was
done, but reputable people say it was done.''

History's Harsh Lessons

Whatever Mr. Caputo decides, history indicates that the political punishment for
lack of candor can be harsh. Consider Representative Mario Biaggi, whose 1973
mayoral campaign collapsed when it was discovered that, summoned before a grand
jury, he had refused to answer some questions, citing the Fifth Amendment
protection against self-incrimination. Had Mr. Biaggi not denied that he had
invoked the Fifth Amendment before the panel, which was investigating his
finances, he might now be in City Hall.

Mr. Biaggi remains unassailable in his Bronx district. But, should he try to
seek higher office, which he talks about from time to time, it is generally
thought that the grand jury episode would be instantly revived.

Then there was David N. Dinkins, who had to decline a scheduled appointment as
Deputy Mayor in 1973 after he disclosed that he had failed to pay income taxes.
Mr. Dinkins, now City Clerk, worked hard to rehabilitate his reputation, but had
to listen to the old income tax story again last year in his losing campaign
against Andrew Stein, the Manhattan Borough President, in the Democratic primary
and the general election.

Another loser last year was Assemblyman John C. Dearie, who called his primary
rival, City Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin, ''the mostinvestigated'' municipal
official, only to have it come out that he, too, was an income-tax delinquent.

For Mr. Caputo, the road back would be at least equally rocky.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bruce Caputo

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A BELATED LESSON IN THE RECOGNITION OF PEKING

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 278 words


To the Editor:

In ''10 Years After the Visit to China'' (Op-Ed Feb. 28), former President Nixon
writes that ''the People's Republic of China had been our bitter enemy'' without
explaining that it was Washington which had caused this enmity by refusing
Peking's offer to establish relations after the Communists had gained control of
mainland China.

o use Mr. Nixon's words, it was ''mushy sentiment'' rather than ''hard-headed
interests'' which gained the upper hand in Washington at that time. But we must
not for-get that Mr. Nixon was in the forefront of those who lobbied against
recognition and viciously maligned the advocates of a more realistic East Asia
policy.

Apparently we had learned nothing from the senseless refusal to recognize the
Soviet regime after 1917. As much as we all detest Communism, our national
''hard-headed interests'' dictate that we have diplomats in the capitals of our
real or perceived enemies.

I am convinced that, had we had our own people in Peking at the time of the
Korean War, much bloodshed, and especially the Yalu disaster, could have been
avoided. As to Vietnam, our experts in Peking would surely have given us a
clearer picture of the actualities in Southeast Asia - and saved our nation and
the people of Southeast Asia a tragic war and its consequences, from which we
all are still suffering.  WALTER A.  SHELDON New York, March 1, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 7; Page 31, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 363 words


To the Editor:

In his review of William Barrett's ''The Truants: Adventures Among the
Intellectuals'' (Feb. 7), Hilton Kramer joins his voice to that of the author in
decrying Philip Rahv's becoming ''more anti-American than ever'' during the
radical movement of the 1960's. However, he neglects to mention what gave that
movement most of its impetus - the increasingly barbarous role of the United
States in Vietnam. It is in that context that Mr. Rahv's anti-Americanism must
be understood. (Of course he did not abandon his anti-Stalinism.) When William
Barrett writes that Mr. Rahv's ''own continued existence as a dissenter depends
on the survival of the United States as a free nation in a world going
increasingly totalitarian,'' he - and presumably Mr. Kramer as well - neglects
the possibility that the United States might divest itself of bourgeois
democratic features and become as totalitarian as the regimes it opposes (the
Soviet Union, Cuba), as authoritarian as the regimes it supports (Chile,
Argentina). Unfortunately, we are witnessing that process today.

It was Max Nomad who first said, ''I feel like a bone that three dogs are
fighting over; and they ask the bone which side it is on.'' The three dogs are
the United States, the Soviet Union and China.  Unlike Mr. Barrett and Mr.
Kramer, Philip Rahv chose not to choose one of the dogs.
MARVIN MANDELL New York City

Writing at Its Best
To the Editor: Cynthia Ozick's essay on ''The Making of a Writer'' (Jan. 31) was
deeply moving. It was eloquent and beautiful. My fascination reached its height
in her final paragraph. Here the sentences were molded with a poignancy and
wisdom that represent writing at its best. The essay is a classic.
CLAUDE C. BOWMAN Merion Station, Pa.

The Times welcomes letters from readers. Letters for publication should include
the name, address and telephone number where the writer can be reached during
the day. Letters should be addressed to The Editor, The New York Times Book
Review, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036. We regret that because of the
large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return
unpublished letters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IRAN SAID TO GET LARGE-SCALE ARMS FROM ISRAEL, SOVIET AND EUROPEANS

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1835 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 7


Iran is receiving military equipment and arms worth hundreds of millions of
dollars from Israel, North Korea, Syria, Libya, the Soviet Union and several
countries in Western Europe to support its war against Iraq, according to
Western intelligence sources.

This unusual collection of suppliers is reported struggling both openly and
covertly, along with the United States, for influence over Iran's future and
over the balance of power in the Middle East.

The arms they are providing enable Iran to continue the 18-monthold war against
Iraq and may even permit it to prevail, with all of the implications that holds
for the spread of Islamic revolution to other parts of the Persian Gulf.

Arrangements Are Complex

According to documents - telex messsages, contracts and bills of lading - $100
million to $200 million in arms, spare parts and ammunition were delivered to
Iran from Western Europe in the last 18 months. The intelligence sources said
the documents indicated that about half of this was being supplied or arranged
by Israel, and the rest by freelance arms merchants, some of whom may also have
connections with Israeli intelligence.

The intelligence sources said the passage of these arms to Iran was embedded in
a secret system of legitimate and fictitious companies, banks transferring
money, chartered aircraft and ships, stockpiles of arms shifted around to cover
places or origin, and collusion of harbor and airport officials. All of this
would allow the parties to deny taking part in the operations.

But the reported quantities and means of delivery are such as to suggest that
the shipments are made with either the participation or the knowledge of several
West European governments. Also, the intelligence sources insisted -and the
documents seemed to support the judgment - that high Iranian officials were
aware that Israel had become an important supplier of arms to Iran, despite the
denials of the Teheran Government.

Non-American sources supplied the initial information about the flow of arms
from Israel to Iran.  It appears that their principal motive was to discredit
the Government of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini by showing that his war effort
against Iraq was being helped by Israel. Along with the United States, Israel is
a prime target of Iranian antagonism.

The arms and equipment are almost all American-made and, according to Reagan
Administration officials, their transfer to Iran has not been approved by the
United States Government, as is required by law. There is no evidence to suggest
United States Government involvement in the transactions.

Israeli officials in Jerusalem acknowledged the secret arms supply relationship
with Iran, but maintained that it was on a small scale.  Nachman Shai, the
spokesman for the Israeli Embassy In Washington, said, ''We have nothing to say
on that.''

Israel Had Ties With Shah

The officials in Jerusalem said that the main reason for the arms sales was to
retain some pro-Western connection with Iran at a time when the United States
and other Western countries were unwilling or unable to do so. Israel and
Israeli intelligence had a close relationship with the Government of Shah
Mohammed Riza Pahlevi, and Israel was generally considered to have the best
intelligence on Iran. All of this was put into reverse, and the Israeli
intelligence operation was decimated, by the Iranian revolution.

Western intelligence sources say the United States is carrying out a series of
covert actions, including the financing of paramilitary forces of Iranian exiles
operating in eastern Turkey, attempts to form a coalition of Iranian exiles and
running a clandestine broadcasting station to report on the shortcomings of the
Teheran Government. These sources said that the activities were aimed at
blunting the Soviet Union's increasing ties to Iran and gaining some influence
on the future course of events in that country.

They also held that Moscow was controlling agents who had succeeded in
penetrating the high councils of the Iranian Government and the ruling Islamic
Revolutionary Party.

Other Israeli Objectives Seen

Reagan Administration officials and Western intelligence sources contend that
whatever positive effects Israeli arms supplies to Iran might be achieving for
the West, the Israelis had other objectives in mind. One is to weaken the Iraqi
Government and army by keeping Iranian armed forces in the field and fighting. A
second motivation is the hope that Iran might want the arms enough to refrain
from endangering the lives of some 50,000 Iranian Jews, according to the State
Department.

The arms supplied to Iran by Libya, Syria and North Korea are largely of Soviet
origin and, according to Western intelligence sources, they are making Iranian
ground forces dependent on Soviet rather than Western military equipment. What
remains of the Iranian air force is still wholly dependent on American
equipment.

The Shah had already begun to diversify his suppliers by buying over $1 billion
in arms from the Soviet Union, and he had factories built to produce spare parts
and ammunition for these arms. The arms bought from Moscow and now reportedly
supplied by Soviet allies include Katyusha rocket artillery, surface-to-air
missiles, antiaircraft guns, armored personnel carriers, small arms and antitank
missiles. By 1978, the Shah's Government was operating a factory to produce the
RPG-7 antitank missile, and this factory is still functioning.

Iran Thought to Pay With Oil

Western intelligence sources could not put an exact dollar total on these
supplies, but estimated the amount at several hundred million dollars. They
assume that Iran is paying with oil.

Direct delivery of arms and equipment from the Soviet Union to Iran is said to
be minimal. The same seems to be true of direct Soviet deliveries to Iraq. the
Iraqis are being resupplied mainly by the Soviet Union's East European allies.

One American intelligence official said that North Korea was flying arms into
Iran by the planeload, and that these included Americanmade arms coming from
Vietnam.

Western intelligence sources said that various kinds of technical and military
advisers from the Soviet Union and countries friendly to it might now number as
high as 2,000. For example, they said there were several hundred East German
advisers working directly with Iran's revolutionary guards, teaching them how to
read manuals and use arms.

The system used by Israel and various independent arms merchants to get arms to
Iran was described and documented by the sources. In most instances, they said,
initial contact is made with the Iranian Defense Ministry, with a promise that
certain kinds of arms can be provided. The Defense Ministry then te@lexes a list
of desired arms and supplies.

Haggling Over Prices Is Common

A legitimate company, such as one in Greece or Panama, then is reported to reply
with a list of what is obtainable at the time and the prices. There is often
considerable haggling about the prices, since the Iranians seem to be working
from a price list about three years old and express some concern about being
cheated. The Iranians then transfer funds, often to a bank in Luxembourg, for
release upon receipt of the arms.

Documents indicate that some of the arms that went to Iran had been shipped from
Israel to Cyprus or places in Western Europe. Other documents, and statements by
Western intelligence sources, seem to show that the arms had come from
stockpiles in Western Europe itself.

In one instance, a substantial amount of arms was loaded onto a ship in a French
port and, according to one source, the area near the docks was cordoned off by
the French police. In other instances, arms were said to be loaded onto cargo
aircraft in the southern part of Western Europe and flown to Iran.

Artillery Transported by Air

According to the documents there were several occasions in which artillery
pieces were loaded onto 747 aircraft and delivered in Iran. The sources said
that local officials were parties to the shipments, and the documents supported
the view

Typical orders included bombs, fuses for bombs, aircraft and tank engines, spare
parts and ammunition for aircraft and artillery.  It is a matter of some dispute
among the sources as to how much of this is tied to Israel. Last August, former
Carter Administration officials said that Israel had secretly sold Iran 250
spare tires for American-built F-4 fighter-bombers in late 1980. At the time of
the sale, Israel told Carter Administration officials that they would hold off
from making any further shipments in order to avoid complicating efforts by
President Carter to free the American hostages held by Iran.

Also, according to Carter Administration officials, Israel undertook not to make
any further transfers to Iran of American-made equipment. The total value of the
sale of the retread tires was put at $300,000.

Further Sales Reported

But Western intelligence sources said that they subsequently became aware of
further Israeli-Iranian transactions subsequent to the release of the hostages,
involving American-made arms and equipment.  According to one authoritative
Western intelligence source, the Israeli intelligence organization known as
Mossad notified the Central Intelligence Agency that it had shipped $50 million
to $70 million in arms to Iran since the hostage release in early 1981.
According to the same source, Mossad said or implied that much of this total had
been provided free of charge.

Last July, The Sunday Times of London reported that Iran had contracted with
Israel for the supply of some 360 tons of Americanmade tank parts and ammunition
for $27.9 million. These were to be shipped in 12 planeloads, going from Tel
Aviv to Larnaca, Cyprus, to Teheran on an Argentine-chartered aircraft. The
Sunday Times reported that after four trips the plane crashed in Soviet
territory.

However, Western intelligence sources now say that the aircraft strayed over the
Turkish border into Soviet airspace and was shot down by Soviet MIG-25 fighters.

Western intelligence sources also confirmed a report by ABC News last August
that Iran was buying engines from Britain for Britishmade Scorpion tanks through
a British company and was buying spare parts for the American-made M-60 tank
from an Italian concern.  The sources said that many of the spare parts did not
fit the tanks.  There was no evidence of Israeli involvement in these
transactions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Iranian soldiers near Ahwaz, Iran

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT DO THE YOUNG OWE THEIR COUNTRY?

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 383 words


To the Editor:

Once again the drums are beating for conscription. Cynthia Roberts ( Op-Ed Feb.
25) writes that ''we must reinstate the draft,'' because the volunteer army is
too expensive and deprives career officers of higher salaries.

But conscription is only the beginning, she asserts. What we really need is
national service - universal servitude for our young people by its true name.
This, Miss Roberts insists, would be most equitable of all.

Break all this down, and you have three basic assumptions:

* The lives of our young people (or at least our young men) belong to the
Federal Government.

* By virtue of their existence, these young people ''owe'' their country several
years of their lives, and possibly their deaths, at ''meager pay.''

* The U.S. needs not a strong national defense but rather strong armed might.
But if the Government owns these young people, what kind of freedom does that
leave? Young people should give up their freedom - under threat of jail - to
fight and die for the freedom of the rest of the country? Or for the freedom of
El Salvador? Or Vietnam? What kind of fairness is that?

And if the young people do indeed owe their country so much that their lives may
be demanded, how much more do we older Americans owe? Yet it is not the
40-year-olds who are conscripted but the 18-yearolds. How is it that they owe
more when they have received less?

Finally, we wouldn't need a vast army of foot soldiers if we would stick to the
legitimate business of defending America. One only needs mighty armies for
conquest, or for patrolling the entire world, as America is currently doing.
The truth of the matter is that the defense of a free country must be mounted
voluntarily, and not by force, or the country is not truly free. There never has
been and is not now any shortage of people - young and old alike - who would
fight willingly to defend America if it were threatened.

But our young people must not be turned into cannon fodder for the generals, or
the allies, or the arms-control specialists. If we value our freedom, we must be
willing to defend the freedom of our young people to a greater extent than the
special interests of fascist and socialist dictators.
RON PAUL, Member of Congress, 22d Dist., Texas Washington, Feb. 25, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1107 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
TOWARD A NEW COLD WAR. Essays on the Current Crisis and How We Got There. By
Noam Chomsky. 498 pages.  Pantheon. Hard cover, $20.50; paper- back, $8.95.

WITH the wrathful God having died or retired from the field, it is useful to
have Noam Chomsky around to scourge us Americans for our sins with the lash of
his savage indignation. An innovative scholar in linguistics when he isn't
writing books and articles about American foreign policy (''American Power and
the New Mandarins,'' ''At War With Asia,'' ''For Reasons of State,'' ''Peace in
the Middle East?'' and ''The Political Economy of Human Rights''), Professor
Chomsky is living proof that, contrary to T.S. Eliot, man can so bear too much
reality.

The only question is what sort of reality? In rejecting the one he says most of
us are forced to swallow by intellectuals in servitude to the ruling elite and
by a press that follows along docilely, Professor Chomsky sometimes offers a
reality that seems unreal. Take the two ending pieces in ''Toward a New Cold
War,'' in which Professor Chomsky treats the Indonesian massacre of people in
East Timor.

According to his summary, a Timorese ''populist Catholic'' political party
called Fretilin had ''emerged victorious'' in a civil war after the Portuguese
revolution of 1974. Fretilin had popular support, was undertaking ''sensible
measures of agricultural reform, literacy programs and so on'' and had declared
independence on Nov. 28, 1975. Out of a clear blue sky, East Timor was invaded
by Indonesian troops from the Western half of the island, formerly part of the
Dutch colony that became Indonesia. By the following year, some 175,000 people
had ''succumbed to outright slaughter or starvation caused by the Indonesian
attack.''

Why did the Indonesians do this? Why did what he refers to sneeringly as the
''Human Rights Administration'' of President Jimmy Carter knowingly supply the
arms for the Indonesians to do this? Why did Daniel Patrick Moynihan, United
States delegate to the United Nations, block ''any significant'' opposing
measures in the General Assembly and then boast about having done so in his
memoirs? It wasn't because of pleasure taken ''in massacre and starvation,''
Professor Chomsky assures us to our relief, ''but because the fate of the
Timorese is simply a matter of no significance when measured against higher
goals'' - which goals are ''Western plunder'' ''of this potentially rich
country'' ''hindered only by the rapacity and corruption of our friends in
Jakarta.''

How about lower goals, then? Weren't there any lower goals? You wouldn't think
so, until in the second essay, an ''Afterword'' written last year, Professor
Chomsky lets slip, usually while quoting someone else, such words and phrases as
''Fretilin guerrillas,'' ''cruelty,'' ''force,'' ''communist'' and ''the
Indonesian military'' ''carried out a major counterinsurgency campaign.''
Counterinsurgency campaign? Could this mean that someone thought there was
insurgency going on in East Timor?

Professor Chomsky may well be entirely justified in his condemnation of
America's conduct in this case. But it seems to me his argument would have more
been forceful had he acknowledged what we perceived to be going on in East
Timor, or pretended to perceive.  Similarly, his essentially reasonable case for
a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian problem would have seemed more
palatable had he acknowledged Israel's perception of the Palestine Liberation
Organization instead of putting his case exclusively in the framework of
Israel's oppression of the Arabs, as well as what he sees as America's
exploitation of Israel for the purpose of controlling the Middle East's oil
resources.

Of course, Professor Chomsky would dismiss such acknowledgment as a waste of
time and words. After all, the whole point of ''Toward a New Cold War'' - when
it isn't to stress yet again the criminality of America's aggression against the
people of South Vietnam - is to argue that the Soviet Union is no greater a
threat to the people of Central America, Africa, the Middle East, South Asia and
Southeast Asia. Possibly, the Soviet Union is even less of a threat, Professor
Chomsky occasionally seems to imply.

In fact, the two states are more or less mirror images of each other, goes his
thesis. We roar at our Soviet reflection and exaggerate how threatening it looks
as an excuse to exploit the people of the nonindustrial nations. We're doing it
now, moving ''toward a new cold war,'' that is, because, having rewritten the
history of Vietnam so as to exculpate ourselves, having purged ourselves with
Watergate and having become enraged over the hostage crisis - in sum, having
overcome ''the Vietnam syndrome'' and the crisis in democracy - we're once again
in a position to do so. Or so the forces that shape our foreign policy, the
multinational corporations, seem to think. And the so-called intelligentsia of
the press and the academies fall right into line.

It's all a matter of common sense. ''Some attention to the historical record, as
well as common sense, leads to a'' ''reasonable expectation,'' Professor Chomsky
writes in one of these essays, ''Foreign Policy and the Intelligentsia'' (1978).
''In every society there will emerge a caste of propagandists who labor to
disguise the obvious, to conceal the actual workings of power and to spin a web
of mythical goals and purposes, utterly benign, that allegedly guide national
policy. A typical thesis of the propaganda system is that the nation is an agent
in international affairs, not special groups within it, and that the nation is
guided by certain ideals and principles, all of them noble.'' ''A subsidiary
thesis is that the nation is not an active agent, but rather responds to threats
posed to its security, or to order and stability, by awesome and evil outside
forces'' - ''the United States is not an exception to the general rule.''

Actually, common sense never told me any of these things. Professor Chomsky did,
and he may very well be right. But for all his righteous anger, I wish he had
told it all a little more evenhandedly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 9, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CAPUTO QUITTING RACE FOR SENATE OVER INACCURACY

BYLINE: By MAURICE CARROLL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 754 words


Bruce M. Caputo, his campaign for the United States Senate damaged by his
inaccurate claims of having been a Vietnam-era draftee and an Army lieutenant,
quit the race yesterday.

Mr. Caputo wrote out a three-paragraph statement in the morning, and in the
early evening his campaign manager telephoned it to news organizations.

''Continuing the campaign,'' Mr. Caputo wrote, ''would only hurt my family,
particularly my parents, the voters who have supported me in the past and the
political parties which helped me reach the State Legislature, the Congress and
the United Nations.''

Three Nominations Open

His departure leaves the race open for nominations by the Republican,
Conservative and Right to Life Parties of candidates to oppose Senator Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, a Democrat.

Politicians say Mr. Moynihan is a heavy favorite to win a second term, and
potential candidates other than Mr. Caputo have shied away from challenging him.

But Mr. Caputo, a former Representative from Yonkers and the 1978 Republican
candidate for Lieutenant Governor, had all but sewed up the three party lines
and had argued that he could make a strong run by attacking Mr. Moynihan as a
free-spending liberal.

Then, two and a half weeks ago, news stories told how Mr. Caputo had, on various
occasions, described himself as a former draftee and lieutenant during the
Vietnam War. In fact, he was a civilian employee in the Pentagon. With the
disclosure, his political support began to weaken.

Last week - in a meeting with his campaign manager, John Sheehan; his campaign
chairman, Bob Wilson; his brother Mac, and other advisers - he heard conflicting
advice about whether to continue the campaign.

''We made an attempt to get the campaign back on the issues,'' Mr.  Sheehan
said. But ''it became very evident,'' he went on, that the focus continued to
return to ''recent events.''

So Mr. Caputo and Mr. Sheehan talked again by telephone on Sunday, and yesterday
Mr. Caputo delivered his statement of withdrawal to his campaign headquarters at
2 West 45th Street. He was in the city but described as ''unavailable for
comment'' when the statement was distributed.

'Considerable Heartache'

The complete statement said: ''With deep regret and considerable heartache, I
withdraw from the United States Senate race.  ''I would have liked the time to
present my version of recent events and defend my record and ideas. But
continuing the campaign would only hurt my family, particularly my parents, the
voters who have supported me in the past and the political parties which helped
me reach the State Legislature, the Congress and the United Nations.  All that,
I do not want to do.

''To my generous supporters and talented staff, I will always be grateful. To
those who continue in public life, God be with you and with our great country.''

Mr. Sheehan said that the 38-year-old Mr. Caputo was unlikely to take a
vacation.  ''He's anxious to get back to his life, to get this behind him,'' Mr.
Sheehan said.

Return to Business Expected

Mr. Caputo was a partner in Booz, Allen, Hamilton, management consultants,
before becoming a full-time campaigner, and he was expected to return to the
consulting business.

Some $400,000 had been raised in campaign contributions, and commercials had
been started on television when the military service stories became public. The
television ads were stopped after a few days. Mr. Sheehan said the campaign
should end ''with all the bills paid.''

There was no immediate reaction from Mr. Caputo's supporters to his departure
from the campaign.  Mr. Moynihan said, ''One must never take pleasure in another
person's pain.'' The political reaction to the original stories had been
extensive and harsh.  Mr. Caputo had said that he ''apologized'' for the
military service claims, without conceding explicitly that he had made them.
After that, the Republican state chairman, George L. Clark Jr., and J.  Daniel
Mahoney and Serphin R. Maltese, who run the Conservative Party, announced they
would ''suspend'' their support.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 9, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnamese Attacked 3 Boats, Chinese Say

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 70 words

DATELINE: PEKING, March 8


China has lodged a strong protest with the Vietnamese Embassy in Peking,
charging that Vietnamese gunboats attacked three Chinese fishing boats on the
high seas, the Peking radio reported today.

It said a crew of 18 was missing after their boat was blown up, and six Chinese
were wounded on another boat hit by shells. A third vessel was set on fire and
towed away, it said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 9, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Clifford Case

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 253 words


He reached the Senate in 1954 by defeating the McCarthyites on the extreme right
of New Jersey's Republican Party. He was ousted, finally, in a 1978 party
primary by a new political right. For the quarter-century in between, Clifford
Case upheld the middle ground of moderate Republicanism. He advanced
bipartisanship in foreign affairs, compassion in the civil rights struggles,
quality in judicial appointments and decency in everything.

Long an influential member of the Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Case
supported Presidents of both parties when he saw them leading the nation toward
peace. And he was bipartisan in his denunciation of executive excesses.

He came to oppose President Johnson's involve-ment in Vietnam as unauthorized
and he was critical of President Nixon for not ending that involvement sooner.
He helped to produce the War Powers Act to make the executive more accountable
for military operations and sponsored a law requiring early notice to Congress
of secret agreements with other countries.

New Jersey, the Senate and the nation all profited from Clifford Case's
intellectual gifts and quiet dignity. Nor did moderation die with his political
defeat. After he lost his party's support, by only a few thousand votes, the
electorate turned to a moderate Democrat for his replacement. Clifford Case was
what you might call an impassioned moderate. He gave moderation a long run and a
good name.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 9, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
TUESDAY, MARCH 9, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 912 words


International
Soviet forces killed 3,000 Afghans with poison gas and other chemical weapons in
violation of a treaty signed by Moscow, according to the Reagan Administration.
Deputy Secretary of State Walter J. Stoessel Jr. told a Senate committee that
the information came from Afghan defectors who had been trained by Soviet
experts in chemical warfare and from refugees in Pakistan who were victims of
the attacks. (Page A1, Column 1.)
Salvadoran rebels attacked two provincial capitals. The assaults paralyzed both
towns for much of the day, and Government forces said that the fighting was
widespread. (A4:3-4.)
Some of the 4,000 Polish detainees could face trials, according to officials in
Warsaw. They said that a political amnesty granted before martial law was
imposed Dec. 13 did not cover all offenses.  This interpretation raises the
possibility that the authorities may threaten detained people with trials in an
effort to persuade them to leave Poland. (A3:1-4.)
U.S.-European differences prompted West Germany to propose that the foreign
ministers of the NATO countries meet periodically in seclusion for frank talks.
Bonn said such meetings, similar to those held by the foreign ministers of the
European Economic Community, could led to ''better understanding.'' (A3:1-4.)
National
A dispute within the Supreme Court over the standards for admitting lawyers to
argue before the Court, simmering for several years, flared again, providing an
unusual public glimpse of disagreements among the Justices involving the
day-to-day administration of the Court. Chief Justice Warren E. Burger accuses
some lawyers of seeking membership in the Supreme Court bar to ''launder'' their
credentials after being disciplined by state bars. (A1:6.)
Pleas for higher military spending have been made by senior Pentagon planners in
testimony before a Senate panel. They asserted it would take more than the
$1,600 billion that President Reagan has proposed for the next five years to
carry out the armed forces' broad mission. (A18:1-3.)
A dispute over laser weapons placed in space and whether they would
revolutionize warfare or be a costly and ineffective boondoggle has been renewed
by the inadvertent disclosure of secret testimony by a member of Congress. In
the testimony, the Pentagon's top research official warned that the Soviet Union
is preparing to put a laser weapon in space in the next few years. (C1:6.)
Shootings at an anti-Klan rally in North Carolina will be investigated by a
Federal grand jury. The Justice Department announced that the panel would
conduct ''a full inquiry'' into the violence in 1979 that left five
demonstrators dead at a ''Death to the Klan'' protest in Greensboro, N.C.
(A14:1.)
Metropolitan
A census challenge failed as the Supreme Court refused to hear an appeal by New
York City and state that the 1980 census failed to count hundreds of thousands
of black and Hispanic residents. City lawyers said they would return to lower
courts for a new trial and would challenge the count on different grounds.
(A1:6.)
Bruce M. Caputo quit the race for United States Senator from New York. His
campaign was damaged by his erroneous claims of having been a Vietnam-era
draftee and an Army lieutenant. (A1:5.)
Curbs on the sale of drug equipment appeared strengthened as the Supreme Court
refused to hear a challenge to a Westchester County law banning the sale of
''drug paraphernalia.'' The ban was upheld last year by a Federal appeals court.
Yesterday's action came five days after the Supreme Court ruled favorably on
another local ordinance regulating such sales. (A1:2-3.)
Foreign-made subway cars may start operating in New York City for the first time
as a result of negotiations betweeen the Metropolitan Transportation Authority
and the Kawasaki company of Japan. The M.T.A. wants to buy 325 cars to replace
old IRT equipment, and sources close to the talks predict that an accord with
Kawasaki will be reached this month. If other talks now under way are completed
successfully, the authority may buy up to 1,150 foreign subway cars over the
next five years. (B1:6.)
The role of Harrison A. Williams Jr. is the only issue before the Senate as it
weighs a recommendation by its ethics committee to expel the New Jersey
Democrat, the panel's chairman, Senator Malcolm Wallop, argued. But Senator
Williams took the Senate floor for 90 minutes and continued to hammer at the
theme that he was victimized by Federal undercover agents in the Abscam
investigation of political corruption. (A1:4.)
Even if an Abscam undercover agent committed perjury, as asserted by his late
wife, it would not warrant a voiding of the conviction of Senator Williams or
the other defendants in the investigation, Justice Department prosecutors argue
in court papers. In fact, the investigators hold, confirmation of the assertions
would not even warrant a new review of the cases by the trial judges. (B4:1-2.)
Windshields are being washed and oil is being checked by gasoline station
attendants in the New York metropolitan region as the price of gasoline dips and
the stations try again to curry favor with motorists. (A1:3-5.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 9, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ANTIWAR ROLE PLAYED AGAIN BY ROSENTHAL

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 8


Representative Benjamin S. Rosenthal, New York City's senior Congressman, came
here 20 years ago and soon made his mark as a liberal gadfly in the House of
Representatives.

It was around Mr. Rosenthal that the first House critics of the Vietnam War
coalesced in 1966; it was his idea in 1969 to keep the House in an all-night
session as a symbol of support for the antiwar demonstrators, and it was Mr.
Rosenthal who became the target of some of President Lyndon B. Johnson's
harshest criticism.

As he introduced a resolution today in the House to end all American military
involvement in El Salvador, Mr. Rosenthal, a member of the Foreign Affairs
Committee and a Democrat from the Eighth District in Queens, had a sense of deja
vu.

'Wrong Then and Wrong Now'

''We have heard it all before - it was wrong then and it is wrong now,'' Mr.
Rosenthal said on the House floor about the Administration's policy in El
Salvador and what he sees as the similarities to American actions in Vietnam.

The four co-sponors of the resolution are Mr. Rosenthal's old Democratic friends
from the anti-Vietnam days: Representatives Phillip Burton of California, John
Conyers Jr. of Michigan, Robert W. Kastenmeier of Wisconsin and Don Edwards of
California.

It is the most far-reaching of a number of Congressional resolutions on El
Salvador. It will go to the House Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs and
then to the Foreign Affairs Committee, but it is given little chance compared
with other more moderate bills.  One of the bills before the House subcommittee
asks for the start of negotiations to end the warfare, and another seeks to deny
El Salvador certification on human rights.

Though he does have a sense of having been through it all before, Mr. Rosenthal
does see a healthy change in the ways of Congress from the 1960's.

Change in Attitude Noted

''In those days it was very conspiratorial, very tough,'' he said in an
interview. ''Those who opposed the war in Vietnam couldn't get hearings. It was
the view of the Democratic chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs then
that it was our role to enhance the Administration.''

Mr. Rosenthal felt differently, believing that Congress should act as an
adversary. ''We couldn't fulfil our constitutional mandate, and we virtually had
to go into the streets,'' he recalled. ''Now you have a different breed of
subcommittee chairman - chairmen who are prepared to hold hearings and bring
things to a vote.''

Mr. Rosenthal, 59 years old, is tall and lanky, with an unassuming manner that
sometimes masks a wry sense of humor.  In January 1981 he underwent an operation
for cancer of the colon, and for 10 months afterward he received chemotherapy
every five weeks. He has lost 20 pounds and looks extremely thin, although he
says he is gaining weight. ''I feel very well,'' he said. ''They talk of total
cure rather than treatment. But having gone through this, I am more worried than
I might otherwise be.''

One measure of Mr. Rosenthal's health is the frequency of his paddle tennis
games. He reports that he is playing daily - partners include friends from the
anti-Vietnam era, Representatives Edwards and Kastenmeier. He plans to resume
outdoor tennis when the weather improves. He lives in Bethesda, Md., and keeps
an apartment in Elmhurst, Queens.

'Stimulating' 1960's Recalled

Aside from being at the forefront of the anti-Vietnam War coalition, Mr.
Rosenthal was a major protagonist of the Great Society programs.

''In the 1960's the work was intellectually stimulating,'' he said. ''You were
fulfilling a mission. Now it's like keeping a finger in the dike to prevent a
rollback.''

He was on the first task force formed by President Johnson to change the purpose
of food stamps from a method of disbursing surplus agricultural goods to
providing food for the needy. He fought long, hard and unsuccessfully for a
Federal consumer agency. Along the way he introduced, through his Subcommittee
on Commerce, Consumer and Monetary Affairs, the concept of inspector generals in
Federal Government departments.

One flaw in the sweep of domestic legislation of the 60's, according to Mr.
Rosenthal, was the failure of Congress to insist on oversight of the program
expenditures that were instituted.  ''Congress doesn't like oversight,'' he
explained. ''Members would rather have their name attached to a piece of new
legislation. But the Congress's complicity with the academics who made the
social programs made these programs vulnerable to the Reagan types.''

Of all the New York Congressmen, Mr. Rosenthal is the closest to Mayor Koch. Mr.
Koch called him the Sunday before the Mayor made his formal announcement that he
would run for Governor. Mr. Rosenthal reports that Mr. Koch's ''usual pungent
charm was helpful'' when he was secretary of the New York City Congressional
delegation.

A Congressional Preacher

Mr. Rosenthal's relations with Governor Carey have deteriorated since the
Representative's subcommittee began an investigation into the American Invsco
Corporation, which was founded by the Governor's wife, Evangeline
Gouletas-Carey, and her family. Mr. Rosenthal severely criticized the company
for what he termed false advertising and violations of securities laws.

Mr. Rosenthal has used his subcommittee as a pulpit for investigative hearings
on manipulations of the silver market, Kuwait's investments in defense-related
industries and the banking practice of the former director of the Federal Office
of Management and Budget, Bert Lance.

Representative Rosenthal was first elected to the House in a special election on
Feb. 20, 1962, the day John Glenn circled the earth. He will run again this
year. ''What else would I do?'' he asked.

However these are difficult times, he indicated. ''I haven't enjoyed this
year,'' he said. ''This is the first Congress I've been in where nothing new is
being done. Both Presidents Nixon and Ford had been in Congress and accommodated
themselves to programs, regardless of who had initiated them. Reagan doesn't
believe that Government should take money out of the pockets of the people. He
wants to return to the 1799 levels of funding - Treasury, Army, Navy. They
didn't have an Air Force then.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Benjamin S. Rosenthal

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 9, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DRAMA: MARGARET KEILSTRUP AND 'WONDERLAND' LEFTOVERS

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 742 words


IF you start to hallucinate in the middle of ''Wonderland,'' Margaret
Keilstrup's play at the Hudson Guild, there may be a good reason for that. In
tone, form and ambitions, ''Wonderland'' is virtually indistinguishable from a
motherlode of failed plays that have turned up at some of our worthier theaters
over the last season or so. A partial list would include ''Scenes and
Revelations'' at the Circle in the Square, ''Grace'' at the American Place,
''Threads'' at the Circle Repertory Company and ''The Whales of August'' at the
WPA. Not to mention Broadway's ''Come Back to the 5 & Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy
Dean,'' which began its career at the Hudson Guild several seasons back.

All of these efforts are about regional American characters (usually families)
who must come to term with the emotional ghosts of their past; all owe varying
debts to Williams, O'Neill, Wilder or Inge; all are full of flights of homespun
lyricism. While this form of drama is by no means a dead issue in the American
theater - witness the fine plays of Lanford Wilson and Beth Henley - the form
alone cannot carry the day. Writers lacking fresh visions or voices of their own
need not apply.

Like its misbegotten predecessors, ''Wonderland'' sinks fast because its author
cannot see beyond her gauzy, pre-fab theatrical conventions and images to cut to
the quick of her characters and their lives. In Miss Keilstrup's play, the
conceits always come first. Her play is set in a symbolic, gone-to-seed frontier
hotel, The Plainsman (nicely designed and lighted by Paul Wonsek), whose
clientele has been robbed by an equally symbolic Disneyland-like amusement park,
Wonderland. There is a telescope on stage, thus prompting much talk about the
metaphorical ''lenses'' that are necessary to bring the past into focus. The
play's opening line, ''Not much traffic on the Sea of Tranquility tonight,''
accurately presages the ersatz poetry of the dialogue to come.

The four characters have been abandoned by loved ones way back when. Chief among
them is Stephen (Dennis Bailey), a Vietnam veteran and Ph.D. in English who
narrates the play in a manner that combines Wilder's stage manager with Tom in
''The Glass Menagerie.'' He is the gentleman caller who briefly toys with the
town's spinster (Debra Mooney) as well as the son that the aged hotel owner
(Thomas A.  Carlin) never had. He is also the protector of Minnie Pierce (Alice
Drummond), a dotty, retired bookkeeper who has escaped from the local old-age
home. Minnie provides the evening's jokes, which, like those in ''Jimmy Dean,''
are wholly dependent on nostalgic invocations of old movie stars.

By the end, you can be assured that old wounds will be opened up, that old
corpses will at long last be laid to rest, that each character will find a
separate peace, and that the telescope will reveal the beginnings of a lunar
eclipse. As one waits for these resolutions, one also waits in vain for a single
line or incident that is not rendered fraudulent by the author's attempts to
forcefeed Greater Significance. The actors, under the direction of David Kerry
Heefner, do not help, though Mr. Bailey's protagonist is undeniably weird.
Between his unmotivated psychotic grins and his obsessive references to the
nearby amusement park, he incongruously recalls one of the few movie stars that
Minnie fails to mention - the crazed Farley Granger of ''Strangers on a Train.''


4 Abandoned
WONDERLAND, by Margaret Keilstrup; directed by David Kerry Heefner; set and
lighting design by Paul Wonsek; costume design by Bob Graham; production stage
manager, Edward R.  Fitzgerald; general manager, Daniel Swee.  Presented by the
Hudson Guild Theater, David Kerry Heefner, producing director. At 441 West 26th
Street.  Stephen Terrill .........................Dennis Bailey Pop Heron
............................Thomas A. Carlin Leah Heron
...............................Debra Mooney Minnie Pierce
..........................Alice Drummond

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LOW-COST AIRLINE NOW SEEKS FARES CURB IT ONCE OPPOSED

BYLINE: By ERNEST HOLSENDOLPH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 9


World Airways Inc., whose rapid growth was built on the cut-rate fares permitted
under airline deregulation, called on the Government today to regulate fares
once again because they are too low.

Heavy operating losses by the airlines last year and a continuing decline in
passenger traffic this year have produced a ''crisis'' among the carriers, said
World's chairman, Edward J. Daly, in a statement released here today. Only the
intervention of the Civil Aeronautics Board on an emergency basis could reverse
this, he said.

Under the terms of the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978, the board retained
authority to regulate fares until Jan.1, 1983, but it has seldom used this
power; instead it has allowed the carriers to adjust rates within a specified
range.

Price Wars Have Curbed Profits

This freedom has led to price wars that have cut into profitability.  World has
been hurt less than larger airlines such as Pan American, United Airlines and
Braniff. World lost $8 million last year, and expects to post a loss of $10
million this year; the five biggest carriers lost almost $790 million in the
last year.

But World, based in Oakland, Calif., has been in the middle of one of the
fiercest fare fights - the struggle for passengers on coastto-coast routes,
where fares have fallen below $100.

The board had no official comment today on World's proposal.  Before
deregulation, World was a charter airline that had gained publicity by seeking
permission to charge $79 for one-way transcontinental flights when the major
carriers were charging several hundred dollars. It was able to start service in
1979 as a scheduled airline with a $99 fare.

Today, however, World assailed free-for-all fare wars as ''disastrous and
completely irrational.'' It asked the C.A.B., in effect, to prohibit fares that
generated insufficient revenue to cover costs.

Mr. Daly, evidently embarrassed by his position, said today that for years,
fares ''were too high in the transcontinental markets, and World did something
about it to the public's advantage and our own; now they are too low, and I will
not remain silent, even though our proposal may offend deregulation purists.''

World now charges $139 one way to fly coast to coast. Capitol International
Airways, another former charter line, offers a $99 fare, and most of the major
transcontinental airlines offer $129 fares. However the range of fares and
services is wide, from the nofrills $99 to about $385 for first-class
accommodations. United is offering a special promotional first-class fare for
$169.

''We have a situation where the bulk of transcontinental fares are below cost,''
said Brian Cooke, a World vice president, at a news conference here today.

The 1978 deregulation law required the Civil Aeronautics Board to allow airlines
to reduce fares freely, without board approval, as long as they did not drop
below 50 percent of the ''Standard Industry Fare Level.'' These ''standard
fares'' were those approved on each route at July 1, 1977, plus an inflation
allowance since then. The 50 percent range was set to avoid predatory pricing.

No Immediate C.A.B. Comment

There was no official reaction from the board to World's petition, but Alan M.
Pollock, a spokesman for the agency, said, ''It is difficult to know what the
board members will decide, but this is really like having New York Air petition
us and call for some kind of controls on Eastern Airlines because New York Air
hasn't yet been able to win the shuttle wars.''

World, which once hauled troops and materiel between the United States and
Vietnam, now serves New York, Washington, Boston, Los Angeles and San Francisco
and cities in West Germany and Britain.

Asked if they wanted deregulation repealed, World officials said today that they
did not. ''However, we want them to enforce the law so long as the board has the
power to do so,'' Mr. Cooke said.

He and Frank J. Costello, a lawyer for the airline, portrayed the problem as an
industrywide crisis, reaching well beyond the battles for the transcontinental
and Florida markets, where price wars have been the fiercest.

''If this continues through September,'' Mr. Costello said, ''then you probably
won't have all these guys to kick around anymore.'' Asked if World was
threatening to shut down, Mr. Cooke said the company intended to continue
operations, but added that the chairman, Mr. Daly, might change his mind if the
business continued to be only marginally profitable.

----

Takeover of Piedmont

WASHINGTON, March 9 (Reuters) - The C.A.B. today gave tentative approval to a
plan by Norfolk & Western Railway to buy a controlling interest in Piedmont
Airlines.

The board said it saw no reason to block the proposal to buy up to 20.5 percent
of Piedmont stock over the next five years.  Under an agreement reached between
the two companies in December, the railroad may not acquire more than 20.5
percent in Piedmont for five years; it now holds about 1.85 million Piedmont
shares, or a 20.2 percent interest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE ASKS MERCY FOR WAR VETERANS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 897 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 9


A Federal district judge in Boston has proposed that the nation's parole boards
give ''special consideration'' to imprisoned Vietnam veterans because of the
traumatic effects of their war experience.

Judge D.@J. Skinner said in an unusual decision Monday that the nation's Parole
Commission, which sets policy for the early release of prisoners, could serve
''a useful purpose'' and decide a policy toward Vietnam veterans ''on a national
basis.''

''It may well be that special consideration should be given to war veterans who
have made great sacrifices for their country,'' said Judge Skinner, whose
decision was immediately lauded by Vietnam veterans.

Joseph C. Zengerle, counsel to the Vietnam Veterans of America, said the
decision was ''of great potential significance to veterans who are now or who
may be incarcerated in the Federal system.'' Beyond that, said Mr. Zengerle, who
was an Assistant Air Force Secretary in the Carter Administration, the decision
made it plain that the Vietnam war experience ''should be taken into account in
determining parole eligibility.''

15,000 Jailed Vietnam Veterans

At latest count, according to the Federal Bureau of Prisons, more than 2,000 of
the 24,000 inmates in Federal prisons are Vietnam veterans. In state prisons,
the figure is 13,000 out of a total of 275,000 inmates.

Judge Skinner's decision was especially surprising to the Vietnam veterans'
group because it partly reversed his own decision last year in the highly
publicized case, which involved Peter Krutschewski, a Vietnam combat pilot who
served two tours and was one of the most decorated helicopter pilots of the war.

Mr. Krutschewski was sentenced last winter to 10 years in prison and was fined
$60,000 for his part in smuggling 57,000 pounds of marijuana into Gloucester,
Mass., in July 1975.

Filing a brief for the Vietnam Veterans of America, Mr. Zengerle and Diane M.
Kottmyer, who are with the Boston-based law firm of Bingham, Dana & Gould,
argued that the defendant was ''not an appropriate subject for harsh
treatment,'' partly because Mr.  Krutschewski had ''rehabilitated himself.'' In
recent years, Mr.  Krutschewski had settled down and became a self-made oil
millionaire.

Beyond this, it was argued that the former pilot's ''combat and post-combat
experience'' in ''the most unpopular and controversial war in the 20th century''
had resulted in stresses that demand ''individualized treatment from the
criminal justice system.''

Plea for 'Mercy and Leniency'

''The Vietnam veterans do not suggest that extraordinary valorous service in
heavy combat in Vietnam entitles an individual to violate the law with
impunity,'' the lawyers said. They proposed, however, that ''mercy and
leniency'' be given veterans by courts as a result of the ''unique nature of the
Vietnam war'' in which veterans returned home ''with either condemnation or
apathy from their fellow veterans.''

In Judge Skinner's earlier decision, Mr. Krutschewski would have been ineligible
for parole for at least three years in the 10-year sentence. The judge, taking
account of the brief by the Vietnam veterans' group, said Monday that the Parole
Commission could now take up the defendant's release ''at any time.''

He added: ''This order should not be taken as intimating any view of mine that
the defendant should be paroled prior to the statutory one-third of his
sentence; it is entered solely for the purpose of giving the Parole Commission
the flexibility to carry out whatever they determine is appropriate national
policy with respect to veterans who served with distinction.''

National Policy Is Proposed

Judge Skinner indicated that if ''special consideration'' was to be afforded
Vietnam veterans, ''it should be a matter of national policy, not randomly case
by case.'' He added that ''this defendant presents a complex problem,'' partly
because he ''is personally rehabilitated and leading a worthwhile life.'' At the
same time, Judge Skinner said, Mr. Krutschewski ran ''a very extensive smuggling
enterprise over a period of three or four years.''

Mr. Krutschewski, who began serving his jail sentence in Sandstone prison in
Minnesota last January, was ''delighted'' by the judge's ruling, said Mr.
Zengerle, who spoke to the veteran last night.

''He's delighted on a personal front, he recognizes this to be a reduction in
the severity of his sentence. He's also become sensitized to the issue of
Vietnam veterans generally and sees this as significant for incarcerated
veterans.''

The long-term effects of serving in the Vietnam War have stirred numerous
studies and resulted in Government supported store-front centers seeking to help
the former soldiers and marines.

In his legal brief, Mr. Zengerle noted what he later called the ''irony'' of the
''mercy and leniency'' by Federal judges toward those who refused to serve in
the war, while a stiff sentence had been imposed on Mr. Krutschewski, ''the most
highly decorated pilot to survive Vietnam.'' Mr. Krutschewski spent more than
1,100 hours engaged in helicopter missions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IS TRYING 'TO GET OUT THE FACTS';
News Analysis

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 9


The Reagan Administration has launched an information campaign to persuade
Congress, the press and the public that it has been telling the truth when it
says vital American interests are threatened by a military buildup in Nicaragua
sponsored by Cuba and the Soviet Union.

Senior State Department officials said this afternoon that they had no illusions
that the vigorous campaign would automatically end domestic opposition to the
Administration's policy on Central America. That policy is aimed at stemming
leftist insurgencies in El Salvador and elsewhere in the region through a
combination of economic and military assistance as well as warnings of possible
direct military intervention.

''We have to get out the facts we have so that people at least will agree on
what is happening down there,'' said an aide to Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig Jr. ''Then, we can worry about getting them to accept the policy.''

Adm. Bobby R. Inman, the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, was in charge
of a briefing for the press today on the Nicaraguan military buildup.

Missile Crisis Atmosphere

Admiral Inman did not go so far as to say that the danger to the United States
was similar to the threat posed by the Cuban missile crisis, when Soviet missile
sites were being built in Cuba apparently to intimidate the United States. But
there clearly was an effort to recreate some of the same atmosphere that existed
in the tense days of October 1962.

The briefing officer was John T. Hughes, described by Admiral Imman as the best
photo reconnaissance analyst in the United States.  Mr. Hughes, who did the
major internal Government briefings during the Cuban crisis, spoke today in the
same State Department auditorium that he used in 1962 to tell the American
public of the military buildup in Cuba and the withdrawal of Soviet forces under
the threat of an American invasion of the island.

On Wednesday, a briefing will be given to former secretaries of state and
defense, and other national security figures of the past, such as Dean Rusk,
George W. Ball, Maxwell D. Taylor and Henry A.  Kissinger, in an effort to get
their endorsement of the Administration's position.

A Briefing on Capitol Hill

On Thursday, briefings will be given on Capitol Hill to members of Congress who
want to see evidence supporting the Administration's assertions.

On Friday, there is to be another briefing for the press, perhaps with
Nicaraguan military defectors rebutting the Sandinist Government's denial that
it has embarked on a major military buildup and is aiding the Salvadoran
insurgents.

There were no striking revelations at the briefing today.  Mr. Haig, appearing
on Capitol Hill last week, said that there were 2,000 Cuban military advisers
and 70 Soviet advisers in Nicaragua.  And officials had already spoken with
concern about the lengthening of Nicaraguan airfields and the building of new
bases.  The officials viewed these developments as preparations for the
introduction of Soviet MIG fighters, to be flown by Nicaraguan pilots undergoing
training in Cuba and Bulgaria.

Photos Support U.S. on Buildup

But the use of photos taken by American planes flying directly over and around
Nicaragua seemed to provide credible support for the Administration's concern.
What was missing from the briefing was any of the ''overwhelming and
irrefutable'' evidence that Mr. Haig says the Administration has accumulated to
prove that the Salvadoran insurgency is being directed from Nicaragua and Cuba
by non-Salvadorans.

A State Department official said this evidence might not be supplied to the
press because it was much more ''sensitive'' than photo reconnaissance.

The ''sensitive'' category would include information from undercover agents who
could be compromised by release of the data. It would also include ''signal and
electronic intelligence,'' which involves sophisticated eavesdropping by ships,
satellites, planes and land stations of voice, radar and radio signals.
Traditionally, intelligence agencies have been very reluctant to allow the
public access to such data.

Last week, the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency discussed
the ''declassification'' of the intelligence information. The department sought
- and failed - to persuade the agency to release some of the material that would
back up Mr. Haig's contention that the Salvadoran insurgents are commanded from
outside El Salvador.

A Difficult Consensus

Without such information, it will be difficult to forge a consensus in
Washington on what is happening in El Salvador.  It seems evident from the
briefing today that the Nicaraguan forces are being expanded. But it has not yet
been shown that there is a direct relationship between the expansion and the
guerrilla war in El Salvador.

Admiral Inman said the briefing was the first in a series. He said El Salvador
would be discussed later. He did not promise, however, to produce evidence said
to link the two countries.

In 1962, President John F. Kennedy had no trouble winning Congressional and
public support for his confrontational policy with the Soviet Union over Cuba.
That confrontation produced a major loss of face for the Soviet Union when
Nikita S. Khrushchev backed down and pulled Soviet missiles and bombers out of
Cuba.

A Two-Fold Problem

But, as Mr. Haig has found out on Capitol Hill, there is no such support today.
The Administration's problems appear to be two-fold.  First, the danger posed to
the United States from the Caribbean region does not seem so direct as it did in
1962.  The old Soviet T-55 tanks and out-of-date antiaircraft guns in Nicaragua
may seem a vast arsenal in Central American terms. But they are hardly the same
threat to the United States as the Soviet mediumrange missiles in Cuba.

To persuade people that Nicaragua is a threat, it is necessary for
Administration officials - as Admiral Imman did today - to repeat a modern day
''domino theory'' in which El Salvador, then Honduras and Guatemala, and
eventually Costa Rica might fall to Cuban-backed insurgents, endangering the
Panama Canal, Mexico and American shipping lanes.

Lack of Enthusiasm in Congress

Secondly, because of the Vietnam experience, many members of Congress have no
enthusiasm, and indeed actively oppose, American involvement in guerrilla wars
backing questionable governments.

Talk of a domino theory only links El Salvador to Vietnam more strongly in their
minds, even though Mr. Haig and others say the analogy is wrong - that Central
America is close at hand and should be decisively dealt with by the United
States to prevent other Cubas from developing.

Admiral Inman, when asked today what he would suggest to eliminate the problem,
said the C.I.A. does not make policy. Ask the State Department, he replied.

Mr. Haig, who testifies before a Senate committee on Wednesday, is trying to
assure members of Congress that there are no plans to send American troops to El
Salvador. But he is not ruling it out on the ground that such a declaration
would encourage Cuba and Nicaragua to move more aggressively in the region.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VESSEY'S VIEW OF DEFENSE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 9


Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., nominated to become the nation's senior military
officer on July 1, believes that ''America needs to wake up and make up its mind
that there could well be a war and to prepare for it.''

''Then,'' he told the Association of the United States Army 16 months ago,
''there might not be any war at all.'' Thus General Vessey, named by President
Reagan to be the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, put himself into the
ranks of those who advocate deterrence over detente.

That is one of the few clues about General Vessey as a military strategist. His
public record on strategy is slender because he has spent most of his career as
a field commander, including time as commanding general of United States Forces
in Korea. Most recently, he has been out of the spotlight as the Army's Vice
Chief of Staff, and Army spokesman say it is unlikely that he will speak out
until he appears before the Senate Armed Services Committee for confirmation
hearings, probably in May.

Even so, the few speeches General Vessey has given, along with observations by
senior officials, suggest that the general is a plain-spoken man with rather
definite ideas.

Lessons of World War II

''I'm not opposed to good will,'' he said in his speech to the Army association.
''In fact, I am in favor of fostering it. But it is a fragile reed upon which to
build defense policy.''

''We can be weak and hope for peace,'' he added, ''or we can be strong and be
sure of peace.'' General Vessey sometimes refers to the lessons of World War II.
''Prior to World War II,'' he said ''many people in England and the United
States considered defense appropriations sufficient - or too high.''

''They weren't dishonest or disloyal,'' he said, ''but they were dead wrong.''
''I believe it is precisely that lack of preparation that will tempt our enemies
and lead to the very war that we seek to avoid,'' he said. ''I would submit we
have no other responsible option than to make realistic preparations for war.''

'Really Fits In'

A policy official indicated that President Reagan selected General Vessey
because ''he really fits in.'' The same official referred to the
Administration's plans for preparing for protracted, conventional, global war as
more likely than scattered small conflicts or nuclear war.

''The short-war war logic is compelling,'' said the general, ''but I'm not sure
the Russians will be smart enough to recognize defeat.  Certainly any study of
1812 and 1941 would lead the student to such a conclusion.''

A senior military officer points out that General Vessey, 59 years old, is among
the few active officers who fought in World War II, with the breadth that
conflict gave even those who were young then.  ''We just don't have people with
the memory and background of that experience any more,'' the officer said. Other
officers said that the general's service in Korea, Thailand and Vietnam, plus an
interest in Latin America, has added to that wide view.

Commander in Korea

Other officers say that General Vessey's service as commander in South Korea has
given him an understanding of combined ground and tactical air operations and of
working with different services.

He is said to be a strong advocate of flexibility on the battlefield. But the
general worries that military forces have become too dependent on technology.
''I'm sometimes concerned that we may not be preparing our leaders and
commanders for the inevitable chaos of battle,'' he said in his speech about the
state of the Army.

''Technology will not be a substitute for physical and mental toughness of
soldiers and leaders,'' he said. Referring to the dictum that whatever can go
wrong will go wrong, he said: ''Murphy's law will operate. There will be runners
and messengers in the next battle, weather will preclude aircraft support and
some of the fancy things that we are now fielding will be fixed with gum and
wire.''

General Vessey, who once served as the Army's chief operations officer, is said
to be a thorough planner. But there is little in his background to indicate that
he knows much about seapower or about the strategic triad of long-range bombers,
missiles and submarines capable of delivering nuclear warheads.

Nor is much known about his views on what is becoming a vigorously debated
topic, the proposal by the current Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Gen. David C.
Jones, for reforming the Chiefs, and particularly for strengthening the
authority of the chairman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gen. John W. Vessey Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 10, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 901 words


International
A Nicaraguan military buildup is being pressed and has upset Central America's
military balance, according to the Reagan Administration.  It made public aerial
reconnaissance photographs that intelligence officials said proved that
Nicaragua, with Cuban and Soviet aid, was assembling the largest military force
in the region. (Page A1, Column 6.)
Nicaragua's buildup is defensive only, according to one of the three members of
the Sandinist junta. He charged that Washington was making charges to the
contrary to justify possible intervention. He conceded that the size of the
Nicaraguan armed forces had been increased, but asserted, ''There is not a
single foreign soldier in Nicaragua.'' (A1:5.)
Victory in Guatemala's election was claimed by the Government's candidate, and
his three opponents were detained by the police as they were marching to the
Presidential palace to present what they said was evidence of fraud. They had
called on their supporters to stage a mass protest, an action that the
Government warned was illegal. (A13:1-3.)
The Irish Parliament's choice for Prime Minister was Charles J.  Haughey, a
millionaire Dublin businessman who was Prime Minister from December 1979 until
last June. He defeated Prime Minister Garret FitzGerald by a vote of 86 to 79.
(A3:4-6.)
National
On a peacemaking visit to Capitol Hill, President Reagan held firm on the budget
plan that Senate Republican leaders oppose because of the high projected
deficit. He told Senate Republicans that he would not consider any budget
alternative that did not have broad bipartisan support in both houses of
Congress. (A1:1.)
Cuts in personal benefit programs would be more acceptable if the sacrifice was
shared fairly, according to several of the interest groups that would be most
affected by proposals to freeze or cut the entitlement programs. Their position
is in sharp contrast to the situation last year, when suggestions for limiting
retirees' benefits were strongly opposed. Entitlements now acccount for about
half the Federal budget, with Social Security accounting for nearly half the
programs. (A1:3-4.)
Assailing the Administration's proposed budget as a ''colossal mistake in
economic policy,'' former Vice President Walter F.  Mondale urged Congress to
repeal the 10 percent income tax cut scheduled for next year and to cut $10
billion from the military budget. Mr. Mondale, an all-but-declared aspirant for
the 1984 Democratic Presidential nomination, spoke at the National Press Club.
(A24:3-4.)
Vietnam veterans should be given ''special consideration'' by parole boards
because of the traumatic effects of their war experience, according to a
proposal by Judge D.@J. Skinner of Federal District Court in Boston. The
Government reports that more than 2,000 of the 24,000 inmates now in Federal
prisons are Vietnam veterans. (A9:1.)
A black police chief in Houston is in prospect for the first time with the
nomination of Lee Patrick Brown, who is now Atlanta's Public Safety
Commissioner. (A20:1-2.)
John Belushi was buried in Martha's Vineyard, Mass., as reports spread that the
33-year-old actor's death last Friday was caused by a large dose of cocaine or
other drugs. He had a reputation for using drugs heavily. A spokesman for the
Los Angeles County Coroner said that laboratory tests would be completed in two
or three days.  (A20:3-4.)
The world will not end today, despite widespread rumors, because of an unusual
alignment of the sun, the planets and the moon, which is called a syzygy by
astronomers. Because the nine planets will be on the same side of the sun, all
will be observable, some without a telescope, shortly before dawn today and
tomorrow. Much superstition is attached to the syzygy, but astronomers expect
nothing unusual to occur. (A10:3-4.)
Metropolitan
A vote on Harrison A. Williams Jr. is expected in the Senate today.  The Senate
majority leader said there was ''almost no support'' among Republicans for a
resolution to censure rather than expel the New Jersey Democrat, and reports
circulated that Senator Williams was again being pressured by fellow Democrats
to resign before an expulsion vote tomorrow. (A1:2.)
A fourth candidate entered the race for the Republican nomination for Governor.
James L. Emery, the Assembly minority leader, said in announcing his candidacy
that he had voted five times for enactment of the death penalty, and declared he
would emphasize the state's economy and crime as the key issues. (B3:1-4.)
A witness to the fatal blaze at Stouffer's Inn on Dec. 4, 1980 testified that he
had the impression that ''someone was stoking the fire'' when he discovered it
as a ''bundle of flame'' in a corridor.  However, the witness said later that he
could not be sure that it was a ''person'' he had seen. Luis Marin, a coffee
waiter at Stouffer's, is accused of arson and murder. (B4:1-2.)
A Central Park upgrading plan has been modified, according to Commissioner
Gordon J. Davis. He announced that the Parks Department had decided not to
proceed with a controversial 150-seat restaurant at the Wollman Memorial Rink.
(B1:5-6.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'COMMENT CA VA?' OPENS GODARD FESTIVAL

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 540 words


THE Agee Room at the Bleecker Street Cinema, currently sponsoring a Jean-Luc
Godard retrospective, opens today with his ''Comment ,Ca Va?'' (''How's It
Going?''). It was made in 1976 with Anne-Marie Mieville when Mr. Godard was
living in Grenoble, France, and after his Maoist period. It's a comparatively
short (78 minutes), technically complex, typically Godardian inquiry into the
nature of things, this time into mass communications and the truth or falsity of
the information communicated.

In form it recalls both ''Le Gai Savoir'' (1968), which Mr. Godard once
described as his last ''bourgeois'' film, and the vitriolic, 52-minute ''Letter
to Jane'' (1972), made with Jean-Pierre Gorin, in which the two film makers
examine a news photograph of Jane Fonda in North Vietnam and find her politics
wanting.

''Comment ,Ca Va?'' is nowhere near as lucid as ''Le Gai Savoir,'' in which two
characters sit in a television studio and hold a feature-length discourse on
language as a capitalist tool and the need to create a new vocabulary before
revolution will be possible.

In ''Comment ,Ca Va?'' a young woman and an older man also sit in a television
studio, studying a short film they are making about the Communist newspaper they
work for. They argue about the quality of the information they are circulating,
focusing on a news photograph from Portugal in which we see a young man, at the
head of a large crowd of demonstrators, confronting armed soldiers.

It is the young woman's belief - I think - that there's no way that a caption
written by her editor can convey the truth of the scene only partially caught by
the news photograph. The more they debate, the more distant becomes the
possibility of finding any truth except that there is no truth. By the end, they
realize that there's no way they're going to be able to make a film about their
newspaper that will be acceptable to the paper's governing committee.

The film also contains another pair of characters, a young man, who is
apparently the son of the editor, and a young woman, who are seen, from time to
time, in a car, in a cafe, at home watching television, oblivious to the
speculation going on elsewhere in the film that contains them.

''Comment ,Ca Va?''does not have English subtitles but, on specific days, the
screening will be accompanied by a spoken English tanslation of the dialogue and
the French titles that appear in the film-within-the-film. Anyone who does not
speak fluent French would be advised to find out when the English translation is
available.

Waht Is La Verite?
COMMENT ,CA VA?, directed by Jean-Luc Godard and Anne-Marie Mieville; produced
by Sonim- age and Institut Nationale du L'Audiovisuel, Bela Productions Paris.
At the Bleecker Street Cinema, Agee Room, 144 Bleecker Street. Run- ning time:
78 minutes. This film has not been rated.  Odette
............................Anne-Marie Mieville

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CARIBBEAN BASIN SECURITY

BYLINE: By Jorge Castaneda

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY


Tiny El Salvador, about the size of Massachusetts and 15 times smaller than
Vietnam, looms larger and larger in the eyes of the United States. Indeed,
events in Central America have been pushed to the front page, and leaders around
the world are justifiably concerned.

In the early 1960's, United States public opinion was jolted by the turn of
events in Cuba. The Cuban Revolution was a clear warning to all that the
traditional peasant societies of the Caribbean Basin nations, based on the
exploitation of the majority of the inhabitants by an oligarchy, were destined
to disappear and that change would come rapidly and, at times, radically. The
demand for change sent Anastasio Somoza, the Nicaraguan President, into exile in
1979 and has been felt throughout the area, now most prominently in El Salvador.

In certain Government circles - in Central America, the United States, and
elsewhere - the events in the Caribbean area are seen primarily as the result of
Soviet and Cuban expansionism, real or imagined. They view the world in terms of
black-and-white. These groups insist on ignoring the grassroots origin of the
unrest. For them, the answer lies in a crusade against Communism. Others point
to decades, even centuries, of social oppression and political domination by a
handful of families as the main source of the turmoil. They see the situation,
not as an ideological tug-of-war between East and West, but as a popular
struggle for bread and justice. This view is shared by many Western European
leaders and by the Roman Catholic Church as well. One cannot argue that the
Vatican is right on Poland and wrong on El Salvador.

What is important is that the people of El Salvador, and they alone, resolve
their differences, not through further bloodshed but through political
negotiation. This is Mexico's position. President Jose Lopez Portillo proposed
in Managua a series of steps to reduce tensions in the area. These steps could
include mutual concessions by the United States, on the one hand, and Cuba,
Nicaragua, and the opposition in El Salvador, on the other.

As for Cuba, we are aware of the obstacles that must be surmounted, especially
those derived from 23 years of an almost total absence of communication. Yet
there seems to be room for some movement and we were encouraged by the meeting
late last year in Mexico City between Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
and Cuban Vice President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez. We are convinced that these
talks could be pursued with success. One might think of removing one of the main
obstacles in the Cuban-American relationship - the Cuban soldiers in Africa - by
agreeing on an internationally guaranteed arrangement regarding Angola and
Namibia.

In the case of Nicaragua, whose military manpower outstrips that of its
neighbors, one might think of a reduction of its armed forces in exchange for
the dismantling of the bands of Somoza guards operating along the
Honduras-Nicaragua border and an end to the training of those groups in the
United States. Nicaragua's neighbors would also have to make concessions,
including limiting the purchase of sophisticated military hardware, since they
already have more tanks and aircraft than Nicaragua. A further measure could be
nonaggression pacts between Nicaragua and its neighbors and between Nicaragua
and the United States. This would assuage the Sandinistas and allay the fears of
Nicaragua's neighbors.

To put an end to the bloody civil war in El Salvador, Mexico has proposed and
promoted informal contacts between the Government of Jose Napoleon Duarte and
the opposition to explore the possibility of negotiating an overall agreement.
El Salvador's elections, scheduled for March 28, are doomed. The opposition has
announced a boycott. The results can therefore strengthen only the hard-liners
in the junta, which is itself the product of a coup. The moderate elements will
again be caught in the middle, except that this time they will be left out of
the junta. What is certain is that civil strife will continue and the
Salvadorans will go on suffering its tragic consequences. For the election to
have any meaning, it must be preceded by political negotiations and a
cease-fire. Would it not be better to encourage a political settlement among the
various factions that would culminate in elections than to ensure continuation
of the bloodbath? When have elections held in the midst of a civil war furthered
the search for a national consensus?

Programs for economic development of the Caribbean Basin, no matter how
ambitious or generous, cannot succeed in the midst of political confrontation
and military threats. Gracious gestures of political accomodation must go
hand-in-hand with the altruism of economic aid.

Mexico is prepared to serve as a bridge, as a communicator, between its friends
and neighbors. Together, we must find a solution that serves the interests and
enhances the security of all the Caribbean Basin countries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Jorge Castaneda is Foreign Minister of Mexico.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

139 IN CONGRESS URGE NUCLEAR ARMS FREEZE BY U.S. AND MOSCOW

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 10


Seventeen senators and 122 members of the House of Representatives joined today
in sponsoring a resolution calling for a freeze in the levels of Soviet and
American atomic arsenals.

The nonbinding measure, which was introduced in both houses, was immediately
criticized by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  in testimony before a
Senate subcommittee. He said the proposed freeze would have a ''devastating''
effect since it would perpetuate as much as a ''6 to 1'' Soviet advantage in
nuclear weapons in Europe.

Proponents, among them Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and
Rep. Jonathan B. Bingham, Democrat of the Bronx, held a news conference at
American University's Kay Chapel to announce the introduction of the single-page
measure, which urges the United States and Soviet Union to ''pursue a complete
halt to the nuclear weapons race.''

'Mutual and Verifiable' Cuts

It calls upon the superpowers ''to decide when and how to achieve a mutual and
verifiable freeze'' on testing, production and further deployment of nuclear
arms, and then to pursue ''mutual and verifiable'' reductions in weapons
stockpiles.

Of the measure's 17 sponsors in the 100-member Senate, 13 are Democrats, among
them Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York and Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut;
the four Republican Senate sponsors include Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of
Connecticut. Of the 122 sponsors in the 435-member House, 105 are Democrats and
17 Republicans.

Mr. Haig, who appeared before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee, maintained
that the proposal would adversely affect the Soviet-American talks in Geneva
aimed at limiting intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe.

Bad Arms Policy, Haig Says

''This is not only bad defense policy, but it is a bad arms control policy as
well,'' Mr. Haig concluded.  Privately, Administration officials expressed
concern that the growing movement against nuclear weapons was increasing
pressure on President Reagan to begin talks with the Soviet Union aimed at
limiting stategic nuclear forces.

The freeze initiative has been endorsed by a long list of prominent business,
religious, intellectual and political figures, including George F. Kennan, the
Soviet expert and diplomat; William E. Colby, former director of the Central
Intelligence Agency, and Thomas J. Watson Jr., former United States Ambassador
to the Soviet Union and former chairman of I.B.M.

Among those speaking at the news conference on behalf of the resolution were
religious leaders, many of whom have played key roles in organizing grass-roots
freeze initiatives.

Freeze resolutions, it was noted at the news conference, have been approved by
legislators in Connecticut, Massachusetts, Oregon, Wisconsin, Kansas and New
York.

Last week, 159 of 180 town meetings in Vermont endorsed freeze proposals, and
similar endorsements have been made by town meetings and city and country
councils in South Dakota, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, New Hampshire, Maine and
Missouri. More than a million people have signed freeze-related petitions
similar to the resolutions that were introduced in Congress today.

'Central Moral Issue'

Rabbi Alexander M. Schindler, president of the Union of American Hebrew
Congregations, predicted that the nuclear arms race would become the ''central
moral issue of our day.''

''What the Vietnam War represented to the 1960's,'' Mr. Schindler said, ''the
nuclear arms race will be to the 1980's.'' Bishop James Armstrong, president of
the National Council of Churches, said it was ''obscene'' for the Pentagon to
have decided to name a new nuclear submarine the Corpus Christi.

''The name means 'body of Christ,''' Mr. Armstrong remarked.  ''Jesus Christ
stands in direct opposition to everything nuclear weapons represent.''

In briskly delivered, five-minute remarks, a succession of speakers asserted
that a nuclear war would mean the end of mankind.

Bingham Says Time Is Ripe

Senator Kennedy argued that the resolution was practical because it did not call
for unilateral disarmament but rather for a ''mutual and verifiable'' freeze and
reductions in atomic arms.

''This is the time for a freeze,'' said Representative Bingham. He disputed the
Reagan Administration's claim that the resolution was not timely because the
Soviet Union had gained strategic nuclear superiority over the United States.

''There is equality today,'' Mr. Bingham maintained. ''We are equally
vulnerable, equally afraid, equally trapped.'' Senator Mark O. Hatfield,
Republican of Oregon, said that he had discussed the freeze intiative with
William Clark, President Reagan's national security adviser, who seemed
''interested'' in the proposal.

Mr. Hatfield, who is chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, said that
he had personally witnessed the destruction that nuclear weapons could inflict.
Mr. Hatfield said that as a Navy lieutenant he had gone to Hiroshima ''before
the rubble was cleared.''

''I knew that the bomb had probably saved my life,'' he said, departing from
prepared remarks, ''but, as I stood there, I had a sense of ambivalence about
the power that had been unleashed in the world.''

(end insert)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR STIRRING CONCERN IN EUROPE

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: LONDON, March 10


American policy in El Salvador is becoming an important element in the
continuing tensions between Washington and the governments of Western Europe,
along with Poland, intermediaterange nuclear missiles and high American interest
rates.

''It makes no sense for you to go through the Vietnam mess again,'' a prominent
British politician commented not long ago, ''because it seems so unlikely to
achieve your aims, which we find quite laudable. Even the Prime Minister,
against all her basic instincts, is beginning to question whether President
Reagan is thinking clearly on El Salvador, as well as worrying about the severe
impact of Reaganomics over here.''

But the Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, is nonetheless sending a pair of
British observers to the Salvadoran elections, which most other governments in
Western Europe are unwilling to do, lest they be criticized at home for seeming
to endorse a regime that many Europeans, especially those of the left and
center, consider dictatorial.

As is often the case in such matters, the resentment against American policy in
El Salvador can be seen in its clearest form in the small countries of northern
Europe.

U.S. Is Called Hypocritical

In Denmark, for example, Prime Minister Anker Jorgensen has publicly charged
that the United States is hypocritical in supporting what he described as a
military regime flouting basic human rights while at the same time attacking a
similar regime in Poland. In the Netherlands, the same theme is taken up not
only by left-wing politicians and newspapers but also by staunch friends of the
United States.

Some Western European diplomats particularly resent the role played in the
formulation and articulation of American policy by Thomas O.  Enders, who served
as deputy chief of mission and then as charge d'affaires in Cambodia in the
early 1970's. He became a well-known figure in political circles here when he
served as the United States representative to the Common Market during the
Carter Administration, and he is now the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs.

''How Mr. Enders, after the punishment he inflicted on Cambodia with his bombs,
can talk about violent minorities and their cruelty in El Salvador is quite
beyond me,'' a Dutch diplomat said recently.

The latest quarrel over El Salvador blew up in Norway, where a local Labor Party
in the northern part of the country narrowly adopted a resolution declaring that
American troops were not welcome to take part in a North Atlantic Treaty
Organization exercise this month.

Ambassador in Sharp Reply

Although it was only a local resolution in a party that, while the largest in
the country, is out of government, the United States Ambassador, Mark Austad,
responded at a press conference that Norwegian criticism of American policy in
El Salvador and elsewhere could seriously jeopardize relations between
Washington and Oslo.

''If you do not want your biggest, your best friend in the world to participate
in your defense, it really does not make sense,'' the Ambassador said. ''We in
the United States call it biting off your nose just to spite your face.'

Mr. Austad's comment brought charges from leftist parties, including Labor, that
he was interfering in Norwegian domestic affairs. But it is not only in small
countries that Washington is often attacked for its policies in El Salvador.

The West German Government is particularly nervous about the problem because it
fuels the anti-Americanism on the left wing of both the parties in the ruling
coalition, the Social Democrats and the Free Democrats. After recalling its
ambassador from San Salvador and cutting aid payments last year, the Government
of Chancellor Helmut Schmidt has grown silent on the whole subject in recent
months.

Pressure continues to come from Willy Brandt, the chairman of the Social
Democrats, for a peaceful settlement in El Salvador, and American policy is
subjected to a steady stream of criticism in the press. The popular magazine
Stern published a special issue on Poland last month titled, ''Freedom - What Is
That?'' The publisher, Henri Nannen, answered his own question with another:
''Are people in El Salvador free, is Chile free?'

French Criticism Less Vocal

Criticism of American attitudes toward Central America is somewhat less vocal in
France, even though France has an official policy that is explicitly hostile.
The French Government maintains that rebel groups in El Salvador must be
recognized as representatives of the people, along with the present regime.

Privately, the message transmitted by President Francois Mitterrand's diplomats
is this: As in other parts of the third world, the revolutionary thrust comes
principally from inside, and it is a mistake to treat it primarily as an
East-West phenomenon; the thing to do is to give the rebels somewhere else to
turn besides Moscow or Havana, and that is a role that France is well equipped
to play.

Mr. Mitterrand's Socialist Party sent a delegation to a meeting of Latin
American political groups in Panama, which joined in supporting negotiations
with the rebels and in condemning the junta. But at the same time, the
delegation asked Nicaraguan representatives why they had kept out a delegation
of exiled Poles representing Solidarity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
HEARING FRANCE'S VIEW

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 10


At President Reagan's request, President Francois Mitterrand has advanced his
planned trip to Washington to tomorrow.  White House talks are expected to focus
on relations with the Soviet Union and Central America.

The impression in Paris is that Mr. Reagan knows he must soon decide between
feuding Administration advisers on immediate issues.  It is good to hear another
allied view at first hand. The West German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich
Genscher, was in Washington a few days ago.

Since Mr. Mitterrand has earned his anti-Soviet credentials in Washington's
eyes, his explanation of why the Europeans will not abandon the Soviet
gas-pipeline deal may convince doubters that it isn't just a mushy-minded German
project. France has already told its nationalized electronics company to make
its own rotor blades for pipeline compressors if the U.S. goes ahead with a
threat to deny licenses for the critical General Electric product.

That is likely to strengthen the ''multilateralists'' in the State Department
who argue that it's futile to lean harder on allies, as the Pentagon wishes. But
on Central America, the French think the State Department line is driving the
U.S., and the West, toward serious trouble.

There is a good deal of sympathy on the French left for insurgents in El
Salvador. Along with French arms sales to Nicaragua, that has provoked angry
muttering in Washington.

But there are harder heads in the French Government who are just as convinced as
the romantic left that a ''damage-limiting operation'' is required in Central
America to save it from the Soviet camp.

That is why Paris supports the mediation plan of the Mexican President, Jose
Lopez Portillo, coldly received by Washington.  Encompassing Nicaragua, Salvador
and Cuba, the plan is more realistic than the original French-Mexican call for a
Salvadoran political settlement.

The background of the $17 million French arms deal with Nicaragua is important
in the overall Paris view. Officials say the Nicaraguans simply turned up one
day with a shopping list carefully composed of weapons that might be used in an
anti-guerrilla or defensive war, but not suitable for either offensive or
guerrilla operations.

Since the list is small and doesn't fit any logical arms buildup program, the
French concluded that the request reflected continued debate within the
Nicaraguan leadership about becoming overdependent on Soviet-sponsored supplies.
''It was clearly politi-cal,'' said an authoritative French defense official.

Surprisingly, the Nicaraguans also asked about training a few pilots in France.
They can't afford French planes, so that too was seen as a political hint.

It is noted here that unlike Cuba and Vietnam, Nicaragua has not become a
certified member of Moscow's ''Socialist camp,'' and doesn't even have observer
status as Ethiopia and Angola do in Comecon, the economic branch. The French
recognize a distinct Managua tilt that way, but argue that threats are most
likely to push it over the brink.

The long view is sometimes put very harshly. Upheaval and farreaching change is
inevitable in awakening Central American societies, it goes. Opponents of the
existing order are bound to be anti-American, since they see the U.S. as the
bulwark of their oppressors. It may be a couple of generations before their
hatred subsides.

Sooner or later they will win. Therefore, the aim should be not to drive them
into Moscow's arms, which would be a strategic disaster, but to hope that if
they go Marxist it will be on Yugoslav terms of real nonalignment, according to
this French argument.

This raises the question of Cuba. Fidel Castro's claim to nonalignment is patent
balderdash. But it is not clear to what extent his regime is simply a mouthpiece
and proxy for Moscow and how far the urge to spread revolution and create
regional allies is homegrown.

Most probably there is some of both in Havana. Before it can tell the
difference, Washington must decide whether it considers both equally
unacceptable or whether it can deal with a Marxist regime close to the U.S. as
it deals with China and Yugoslavia, providing it isn't a Soviet ally.

The French analysis may be unnecessarily pessimistic, but only if no
intermediate solutions can be found. So far, Cuba has said it will only talk
with the U.S. about bilateral issues, and Washington has said it will only talk
with Cuba about cutting off support for rebels in the hemisphere.

Mexico's offer to be a go-between could at least clarify possibilities. It is
already clear that if the U.S. seeks a military solution in the Caribbean and
Central America, it will unify all but the far right in opposition and aggravate
relations with European allies. If it continues to bellow and bumble
ineffectively, as now, the deterioration will be more gradual but as sure.

Mr. Mitterrand will have a lot to say to Mr. Reagan, and it should be hoped that
he is heard.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE PLIGHT OF WORLD AIRWAYS

BYLINE: By THOMAS C. HAYES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1047 words

DATELINE: OAKLAND, Calif., March 10


It was the pugnacious chairman of World Airways, Edward J. Daly, who unleashed
the transcontinental air fare wars in 1979. Today it appears that Mr. Daly is
scrambling to avoid becoming the first fatality of the deepening ticket
discounts.

The airline, hard hit by continuing fare wars and the recession, has watched its
market share slump amid a general decline in air travel.

In January 1981 the carrier's passenger load factor was 84 percent. In January
this year, it was flying at 65 percent of capacity. In February 1981, the
average passenger load was 79 percent, but for February 1982, the factor is
projected to be in the low 50 percent range.

High interest rates have also taken their toll, pushing the carrier's interest
expense up sharply, to $50.6 million in 1981, up from $42.2 millon in 1980.

Difficult to Judge

World's problems may be many, but the dimensions of its predicament are
difficult to gauge. Mr. Daly, in an interview published March 2 in a local
newspaper, indicated that World's demise could come this month. ''I'm not
running scared, but if I don't get relief I will be out of business,'' he said.
''It might be a week or a month. The labor force and the bankers will make the
decision.''

Two days later, he attempted to reassure travel agents that the situation was
not quite so serious. In a notice to 15,000 agents, he asserted that World ''has
every intention of meeting its scheduled service commitments both now and in the
future.''

The airline's financial figures also cloud the situation. It is projecting a
loss of $11.1 million for 1981, on revenues of $375.6 million, an improvement
from the $28 million loss reported in 1980, on revenues of $247.8 million.

But the 1981 estimate includes nonoperating gains of $1 million from the sale of
equipment and $3.8 million from a bond retirement, according to Michael
Henderson, a World Airways spokesman.

Petition for Help

World Airways executives considered the airline's problems severe enough to seek
Government help, and on Tuesday it asked the Civil Aeronautics Board to halt
what it termed ''irrational'' pricecutting by regulating fares.

Mr. Daly's petition noted that one-way coach fares are in the range of $94 to
$142 before taxes, and that World's average net fare of $142 a passenger is well
below its operating cost.

Although its request was phrased as a bid on behalf of all domestic carriers,
some in the industry read it more as a rescue plan tailored precisely for World.
''It is very self-serving,'' Wesley G.  Kaldahl, an American Airlines executive,
said today.

World contended in its petition that it had the lowest fares of any carrier on
the domestic routes and that larger competitors, American among them, must be
operating at steeper losses on coast-to-coast routes, such as New York to San
Francisco.

Competition Compensates

But Mr. Kaldahl asserted that American Airlines profits from other routes more
than cover the losses of the carrier's transcontinental routes. ''I can argue
very effectively that my costs are lower than his,'' Mr. Kaldahl, vice president
for marketing services at American, said in a telephone interview from Dallas.

''He tried to be the low-discount operator'' on the transcontinental routes,
said Robert Joedicke, an airline analyst with Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb Inc.
''But the established carriers wouldn't let him have it, and cut back their
fares, too. I don't really know what he's got to bellyache about.''

Mr. Daly had high expectations for World's growth. The airline, based here at
the Oakland International Airport, was principally a carrier for packaged
charter tours and a contract carrier of American troops before the Airline
Deregulation Act of 1978.

World Airways grew rapidly during the Vietnam War on the strength of contracts
with the Air Force Military Airlift Command.

Higher Initial Costs

With no hangars, counter space or other facilities at commercial airports, Mr.
Daly had to spend heavily to position World to enter the commercial airline
fray. The carrier's long-term debt jumped to nearly 70 percent of its total
capital in 1978 from 11.5 percent the previous year. At the end of 1981, its
long-term debt amounted to about $350 million, according to a source within the
company.

Stung by recession, high interest rates and the fare discounting, Mr. Daly moved
to sharply reduce costs earlier this year. World is asking its 1,500 pilots,
flight attendants and maintenance personnel, represented by the International
Brotherhood of Teamsters, for wage cuts of 10 to 20 percent. Negotiations are
expected to begin March 19.

The Port of Oakland, which operates the airport, has passed along to the
Commerce Department a request by World to defer payments on a $4 million loan
used to construct its hangar. The deferral would amount to $480,000 for the next
two years, according to Walter Abernathy, executive director of the Port of
Oakland.

Last month, World laid off about 700 of its unionized workers. And, last week,
Moody's Investors Service downgraded its rating of World's equipment trust
certificates to Single-B from Ba. The certificates, a form of debenture secured
by the value of its aircraft, include a series of 10 percent certificates due in
1993, and a series of 11 1/4 percent certificates due in 1994.

Personal Assets Pledged

Mr. Daly has also pledged to use $5 million of his personal assets to secure
World's financing. Mr. Daly owns 82 percent of World's 10 million common shares.
In January, he said that he would cut his own salary in half, to about $26,000.
The normally outspoken executive rejected a request for an interview. ''He's
busy trying to run the company,'' Mr. Henderson said.

Mr. Abernathy of the Port of Oakland said the port continues to supply fuel,
utilities and other support to World Airways facilities. He said that Mr. Daly
''is a man of his word'' and, although World is short of cash, Mr. Abernathy
expected the carrier to survive the recession.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of World Airways ticket counter Table of World
Airways

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA SEIZES VIETNAMESE BOAT NEAR DISPUTED ISLAND GROUP

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 740 words

DATELINE: PEKING, March 11


China has seized a Vietnamese boat near the disputed Paracel Islands in the
South China Sea after an incident in which Vietnamese gunboats fired on three
Chinese boats and set them on fire.

A brief announcement today by the New China News Agency said frontier guards
stationed in the Paracels, which China calls the Xisha, had caught a
''Vietnamese reconnaisance boat'' with a 10-man crew ''intruding into China's
territorial waters'' on March 4.

The announcement said the case was still ''under examination,'' indicating that
the boat and crew were still detained.  The incident in which three Chinese
boats were set afire occurred in waters to the west on March 3, suggesting that
China's seizure of the Vietnamese boat might have been a retaliatory measure so
that they could bargain for the release of captured Chinese crewmen.

18 Chinese Fishermen Lost

According to a protest note delivered by the Foreign Ministry to the Vietnamese
Embassy here, 11 Chinese boats were fishing in the South China Sea when they
were shelled by two approaching Vietnamese gunboats. As a result of the attack,
the Chinese said, 18 of their fishermen were missing and 6 were wounded.

The Chinese Government note contended that one of its fishing boats with 18 men
aboard exploded as a result of the ''heavy shelling.'' Another boat, the Chinese
said, was hit by 14 Vietnamese shells, wounding the captain and five crewmen.
The third boat, which burst into flames, was seized with its crew by the
Vietnamese.

Vietnam's version of the incident, which was carried earlier by the Hanoi radio
and the Vietnamese News Agency, contended that 40 armed Chinese vessels had been
sent into Vietnamese waters from 4 to 10 miles off Binh Tri Thien Province.

Vietnam charged that they were there to ''carry out espionage and provocations
and obstruct the normal life of the Vietnamese fishermen,'' and had damaged a
Vietnamese fishing boat.

Worst Clash Since 1979

''Militiamen on board Vietnamese fishing vessels firmly resisted the Chinese
intruding ships, setting ablaze three of them and capturing another near Con Co
Island in Binh Tri Thien,'' the Vietnamese said.

The confrontation appeared to be the worst clash to take place at sea between
China and Vietnam since the two countries fought a short but fierce border war
in early 1979.

There have been other, more minor incidents in the disputed waters of the South
China Sea, with each side contending that its vessels were peaceful fishing
junks while the other's were marauding gunboats.

The veracity of the claims have been virtually impossible to check, although the
Chinese report about the attack on its boats on March 3 gave considerably more
details than other reports.

Hundreds of Atolls and Reefs

The Chinese seizure of the Vietnamese boat on March 4, while less dramatic, is
potentially more significant because it took place in an area over which both
countries claim sovereignty.

The Paracel Islands, which consist of hundreds of atolls and reefs, lie in
waters that are thought to have untapped offshore oil reserves. The Chinese have
put troops on a number of the islands and this year reported having planted
trees from the Chinese mainland on some of the atolls.

The latest charges come in the wake of reports of minor clashes along the
disputed Vietnamese-Chinese border during the Lunar New Year holidays in
January. At that time China accused Vietnam of killing or wounding several
Chinese villagers.

In its protest to Vietnam this week, the Chinese Foreign Ministry charged that
''the Vietnamese authorities have gone so far as to dispatch naval vessels to
make raids on Chinese fishing vessels on the high seas, thus creating a grave
incident of bloodshed.'' It called Vietnam's ''despicable'' charges of Chinese
intrusion ''an attempt to cover up their sheer acts of piracy.''

The Chinese Government has demanded the return of the captured fishing boat and
crew, compensation for losses and an end to ''raids on Chinese boats'' and other
military border provocations.

''Otherwise, the Vietnamese authorities will be held responsible for all the
consequences arising therefrom,'' the Foreign Ministry note said. It did not say
what such consequences might be.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

3 DRAMAS ON JAPANESE-AMERICAN INTERNMENT DAYS

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1101 words


In 1942, Lionelle Hamanaka's father was forced to leave his comfortable life as
a student in Fresno, Calif., to live in a series of tarpaper barracks in camps
surrounded by barbed wire. He lived this way until nearly the end of World War
II. During that time, Miss Hamanaka's brother got pneumonia, and her sister, who
lived for a time with the family in a converted stable in Santa Anita, Calif.,
contracted tuberculosis.

Miss Hamanaka's family did not suffer the experience alone. They were among more
than 110,000 Japanese Americans who were forced, ostensibly for national
security reasons, to abandon their homes for the internment camps situated in
various desolate regions around the country.

Tonight, a play by Miss Hamanaka titled ''Rohwer,'' about a Japanese American
family's experience in the internment camp in Rohwer, Ark., will be presented by
the Pan Asian Repertory Theater.

The Internment Experience

''Rohwer'' is the first of three plays based on the Japanese internment
experience to be presented in sequence over the next six weeks by the Pan Asian
theater, at 120 West 28th Street. ''Rohwer'' will continue through March 21.
''Behind Enemy Lines'' by Rosanna Yamagiwa Alfaro will be presented from March
24 to April 4, and ''Station J'' by Richard France from April 7 to April 18.

Miss Hamanaka's play, her first, completes many years of study on the internment
experience that began somewhat strangely.  ''My parents never talked about the
camps,'' said Miss Hamanaka, a 31-year-old native New Yorker who makes a living
as a jazz singer.  ''I found out about them in a junior high school social
studies class. I ran home that day and said 'Mommy, Daddy, is it true?' And they
said 'Yes, it's true.' I had to learn a lot on my own.''

Her play follows a proud father, the keystone of a strong family, as camp
conditions gnaw away at his self-confidence and authority. He is falsely charged
with sabotage and jailed for several months, forcing his wife and children to
carry on without him. When he returns, he finds his words carry less weight with
his family than before. His daughter leaves to marry a young Japanese American
who, hoping to prove he is not an unloyal American, enlists in a segregated unit
of the United States Army. Finally, even his wife denounces him when he gets
drunk on sake.

Knowing One's Roots

''I felt I had to write this play,'' Miss Hamanaka said. ''I felt I owed it to
my parents. It's also my own roots, and everyone should know where he or she
comes from.''

Miss Hamanaka found a good home for her play at the Pan Asian theater. Founded
in 1977 by the actress Tisa Chang, the theater is devoted to plays with Asian
American themes, using mostly New Yorkbased Asian American playwrights and
actors. In recent years, several Pan Asian productions have received critical
acclaim, among them Ernest Abuba's ''An American Story'' in 1980 and last
season's ''Flowers and Household Gods'' by Momoko Iko.

Why is a series of plays about an experience that took place 40 years ago only
now being shown in New York?  A political inititiative sponsored by a coalition
of Japanese Americans -the so called ''redress and reparations'' issue - has
helped create an environment conducive to speaking out about the internment
experience. Last year, a Congressional commission traveled to nine American
cities, holding public hearings to determine whether to make a formal apology
and cash payments to Japanese Americans whose savings were wiped out during the
internment. The commission's report, which may recommend Congressional action,
is due this fall.  (For a discussion of books about similar experiences, see the
publishing column on page C24.)

Beyond the favorable political climate, some members of the generation of
children whose parents were interned during World War II, have shown an interest
in using the experience artistically.  According to Tisa Chang, the artistic
director of the Pan Asian Repertory Theater who chose the plays in the trilogy,
that is largely due to a difference between the generations.

'Why Weren't There Strikes?'

''The older generations just don't talk about the camps,'' said Miss Chang.
''The people in this generation are more courageous. They want to analyze and
examine their past. They say 'Why weren't there strikes? There were latrines
without doors, rations, and saccharine that made babies sick. Why weren't there
thousands and thousands of lawsuits?' ''

This generation, Miss Chang added, grew up in America during the 1960's, and
thus learned to value self-expression highly, and to use organized political
protest to counteract social wrongs. They are now applying those values to their
own past, she said, much as blacks and other minorities did in the 1960's.

Rosanna Yamagiwa Alfaro, a third-generation Japanese American and the author of
''Behind Enemy Lines,'' drew upon neither her own experience nor those of
relatives in the camps when she wrote her play. She was a child in Michigan
during World War II and says she emerged from the war unscathed psychologically.
Indeed, she went through college and most of graduate school at Stanford before
becoming politically aware during the Vietnam War.

A Footlocker of Memories

Richard France, the author of ''Station J,'' is not of Japanese descent at all.
A 43-year-old Caucasian, he was drawn to the subject of the internment camps
because once, in 1962, he met a couple who had been interned in Jerome, Ark.
When he expressed interest in their experience, they gave him a footlocker
filled with diaries, old newspapers, propaganda leaflets and the like. ''They
thought someone should tell the story,'' he said, ''It didn't appear to them
that a Japanese writer ever would.''

He dropped the project at the time, but he recently picked it up because ''I was
intensely interested in what can happen when a pluralist society is marshaled
against any member in its midst. It recently happened to Iranian students in the
United States.''

The schedule is: Tuesdays through Saturdays at 7:30 P.M., Saturday matinees at 2
P.M. tomorrow, March 27 and April 10, and Sunday matinees at 3 P.M. Tickets are
$6 and $8. Theater Development Fund vouchers are accepted. For reservations,
call 255-7293.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV Weekend;
TOUGH COP, BROADWAY EXTRAVAGANZA

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 28, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words


TOMORROW night at 8, ABC-TV introduces a new series, ''T.J.  Hooker,'' with the
kind of hero who would have been unthinkable for television just a couple of
years ago. Police Sergeant Hooker (William Shatner), like a lot of other
television characters these days, yearns for the good old days when criminals
knew their place and the streets were safe for law-abiding citizens. ''I've seen
the past,'' Sergeant Hooker announces, ''and it works.''

He is a former Green Beret who is proud of his experiences in the Vietnam War.
When we meet him, he is being investigated by the district attorney's office for
the questionable shooting of an armed robber and he has been assigned to
training special recruits at the police academy. Sergeant Hooker is never less
than solemnly blunt with his young charges: ''There's a war going on out there
in the streets and, from where I stand, the bad guys are winning.''

Although he considers himself a good family man, the sergeant is divorced. But
he retains the respect of his former wife and she still occasionally invites him
to share her bed. Hooker is too devoted to his job to have a close relationship
with anybody else. As his wife observes, ''When I divorced you, I should have
named the department as co-respondent.''

Surrounding Hooker, of course, is the gaggle of new recruits, each of whom has a
problem ready for exploiting on a weekly basis. A womanizer named Romano (Adrian
Zmed) seems more equal than the others if only because he gets top billing under
Mr. Shatner. The cast also includes Richard Lawson and Brian Patrick Clarke.

Running for 90 minutes (the regular weekly installments, Saturdays at 8, will
last an hour), this premiere episode lets Hooker tackle a pair of especially
nasty thugs who go around killing their robbery victims with gratuitous
viciousness. Sergeant Hooker gets his men, of course, but nothing is likely to
make him very happy as he goes around yearning for the days when the mass was
celebrated in Latin and boxers got carried out of the ring instead of quitting
because of stomach cramps. In its own manipulating way, ''T.J. Hooker'' is a
fascinating creation.

Also tomorrow at 8, on WNET-TV, public television is continuing its fund-raising
efforts with a three-hour ''musical theater extravaganza'' titled ''Broadway
Plays Washington.'' The Pittsburgh station WQED produced this show specifically
for the pledge period as part of its ''Kennedy Center Tonight'' series. Debbie
Reynolds, sporadic host for the event, explains at the outset that ''we are here
tonight'' to thank Washington's John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts
for its continuing cooperation with Broadway.

The cameras record just about every marquee to be found on Broadway and then
follow a group of chorus line players as they rush to Pennsylvania Station,
arrive in Washington and finally, in black-tie costumes, prance out onto the
Kennedy Center stage where they energetically support a parade of stars, who are
supposed to be recreating ''their triumphant performances which brought down
many houses over three decades on Broadway.'' In fact, the connections between
performers and the Broadway numbers are often nonexistent.

Beatrice Arthur opens the proceedings with ''Hey, Look Me Over'' from
''Wildcat,'' a show she didn't appear in. Miss Reynolds does a number from ''The
Unsinkable Molly Brown,'' which she did appear in, but only in the movie
version. And so on, through a slew of minimally produced numbers performed on a
small patch of stage using the accompanying orchestra as a backdrop. The first
hour, the only part available for previewing, does end with a bang as Chita
Rivera and two male dancers whip themselves through a song-and-dance routine
from ''Chicago.'' Others in the cast include Larry Kert, Elaine Stritch, Imogene
Coca, Charlotte Rae, Andrea McArdle, Pearl Bailey and Melba Moore. There are
several breaks for money-raising ''commercials.''

At 7 tomorrow evening, WABC-TV is presenting a one-hour sports special called
the ''Colgate Women's Games.'' The focus will be on the finals at Madison Square
Garden of what is described as the ''largest track and field event for females
in the United States.'' More than 200 of them, aged 8 to 30-plus, competed. They
will be applauded by such celebrities as Lena Horne, Willie Mays, Chita Rivera,
Dina Merrill, Lionel Hampton and Gwen Verdon. The narration will be read by Bud
Palmer.

This Sunday at 9 on WNET, ''I Remember Nelson'' reaches its fourth and final
episode on public television's Masterpiece Theater. In several respects, this
has been one of the more curious offerings on this series of imports. Produced
for Thames Television, the biography is subtitled ''Recollections of a Hero's
Life.'' In each episode, Horatio Nelson, the famed British admiral, was seen
through the eyes of a different person - his wife; the husband of Lady Hamilton,
his mistress; his chief naval aide, and this week, one of the ordinary sailors,
William Blackie, who fought with him at Trafalgar.

Some of the observations have hardly been flattering. Compared with Lord
Hamilton, for instance, Nelson came off as an unscrupulous and nasty bounder.
Throughout, however, the series has maintained a rather distant, almost coldly
dispassionate view of its subject. The conclusion is no different, although Mr.
Blackie (Phil Daniels) and his fellow sailors regard Nelson (Kenneth Colley) as
a national hero destined for the history books. Nelson becomes an almost
subsidiary figure as, fatally wounded, he watches his men being battered but
fighting on to victory.

Typically, the portrait ends on an ambiguous note as, a half century later, some
hearty English types happen upon a broken Blackie in an old-age home. Pressing a
shilling into his palm, a heartily confident gentleman assures Blackie that he
is a very brave fellow and that ''our country owes its strength and prosperity
to people like you.'' We are left with the sight of Blackie smiling, perhaps
ironically.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of William Shatner

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 124 words


BARNEY SEIBERT

MIAMI, March 10 (UPI) - Barney Seibert, a long-time reporter for United Press
International, was found dead in his apartment late Tuesday.

The police said that Mr. Seibert, 60 years old, had apparently died of natural
causes. Mr. Seibert suffered a severe heart attack in 1976 and had also suffered
from a recurring fever since a two-year assignment in Vietnam.

Mr. Seibert was born in Keokuk, Iowa. He received a B.A. from the University of
the Americas in Mexico City, and an M.A. in journalism from the University of
Iowa.

After newspaper work in Mexico City, Springfield, Mo., Davenport, Iowa, and
Colorado Springs, Mr. Seibert joined the International News Service in 1956,
which in 1958 merged with United Press.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 13, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE BILL SEEKS A REIN ON THE U.S. IN LATIN AMERICA

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 12


Calling the Reagan Administration's policy on Central America ''confused and
dangerous,'' two Democratic Senators proposed legislation today to require prior
Congressional approval for military action and covert intelligence operations in
the region.

The Senators, Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts and Christopher J.  Dodd of
Connecticut, said they would try to attach their bill to President Reagan's
Caribbean Basin Initiative or to any other legislation that offered a chance for
quick action.

The measure is the most comprehensive introduced so far with the aim of giving
Congress greater control over Administration moves in Central America. It
reflects a growing determination on Capitol Hill to check any active
intervention by the United States before it goes too far in the view of
legislators.

Favorable Political Climate

The two freshman Senators admitted that ''under normal circumstances'' such
restrictive legislation would stand little chance of success. But they said they
were counting on the political climate to aid them.

''A vote against this would be interpreted as a vote for U.S.  intervention in
El Salvador,'' Senator Tsongas said. ''That would be very difficult to do in an
election year.''

In recent weeks, many lawmakers have said they detected a growing alarm around
the country over the Adminstration's policy toward the region, particularly its
vows to protect El Salvador from Communist incursions. ''No question, on this
issue the American people are ahead of Congress,'' Mr. Tsongas said. ''We think
there's a momentum here.''

The sense of concern has produced a number of proposals on Capitol Hill.
Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, has proposed an amendment,
for example, that would tighten the 1973 War Powers Act, which now requires the
President to obtain Congressional approval within 60 days of sending combat
troops to a troubled region. The Byrd amendment would require prior approval.

And last week the House overwhelmingly passed a resolution urging a political
solution in El Salvador, where the American-backed junta is battling left-wing
guerrillas. A somewhat tougher statement is pending in the Senate.

Human Rights in El Salvador

Under the present law, the President must certify that the junta is improving
its human rights policy before El Salvador can receive American aid.

Mr. Reagan made such a certification last month, but Representative Gerry E.
Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts, then introduced a bill to reverse it. On
Thursday the House Foreign Affairs Committee postponed consideration of the
measure.

The War Powers Act, approved by Congress over President Richard M.  Nixon's
veto, was aimed in part at hastening the end of the Vietnam War, and contained a
specific prohibition on American military activity in Indochina after Aug. 15,
1973. It also contains language calling on Presidents to ''consult'' with
Congress ''in every possible instance'' before sending armed forces into
hostilities.

Later, the Ford Administration complied with the War Powers Act by notifying
Congress in 1975 that it was taking steps to recover the Mayaguez, an American
merchant ship seized by Communist forces off the coast of Cambodia.

While final details are still being drafted, the proposed amendment announced
today would apparently change existing law in at least three ways.

The clause in the War Powers Act, which gives the Administration a 60-day grace
period before seeking Congressional approval for armed intervention, would be
eliminated for Central America.

The Administration would be barred from using funds in the region not
specifically earmarked by Congress. Under current law the Administration has a
variety of discretionary accounts that can be tapped without specific
authorization, and the White House recently used one to send $55 million in
special military aid to replace El Salvador's battered helicopter force.

A Rein on the C.I.A.

Covert intelligence operations would be subject to some sort of Congressional
approval, but the mechanism for that review has not yet been drafted. One idea
would be to give veto power to selected committees, including Intelligence,
Foreign Affairs and Appropriations. Now the Central Intelligence Agency is
merely required to inform Congress of covert operations ''in a timely manner,''
and the lawmakers have no veto power.

The proposed amendment also says that foreign military sales, economic support
funds and the training of Central American forces would be subject to
Congressional approval. But the lawmakers have review power over most of those
activities already.

''We want to provide a mechanism that gives the Administration pause before it
goes ahead and does something,'' Senator Tsongas said.

Even if the bill does not pass, the lawmakers feel that its mere existence
serves a purpose. ''We are creating a debate environment,'' Senator Dodd said.
''We are keeping the feet of the Administration to the fire.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of U.S. senators (Page 5)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 13, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WATT CLEARS THE WAY FOR A WAR MEMORIAL TO VIETNAM VETERANS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 323 words


WASHINGTON (AP) - Interior Secretary James G. Watt has cleared the way for
construction of a memorial dedicated to America's 2.7 million veterans of the
Vietnam War, a Government spokesman said today.

Mr. Watt's action appeared to resolve a controversy over the design of the
memorial, which is to be in a park between the Lincoln Memorial and the
Washington Monument.

In a letter to Jan C. Scruggs, president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund,
Mr. Watt approved a plan that would add a statue and flagpole to the abstract,
V-shaped design originally chosen for the memorial. Critics of design have
attacked it as a political statement of shame and dishonor. They called for a
more traditional, heroic monument.

Phil Million, an Interior Department spokesman, said Mr. Watt's letter ''clears
the way'' for the memorial fund to apply for a ground-breaking permit. Mr. Watt
also said in the letter that his approval had been given on the
''understanding'' that changes would be made in the memorial's inscription, Mr.
Million said.

'Bringing Honor to All'

Mr. Watt wrote that the inscription should ''add better and proper language
bringing honor to all 2.7 million who served in Vietnam,'' according to Mr.
Million.

The Secretary's letter congratulated Mr. Scruggs for pushing the memorial
project toward completion and said he was looking forward to breaking ground for
the memorial, Mr. Million said.

Mr. Million said that precise specifications for the flagpole, statue and
inscription would have to be worked out and gain final approval by the Interior
Department, the National Capital Planning Commission and the Fine Arts
Commission.

The main portion of the memorial would consist of two long walls of black
granite, coming together in the shape of a V, bearing the names of 57,000
Americans who were killed or are missing in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 13, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
SATURDAY, MARCH 13, 1982

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 907 words


International
Critics of the Central America policy adopted by the Reagan Administration said
it was ''confused and dangerous,'' and proposed legislation that would require
prior Congressional approval for any American intervention in the region,
including military action and covert intelligence operations. The opposition to
the policy came from two freshmen Democratic Senators, Paul E. Tsongas of
Massachusetts and Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut. (Page 1, Column 3.)
The Caribbean economic plan proposed by the Reagan Administration was endorsed
by President Franc,ois Mitterrand of France, who flew to Washington for a
meeting with President Reagan. There was no indication from the public
statements issued after the meeting of nearly three hours that France and the
United States do not continue to hold differing views on the guerrilla war in El
Salvador or on the general question of outside involvement in Central America.
But President Reagan told reporters that he believed President Mitterrand ''now
has a better understanding of United States policy objectives'' in Central
America. (3:-5-6.)
Claims by a Nicaraguan captured last year in El Salvador while fighting with the
guerrillas that he had been trained in Cuba and Ethiopia and was sent by
Nicaragua were denied by him at the State Department. The report that Orlando
Jose Tardencillas Espinosa had told the Salvadoran Army and the American Embassy
was regarded by the Reagan Administration as confirmation of Nicaraguan and
Cuban involvement in El Salvador, and he was invited to tell it again to
reporters. He recanted, saying that he had never been to Cuba or Ethiopia, had
never seen another Nicaraguan or a Cuban in El Salvador and had made his
previous statements under coercion. (1:2.)
National
A decline in the Producer Price Index last month - the first in six years
-provided the most dramatic evidence thus far of progress in the fight to curb
inflation. The decline was only one-tenth of 1 percent, but most economists had
expected the Government index to show another modest increase. (1:6.)
A plan for dealing with toxic wastes was announced by the Environmental
Protection Agency. The agency issued its ''national contingency plan,'' which is
intended as the Government's response to the problem posed to health and the
environment by thousands of abandoned hazardous waste dumps that, until now, had
been largely ignored. (1:1.)
The offer to pay all Medicaid costs, now borne by the states, will be withdrawn
by the Reagan Administration if the nation's governors persist in their refusal
to take over Federal food stamp and welfare costs, a White House official said.
(1:4-5.)
A two-tiered price support system for surplus milk has been proposed by the
National Milk Producers Federation, which fears that if it does not offer help
to cut the $2.1 billion the Government expects to spend this year to buy and
store surplus dairy products, the Administration will take even more stringent
action. (8:1-3.)
City population losses continue despite widespread neighborhood renewal,
according to a census study. The study found that in the census tracts of 10
major cities where there had been extensive housing renovation there was a
substantial decline in white and black residents from 1970 to 1980. (9:1-6.)
A revised design for a memorial to Vietnam War veterans in Washington has been
approved by Interior Secretary James G. Watt, apparently ending a controversy
raised by the original abstract V-shaped design. He approved a plan that would
add a statue and flagpole to the monument, apparently responding to opponents of
the original plan, who demanded a more traditional, heroic monument. (11:6.)
Metropolitan
An attempt to give away $10,000 by throwing it from the observation deck of the
Empire State Building, and a bank robbery on the main floor, caused an uproar in
the skyscraper and surrounding streets.  Two men sought to promote their
adult-education school by showering the streets with dollar bills. In the
meantime, two suspects in a holdup in a Bankers Trust branch were tackled on the
street and disarmed in the one of the most heavily photographed arrests in
recent times. (1:2-4.)
Criticism of public safety proposals for the nuclear reactors at Indian Point in
Buchanan, N.Y., was expressed by local officials. The officials said the plan,
which is intended to protect the nearly 300,000 people in the area if an nuclear
accident occurs, was inadequate and might never be workable. (1:1.)
Funds for a South Bronx project may be cut by the Department of Housing and
Urban Development despite the Reagan Administration's awareness of ''the needs
and problems'' of the area, an official indicated. (27:6.)
More state aid for the dental schools of Columbia University and New York
University is being sought by university officials because of the growing
inability of students to pay for increasing tuition and the deficits the schools
have raised. The universities have proposed a plan under which the state by 1985
could be paying more than $15 million a year in subsidies. (28:5-6.)

Business Digest, Page Page 31

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HIGH AIDE SAYS U.S. SEEKS SOVIET TALKS ON SALVADOR ISSUE

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 13


A senior Administration official said today that the problem in El Salvador was
global in nature and that the United States should involve the Soviet Union,
Cuba and other Latin American nations in the search for a solution.

''We have to talk to the Russians,'' the official said. ''There are discussions
that must be held, there are steps that must be taken in political, economic and
security areas which tend to influence calculi in Moscow, in Havana, in
Nicaragua and in the regional context, and it is a very complex mosaic of
interrelated actions which must be consistent, credible and hopefully will
ultimately bring a successful outcome.''

There have been inconclusive United States discussions on El Salvador with
Soviet, Cuban and Nicaraguan officials. In recent weeks President Jose Lopez
Portillo of Mexico has urged the United States to become more actively engaged
in contacts with the Cubans and Nicaraguans.

Meeting With Mexican Is Set

In New York on Sunday, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  will meet with
Foreign Minister Jorge Casteneda of Mexico to continue discussions about the
Mexican proposals. The proposals have been criticized by the Administration for
not going far enough in seeking to end what Washington describes as shipments of
arms to Salvadoran insurgents from Nicaragua and elsewhere.

Today, the high official denied that the stress on a global approach was a
deliberate shift in policy by the Adminstration in the face of widespread
Congressional and public concern over United States involvement in El Salvador.
He insisted that the Administration had always seen the problem in more than
local terms.  What seems different, however, is his emphasis on the need for
intensified political contacts and a lessening of polemics that suggest possible
United States military intervention.

When Mr. Haig began expressing concern about Communist subversion in Central
America, he repeatedly left open the possibility of direct American military
involvement. Lately, however, the Administration has given more stress to
political and economic aspects of a solution.

But over the last year the Administra-
tion, particularly through comments by Mr. Haig, has seemed to be threatening
the use of military force., the emphasis now seems to be on political and
economic measures.

Expanding on remarks made by Mr. Haig before a Senate Appropriations
subcommittee earlier in the week, the senior official said today that it made
little sense for the United States to focus exclusively on the situation within
El Salvador, especially with the opposition in Congress to an expansion of
United States involvement there.

The official, who met with a group of reporters, declined to be identified. The
main point of his argument was that the Administration was determined not to
fall into the trap that befell American policy makers on Vietnam by trying to
solve the problem only within the country concerned when, in his words, ''this
is a global problem.''

Vietnam Pattern Avoided

If the Vietnam precedent was followed, he said, ''the only thing left for the
United States is to do what we did in Vietnam - up the ante, creeping
escalation, increasing involvement.''

''And I tell you the President's policy is to avoid precisely that and to deal
with this issue as a global problem,'' he said. ''And this means we have to
harness, and we have, the full panoply of the political, economic and security
assets of the United States to deal with this problem in Moscow, in Havana, in
the regional context, the Organization of American States, and in Salvador
itself.

The senior official was reluctant to provide details, but when asked if he hoped
he could persuade the Russians and Cubans to stop providing arms and other
support to the rebels in El Salvador, as the Administration has charged them
with doing, he responded affirmatively.

''I'm suggesting that you don't have the luxury of dealing with this problem in
any other way,'' he said. ''There is no other way of dealing with this problem
effectively other than the more traumatic ways that people fear.''

He was referring to the recurring concern over Mr. Haig's refusal in the past to
rule out the use of American military force in El Salvador.

No Threat of Force Seen

''No one has threatened to use military force in El Salvador,'' the official
said. ''The President said there are no plans. That's a simple fact of life. I
don't know of any responsible official in the Administration who has suggested
the introduction of forces.''

But he said that for officials to say publicly ''every day'' that there will be
no use of military power would only jeopardize efforts to deal with the problem
with the Russians and the Cubans.

Mr. Haig, appearing Wednesday before the Senate Appropriations subcommittee on
foreign operations, said, ''There are the local manifestations of a global
problem, the solution of which is not going to be found by the level of
assistance we give to El Salvador or don't give, or the number of American
advisers.'' He was not pressed to explain.

Soviet Problems Cited

Today, when reporters asked why Moscow might want to do anything to end the
trouble in El Salvador, the official said the Soviet Union was undergoing a
serious economic crisis, was facing long-term demographic problems because of a
rising birthrate among Soviet Moslems and a declining one among Russians, and
was being isolated internationally because of the situations in Poland and
Afghanistan.

Moreover, he said there were signs of an emerging succession problem as some
criticism of Leonid I. Brezhnev, the aging Soviet leader, is being tolerated by
some factions in the leadership.

''All of these things suggest that a prudent leadership that can detach itself
from excessive paranoia has an interest in getting back with a more responsible
relationship with the West,'' the official said. ''They need technology, credits
and legitimacy and a stabilization of the runaway arms problem.''

The implication was that the Soviet Union might be interested in taking a
helpful attitude toward limiting the flow of arms into Central America if this
was needed to improve East-West relations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Haig with Claude Cheysson at the White House
(page 12)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EXPORT BRIDES BIG BUSINESS IN PHILIPPINES

BYLINE: By PAMELA G. HOLLIE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 593 words

DATELINE: MANILA, March 13


More than 3,000 Philippine women became export brides of Australians and West
Germans last year, and 4,000 others went to other European countries and the
United States.

Groups of men on bride-hunting tours here conduct interviews arranged by
introduction services. A marriage can take place within the week, but visas for
the brides may take up to six months.

''Filipinas are more understanding,'' said Basil Barrington, an Australian who
found his wife on a bride-hunting trip a year ago and married her last week.
''They are more willing to accept a man for what he is.''

The personal columns in Manila newspapers contain ads from men all over the
world looking for brides, and dozens of agencies and recruiters have set up
business in the last few years since the troop withdrawals following the Vietnam
war reduced the opportunities for Philippine women to meet Western men.

American Husbands Preferred

''Foreign citizenship also entitles them to bring their family out of the
Philippines one by one,'' said Howard Dexter, who calls himself a freelance
recruiter for two Australian publications that advertise brides. ''Most of the
women would prefer American husbands, but they will take Australians, Germans,
probably any white male from anywhere.''

Though most of the recruiters and matchmakers here are probably legitimate,
there are many that are fronts for prostitution. Many women who have left the
country believing they were going to a home have found themselves in bars and
brothels.

''Matchmaking might be all right for intelligent, consenting adults,'' said
Emelina Garcia of the National Commission on the Role of Philippine Women. ''But
what about those who are not aware of the tricks, those whose poverty, for
instance, makes marriage with a foreigner all that much more irresistible? It
simply opens them to exploitation.''

Recruiting practices in recent months have become more bold. A recent plan
denounced by women's groups here called for the recruitment of Philippine women
for men in West Germany. A woman would be taken to West Germany, all expenses
paid, and if she married in 90 days the trip would be free. Otherwise she might
be asked to pay for part of it. If she did not marry, she would be returned to
the Philippines.

Methods Are Denounced

The supermarket approach to marriage prompted the Women's Rights Movement of the
Philippines to issue a statement denouncing the methods used to find marriage
partners. Finding a partner, the women said, ''is a deeply sensitive, intimate
matter that cannot be the subject of commerce, industry negotiation or
investment.''

But it is a good business. Although the women usually pay nothing, a man can
expect to pay a couple hundred dollars for membership in an introduction service
and perhaps several thousand for a bridehunting trip.

The application form at Vicki Enovesco's introduction service asks a woman her
age, height, weight and measurements, whether she likes to cook and do housework
and whether she wants to have children of her own or would accept someone
else's. The form asks for ''one or two clear photographs of yourself.''

In time the applicant may get a letter from some of the 2,000 men who are
members of the service, and eventually she may find a husband. If so, she will
be lucky. There are 3,000 Philippine women who are waiting.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IS DEMANDING RETURN OF PAPERS

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 893 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 13


The Justice Department is demanding the return of documents about secret
electronic surveillance that were made public under the Carter Administration,
contending that their disclosure would result in ''identifiable damage to the
national security.''

Gerald A. Schroeder, adviser to the Justice Department's Office of Intelligence
Policy and Review, has insisted that V. James Bamford, a writer, return 250
pages obtained two years ago in response to requests made under the Freedom of
Information Act.

Mr. Schroeder has said the information had been released ''in error'' by Robert
L. Keuch, Deputy Assistant Attorney General in the Carter Administration, and
was, therefore, still considered secret by the Government. Mr. Bamford has
declined to return the documents.  Letters from Mr. Schroeder dated Sept. 22 and
Nov. 27 suggest that Mr. Bamford might be subject to Federal legal action if he
publishes the information as planned.

Mr. Bamford used the disputed documents as background for a book, entitled
''Puzzle Palace: A Report on America's Most Secret Agency.'' The book, on the
history of the National Security Agency, the unit that breaks codes and monitors
international communications, is due for publication this fall by Houghton
Mifflin Company.

Information on Illegal Spying

The documents in question concern a Justice Department investigation in 1975
into reported illegal spying by the National Security Agency and the Central
Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Bamford's book details, among other things, the security agency's
''Minaret'' operation, in which anti-Vietnam war protesters such as Jane Fonda,
the actress, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and Dr. Benjamin Spock were
placed under surveillance.

Specialists on Government information said the Administration's insistence that
the documents be returned was extremely unusual.  Morton H. Halperin, director
of the Center for National Security Studies, said there was ''no legal basis''
for the Government request, adding that the demand appeared to violate the
provisions of the executive order controlling the public release of classified
information.

The Administration has prepared a revised executive order, which President
Reagan has not yet signed, that would seek to give the Government authority to
reclassify information that had been declassified and released. In testimony
before a House subcommittee last week, Mr. Halperin and other legal experts
denounced the proposal as an ''unconstitutional violation of First Amendment
rights.''

London Reporter Used Documents

In an interview Thursday, Mr. Bamford said he would refuse to return the
material not only ''as a matter of principle,'' but also because some of the
documents were soon to be published in Britain.  Mr. Bamford said he had given
copies of the material to Linda Melvern, a reporter for The Sunday Times of
London, more than a year before the Justice Department first demanded their
return.

In an article to be published Sunday, Miss Melvern wrote that the Bamford
documents showed that Britain's electronic spying agency had assisted the
National Security Agency from 1967 to 1973 in monitoring international telex
traffic to gather information against Americans protesting the Vietnam war.

Mr. Bamford said he obtained the documents in July 1979. On July 23, 1981, Mr.
Shroeder told him at a meeting in Washington that the documents had been
improperly declassified and asked him to return them.

Two months after that meeting, Mr. Bamford received a letter from Mr. Schroeder
saying that the material had been released improperly because the Justice
Department had failed to circulate the documents to the security agency before
they were declassified.

'Duty and Obligation'

''Accordingly, you are currently in possession of classified information that
requires protection against unauthorized disclosure,'' Mr. Schroeder wrote. ''It
is, therefore, your duty and obligation as a United States citizen to return
this information to the Department of Justice.''

In a letter written to Mr. Schroeder in October, Mark H. Lynch, Mr. Bamford's
attorney, argued that Mr. Keuch had been ''the most experienced and
knowledgeable person in the department with respect to intelligence issues'' and
that Mr. Keuch had made a ''conscious decision'' not to consult with the
security agency before he released the documents.

In a letter to Mr. Lynch, dated Nov. 27, Mr. Schroeder referred to Mr. Bamford's
upcoming book and wrote: ''Questions of legal rights and remedies
notwithstanding, this damage can never be repaired.''

----

Request to Suppress Testimony

WASHINGTON, March 13 (AP) -The Defense Department wants a Senate subcommittee to
erase from the record information about the Stealth bomber that was released in
a public hearing Feb. 24.

The comment that officials have asked to have classified was made by Richard
DeLauer, director of research for the Pentagon, and said that the first Stealth
planes will be flying by 1991, a source on the Senate Armed Services Committee
said today. ''It's a little bizarre, sort of like Alice in Wonderland,'' the
source said.

Stealth is a project using technology designed to make a plane almost invisible
to enemy radar.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPUS RADICALS OF 60'S ARE RESHAPING STYLE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON COAST

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1198 words

DATELINE: SANTA CRUZ, Calif., March 10


This seaside city of 42,000 people decided not long ago to adopt its own foreign
policy. By a 2 to 1 majority, its voters approved a resolution opposing American
intervention in El Salvador.

The vote was another sign of the evolution that has occurred in this coastal
community 75 miles south of San Francisco, which for most of its sleepy history
worried little about what happened beyond the redwood forests at its eastern
boundary or at its pleasant beaches on the west.

It is a town reminiscent, in many ways, of Berkeley in the 1960's.  Its downtown
mall is crowded most of the day with young people with beards, beads and
backpacks, people who seem to do little except talk and listen to street
musicians and perhaps smoke marijuana.

A Magnet for Dropouts

At the city's riverside San Lorenzo Park, young migrants, lured by the sun, the
beaches and the city's reputation as a magnet for society's dropouts, sleep
beneath a bridge, wash their clothes in a duck pond and, according to the
whispers of some people, occasionally roast one of the ducks over a bonfire.

In an election last fall, candidates who described themselves as progressives
gained a four-seat majority on the seven-member City Council. The city
government is now headed by a socialist Mayor, 36-year-old Michael Rotkin, who
lectures on Marxism and Leninism at the University of California campus here.
American policy toward El Salvador has been only one of the unusual items
showing up on an agenda mostly occupied in the past with sewer and street
projects.

No radical changes have yet been imposed on Santa Cruz by its new officials.
Indeed, they have formed a kind of tense truce with oldtimers on the City
Council. But two weeks ago the new Council majority voted to place a measure
before city voters June 8 imposing rent control here, and other changes are
brewing.

What is happening in Santa Cruz is an example of how graduates of the campus New
Left movement of the 1960's, many of them now turning portly and gray, have
begun to wrest power from community leaders in a handful of California cities
and are advancing a kind of socialistpopulist style of government at the local
level.

Similar Developments Elsewhere

A similar majority of New Left activists have taken over the local government in
Santa Monica, a city of 80,000 near Los Angeles, and passed one of the most
restrictive rent control laws in the nation.  Others control local government in
the college town of Chico in northern California.

''The overlapping success we're having,'' said Mr. Rotkin, ''has to do with the
general economic trends: the economy is a mess and people are looking for
change.'' He said he became radicalized while serving as a Vista volunteer among
black migrant workers in Florida, and later as a member of the Students for a
Democratic Society at Cornell University,

Heirs to a California tradition of share-the-wealth reformers dating to the
1920's, the most successful of the activists have mounted well-organized
campaigns to develop support at the neighborhood level, usually concentrating on
a single economic issue such as rent control.

Although the activists use various labels to describe their organizations, the
common denominator is a contention that large corporations and private
enterprise in general have failed to serve the public fairly and that government
should intervene on behalf of consumers to achieve a more equitable balance
between the public and business.

Working Within the System

Many of the community activists are affiliated with the Campaign for Economic
Democracy, a well-organized group headed by Tom Hayden, the anti-Vietnam War
activist and co-founder of Students for a Democratic Society in the 1960's. Mr.
Hayden, who is seeking election to the California State Assembly, said he
decided several years ago to work ''within the system'' to achieve some of the
goals of the New Left.

He defines ''economic democracy'' as a program designed to gain an influence in
government that will give the public more control over the economic forces that
affect them, from rent control to uncontrolled dumping of toxic wastes.

But such critics as Robert Gabriel, president of the Chamber of Commerce in
Santa Monica, where Hayden allies have made the most gains, say the term is an
''innocent sounding'' synonym for socialism and is designed to avoid scaring off
potential recruits.

Most of the radicals' success so far has come in college towns like Santa Cruz
and Chico that have large pools of youthful antiestablishment sentiment, but the
successes have not been limited to college students.

Tenants Are Mobilized

In Santa Monica, where more than 75 percent of the voters are renters, the
activists mobilized a coalition of tenants covering a broad spectrum of age
groups and occupations. The tenants had become angered by soaring rents and the
refusal of many landlords to pass along their savings from a sharp reduction in
property taxes that was approved by California voters in 1978.

In Santa Cruz, Mr. Rotkin and socialist supporters first gained a political
foothold by organizing a group of mostly elderly residents in a west side
neighborhood after its only medical clinic, operated by private physicians, was
closed. Arguing that private enterprise could not be counted on to serve the
public, Mr. Rotkin developed a neighborhood organization that became the base on
which he was elected to the City Council and then Mayor.

Rent control is also an emotional issue here, a result of economic and
demographic change. For most of its history, the city was a resort town that
attracted tourists, and some retired people, from elsewhere in California. But
things began to change after the university opened in 1965 and later, when the
town become a bedroom community for workers in the electronics industry near San
Jose, 30 miles to the northeast.

In 1975, influenced by ''slow growth'' environmental groups, the city sharply
limited new housing construction to control its growth.  The city, where about
half the residents are now renters, now faces a serious shortage of apartments
and rents are soaring.

Twice in the last four years voters turned down proposed rent control laws, but
the City Council voted to place the measure before voters again June 8, and
public sentiment seems to favor it.

''Without rent control,'' Bruce Van Allen, the Vice Mayor, who is also a
socialist, said recently, ''we face social and economic disaster. We must
stabilize rents. We cannot say to more than half of our population: sorry, but
you are the losers.''

Mr. Rotkin said he was convinced leftists could find a market for their ideas in
small town America. Still, he said, he did not expect change to come fast or
without hard work. ''I think we've learned that you can't do it with rhetoric,''
he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Santa Cruz area photo of Mayor Michael Rotkin
photo of Santa Cruz street photo of flutist on beach

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE GREAT REPRESSION

BYLINE: By LEONARD SILK

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1862 words


HOW to describe the underlying condition of the American economy? Short-term, it
is obviously in a recession that started last fall; but this is the second
recession since 1980, the third since 1975, and many economists believe that,
even if recovery begins in the second half of this year, a fourth recession is
just around the corner. It's been a long sequence of recessions and weak,
aborted expansions.

Is this, then, a depression we are in? Looking backward, the term seems too
strong. The economy has been stagnating, not collapsing. If the roof were to
fall in later this year, or next, it could become a depression, but the odds are
still against it.

Call it repression - a chronic state of underemployment and industrial slack
that has dogged the economy for the greater part of the past decade, a condition
brought on by repressive actions of governments in the industrial world to cope
with inflation, energy shortages and currency disorders.

In American terms, the accompanying charts tell the story. The utilization of
manufacturing capacity, which ran as high as 90 percent in the mid-1960's,
averaged in the low 80 percent range during the 1970's and in the final quarter
of 1981 was down to 74.8 percent.

The jobless rate, only 3.5 percent of the labor force in 1969, President Richard
M. Nixon's first year in office, has been on a rising trend since then, and was
last clocked at 8.8 percent in February. Since unemployment lags behind the
production data, it almost certainly will go higher.

New housing construction, which peaked at 2,378,000 units started in 1972, is
currently running below 1 million starts.  Business failures are climbing
sharply. They soared from 24 per 10,000 in 1978 to a rate of 83 per 10,000 now.
And the stock market, which has on the surface wobbled up and down without
getting anywhere, actually has been in a long quiet crash if results are
adjusted for inflation. Measured in constant 1981 dollars, the Dow Jones
industrial average has fallen from an adjusted level of 2,624 in 1965 to less
than 800 now, a decline of nearly 70 percent.

When did this Great Repression begin? Since history is a seamless web, it is
hard to date it precisely. But the escalation of the Vietnam War in 1965 and
1966 seems the logical point, since that is when a price-stable phase of
economic growth gave way to an inflationary phase. The Johnson Administration
tried to mount a medium-sized war on top of an almost fully employed economy
without raising taxes lest Congress slash the President's eagerly sought Great
Society program. The first act of repression came in 1967 when L.B.J. belatedly
called for and got a tax increase, which helped to jerk the economy into a
mini-recession.

BUT the new era of inflation was not so easily ended.  President Nixon sought to
repress the rising trend of inflation first in 1969-70 by a policy of
''gradualism'' in fiscal and monetary policy, which caused a recession; then,
fearing the possible damage to his electoral prospects, he resorted to price and
wage controls in 1971-72, while speeding up the growth of the economy with the
help of a cooperative Arthur F. Burns as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.

The inflationary trend was implanted even more deeply, both at home and abroad,
in 1973, when the economies of the Western world boomed together, driving up
commodity prices.

The most dramatic episode in that inflationary trend came with the outbreak of
the Arab-Israeli war in October 1973, and the Arab oil embargo against the
United States and a few other countries, setting the world up for the enormous
increases in oil prices by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries,
including not only the Arabs but our then close ally, Iran.

During the 1970's, the main method of checking inflation in the United States
was a repressive monetary policy. The money supply, defined as currency in
circulation and demand deposits plus other checkable accounts, was reduced from
21 percent of gross national product in 1971 to 15 percent at present.

But this means of braking inflation has come at a high cost. John Winthrop
Wright, head of an investment advisory service, states: ''The United States has
suffered through 10 years of record-breaking inflation, a surge in business
bankruptcies, mostly among small companies during the past 18 months, and an
unprecedented shrinkage in the auto, housing, savings and loan and farm
equipment industries.

''This excessive inflation and related business casualties occurred despite the
Federal Reserve Board's unprecedentedly vigorous employment of tight money
policies. It can, therefore, scarcely be doubted that the unselective nature of
the established methodology is an unmitigated failure and that it is time for a
thorough, constructive reformation of the nation's economic and monetary
management.''

Mr. Wright is far from alone these days in his rejection of the current methods
of monetary repression, based on the formula of trying to restrict the rate of
growth of the money supply within narrow bands.

David M. Jones, vice president and economist of Aubrey G. Lanston & Company, a
leading government securities dealer, recently declared: ''The United States
economy is currently in the throes of a deepening and widening recession. It may
turn out to be the worst slump since the Great Depression of the 1930's.

''The main cause of this cumulating downturn has been the Federal Reserve's
excruciatingly tight money and credit policy over the past year or so. This Fed
restrictive overkill took the form of an abrupt and irregular series of Fed
restrictive responses to unexpected spurts in money demand.''

While Mr. Jones generally commends the Fed's anti-inflation stance,
''particularly in the face of an irresponsibly stimulative fiscal policy,'' he
holds that the ''prolonged and excessive Fed restraint in 1981 will almost
certainly produce higher unemployment and more economic pain than would have
been required to crush inflation and inflation psychology.''

Perhaps the best indicator of what Mr. Jones calls the Fed's ''strangle-hold on
the economy'' is the real interest rate - the market rate less inflationary
expectations. Since one cannot precisely quantify inflationary expectations, it
is conventional to measure real interest rates by taking selective market rates
of interest against the annual rate of increase in consumer prices.

Irwin Kellner, senior vice president and chief economist of Manufacturers
Hanover Trust, calculates that, using the spread between the prime rate and
inflation, the real rate of interest is now 8.08 percent, compared to an average
of 2 percent or less in most earlier years. The spread between market rates on
utility bonds and inflation is now 7.53 percent, the highest of the postwar
years; one must go back to the early years of the Great Depression of the 1930's
to find higher long-term real interest rates.

The world slump has resulted from comparable efforts of most other nations and
their central banks to fight inflation, partly in response to the pressure of
high oil import prices, and partly, they say, to protect their own currencies
against the pull of high interest rates in the United States.

Kurt Richebaecher, an economic consultant who formerly was chief economist of
the Dresdner Bank in West Germany, contends that the current economic crisis,
which he considers the worst since World War II, dates back to the second big
increase in oil prices by OPEC in 1978. ''But,'' he adds, ''although that
triggered the crisis, we should beware of making it solely or even mainly
responsible for our present worldwide economic predicament.''

Rather, he contends, the emphasis on oil distracts attention from ''the real
causes and the real culprits -namely our governments, and in most cases central
banks.'' Anyone who finds that hard to believe, he says, should look at Japan,
''which has coped with the oil price jump in masterly fashion despite its
unmatched dependence on energy imports.''

The world appears to be suffering from the effort to cope with inflationary
strains by periodic bouts of tight money, which, when they induce recession and
climbing unemployment, give way to bigger inflationary injections, which, in
turn, seem to have undermined productive power.

Huge budget deficits, created by the Reagan Administration's tax cuts adopted
for their alleged ''supply-side'' stimulative effects together with sharp
increases in military spending, further undermine national productivity by
taking private saving away from investment in plant and equipment.

By some calculations of projected budget deficits and savings rates, the United
States Government in the next three years could absorb more than three-fourths
of all private saving, thereby choking off capital formation and productivity
growth, worsening the nation's competitiveness in world markets.

Thus, as the Orwellian year of 1984 approaches, stimulus has become repression.
And, until the nation's fiscal and monetary policies are changed, along with the
building of new industrial policies, repression is likely to continue.

A GLOSSARY OF UPS AND DOWNS

Economies never stand still. They're always rising and sinking and, on rare
occasions, collapsing. Here are some of the words economists and politicians use
to characterize an economy's ebbs and flows:

BUSINESS CYCLE: The sequence of expansion and contraction of capitalist
economies. The cycles are highly irregular. Sometimes an economy can run through
an entire cycle in a year; sometimes it can take a decade or more. Some
economists believe in a Kondratieff cycle, lasting about 50 years, with minor
cycles within it, and ending in a mighty crash.

TROUGH: The bottom of an ordinary, short-term cycle, when such important,
so-called coincident indicators as the gross national product and industrial
production stop falling.

RECOVERY: The phase when G.N.P., industrial production, employment, housing,
retail sales and other indicators are rising, some sooner, some later. Business
investment and the drop in unemployment tend to lag behind in recoveries.

PEAK: The end of the expansion.

RECESSION: The slide downhill. The current recession is the 20th of this
century.

DEPRESSION: An ill-defined term meaning a spell of hard times and high
unemployment. Originally the term was used as a euphemism for such harsh words
as panic or slump. But depression exhausted its euphemistic appeal by 1937 when
the recovering economy seemed to be relapsing into depression, and President
Franklin D. Roosevelt said it was only in a ''recession.''

STAGNATION: When the economy seems to stall, with frequent recessions followed
by weak recoveries. Over the years of stagnation, real economic growth is
sluggish.

INFLATION: When price levels are rising and the dollar shrinks in value.

DEFLATION: When price levels are falling and the dollar gains in value. Hasn't
happened since the early years of the Great Depression of the 1930's.

DISINFLATION: A slowing of the rate of inflation.

STAGFLATION: The combined phenomenon of stagnation and inflation.

SLUMPFLATION: An inflationary slump.  L.S.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: interest rates graph real interest rates graph oil
prices graph national debt graph factory utilization graph business failure
graph unemployment graph housing starts graph stock market graph

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BIGGER BUCKS FOR SECURITY BUT HOW MUCH AND FOR WHAT?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2253 words


WHILE Congress and the Pentagon continued to argue last week over numbers -
specifically, President Reagan's $1.6 trillion, five-year defense buildup - 150
members of Congress sponsored a resolution calling upon the superpowers to
''pursue a complete halt to the nuclear weapons race.'' The Week in Review asked
Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Colorado, Barry Blechman of the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace, and Fred C. Ikle, Under Secretary of Defense
for Policy, to go behind the numbers and talk strategy. Excerpts of their
discussion, with Leslie H. Gelb, national security correspondent for The New
York Times, Richard Halloran, a correspondent in The Times's Washington bureau,
and Caroline Rand Herron, an editor of The Review, follow.

Question. Has the United States ever really had an overall defense policy, or
have we been simply reacting to events all these years?

Mr. Blechman. To the extent to which we led events, we did indeed have a
farsighted policy well into the 1950's, where we reacted decisively and
effectively to contain the threats that the Soviet Union posed to Europe and in
the Near East. That policy came a cropper when we tried to apply it to events in
Asia, and later, in Africa.

Mr. Ikle. I believe we have a policy now. And we have had it in prior decades.
(But) we have to recognize the changes in the world.  Containment has failed in
the sense that the Soviets leapfrogged beyond the bounds of containment and
established military outposts in Africa, the Caribbean, Asia, often in places
where we used to have reinforcing geostrategic positions.

Mr. Aspin. The problem is lack of consensus. On conventional forces, we've gone
through cyclical phases from containment to detente. One strategy says, keep the
Soviet Union bottled up because you will cause such enormous disruptions that it
will force change from within. The other says, get as many relationships going
as possible and change will come about because you've gradually brought them
into the 20th century and into the Western orbit. And we go back and forth, just
as on the nuclear side, between an assured destruction, countervailing strategy
and a counterforce strategy.

Mr. Blechman. The crucial factor really is the degree to which Soviet actions
are seen as the primary engine behind the various challenges to our interests
throughout the world. The Carter Administration, more than any of its
predecessors, had seen the diversity of sources of conflict. The present
Administration has shifted very sharply.

Mr. Ikle. I would put it differently. The present Administration has decided to
act upon the recognition of the Soviet threat, which was in many ways already
agreed to, and has had the courage of (its) conviction.

Q. We've heard for 30 years about the bomber gap, the missile gap, the
conventional force gap and the spending gap. In almost every instance, they
turned out to be illusory, or way overdrawn. Are we going to find that out again
in two or four years?

Mr. Ikle. I would disagree with the focus.

I think the changes in the threat can be described in quite a simple fashion by
emphasizing two trends, rather than gaps. One is the trend in the investment in
military assets. The Soviet Union has been acquiring much more over the last
perhaps 20 years. The second trend is the leapfrogging over the lines of
containment. Particularly in the event of a major conflict, the Soviet Union
would find itself in a much better strategic position.
Military Superiority

Q. Are you saying they now have, in a good many instances, military superiority
over us?

Mr. Ikle. We still have an advantage in naval forces, and it is the purpose of
the proposed naval program to hold on to an advantage in maritime forces.

Q. Other than that are we in a position of inferiority?

Mr. Ikle. Looking at numbers, we are, in strategic forces and in theater nuclear
forces. Qualitatively we have some advantages in conventional equipment, but
there is an overriding quantitative advantage on the Soviet Union. But I think
we should try to avoid simplistic answers of superiority.

Q. Is the principal threat to the national security of the United States from
the Soviet Union?

Mr. Aspin. It depends on how you define national security. We are now dependent
upon foreign sources for a large percentage of our oil. We're also threatened by
economic competition from Japan and West Germany. We also have environmental
threats to national security -the waters are being over-fished. Clearly in terms
of the military part of national security, the greatest threat is the Soviet
Union. But the other threats - a big military budget doesn't do much good in
dealing with those.

Mr. Ikle. Are you saying we therefore don't need a military budget?  Mr. Aspin.
No, no, not at all. It's a question of degree. If I were to criticize this
Administration, it would be for the reliance on a very large military budget -
not a large military force, just a large military budget - as kind of a hedge
against which it conducts foreign policy.

Mr. Ikle. The proposed defense program is not meant to be the cureall for our
foreign policy.  Mr. Aspin. It would be good if the Administration would say
that a little more often.  Mr. Ikle. In fact, the President has said this very
eloquently, in relation to one particular troubled area. In his speech on the
Caribbean and Central America he put a great deal of emphasis on instruments
other than military instruments to cope with the problems that we confront.

Mr. Aspin. But the point about who is ahead and who isn't ahead cannot be
entirely ignored. Because ultimately in devising a defense budget you have to
come to the question of how much is enough - whether we're going to buy and how
much.
Cutting Retirement Pay

Mr. Blechman. The question always is whether you come to that by building up
some specific problems, or whether you make an aggregate comparison like the
budgetary comparison and then somehow invoke some mysterious political
consequences of the fact that we estimate that they spend more than we spend.

Mr. Ikle. Nobody is advocating in the Administration that there are mysterious
consequences. It's not mysterious at all, unfortunately. We certainly recognize
fully that much more refined comparisons and analyses are needed. But if you
begin to cut back from the total defense budget you would begin to widen again
the disparity between the investment effort.

Mr. Aspin. It depends on where you cut. Let's say you could with the wave of the
hand cut $15 billion out of the retirement program.  That doesn't change the
military balance at all. Presumably the Soviet Union also spends some money that
doesn't contribute to defense. So, you know, raw numbers don't mean much, and
neither do statements about how you can't cut.

Q. In making military strategy you have to establish some priorities. What areas
are we worried about most? Is Europe still the focus?

Mr. Ikle. There is a shift, yes, which introduces a greater sense of realism. We
want to get away from the Maginot Line mentality for the defense of Europe,
which piles most of our military assets at one front.

Q. The Alliance concurs?

Mr. Ikle. There is considerable concurrence, although there's occasional
hesitation. But the Alliance as a whole has shown a great understanding and
sympathy for our effort to strengthen the southern flank, to develop a
capability for deterring aggression in the Persian Gulf area.

Q. What about our efforts to spur them on to assume a greater responsibility for
their defense?

Mr. Ikle. They are also suffering in Europe from the economic crisis. There's a
broader problem of spurring on our allies. One area where we have not yet
succeeded in convincing them that it is in our interest to improve Atlantic
security is the Caribbean. But I think we're making headway there, too. Because,
clearly, NATO is threatened by the military events in the Caribbean.

Mr. Aspin. You know, there is real possiblity of a revolt against defense
increases in this country unless our allies are doing more.  We are putting so
much of our capital and our scientific and technical resources into defense,
whereas they're putting theirs into Sonys and Toyotas and beating the bejesus
out of us in the domestic market.

Q. What's the core of the Administration strategy?

Mr. Ikle. First and foremost, we want to strengthen nuclear deterrence by having
forces the aggressor knows are guaranteed to survive his attack. This may mean
investments in things such as command, control and communications, which aren't
all that visible and glamorous for statistical tables of red and blue
comparisons.

But this does not mean, contrary to what has been said, an increase in the
emphasis on nuclear war, and particularly not limited nuclear war. (There is)
increasing emphasis on being prepared for a multiplicity of different types of
possible conflicts involving conventional forces - not only on increased
sustainability, but on our ability to have an industrial mobilization. We are
presently not prepared for that sufficiently.

Mr. Blechman. The highest priority always has to be accorded to the threat of
nuclear war. That's the only threat that can do enormous physical damage to the
United States itself.

But you have to go beyond eliminating problems of survivability.  What you need
is diplomatic policies, and arms control negotiations, to put back the threat of
nuclear war into the corner where it's lurked for many years and from which it's
only recently come out. I'm glad the Administration puts so much emphasis now on
countering impressions that it plans for nuclear wars. That certainly wasn't the
case when it first came into office.
Retaliatory Strikes

Mr. Aspin. I don't have any idea what this Administration's defense policy is.
And I read the posture statement and I still don't know. And I listen to Fred
Ikle and I still don't know. To paraphrase Will Rogers, I think this
Administration has never seen a weapons system that it didn't like. That posture
statement conveys that it doesn't have an overall policy. We're just buying
things without any relation to the threat.

The other thing that worries me very much is the idea of parallel escalation -
if they hit us at a place which is disadvantageous to us, we'll go and hit them
at a place where it's advantageous to us and disadvantageous to them. This is a
bizarre concept.

Mr. Blechman. One of the real problems is when you start thinking of how you
might respond to serious provocation, you very quickly come to the conclusion
the only thing you could do is to bring the war to the Soviet Union itself. I
cannot imagine the Soviet Union absorbing strikes against its own territory
without retaliating against American territory.

Q. For the better part of the last 30 years, the basic judgment has been that
you have to be able to respond where you are challenged, because, it was
generally believed, if you threatened to hit back against the Soviet Union for
something that was going on in Vietnam or Iran, it wouldn't be credible to
Moscow. Is there any basis for having changed this judgment?

Mr. Ikle. I don't agree with this thesis. We did not ward off the threat to
Berlin by being capable to defend Berlin. We did not obtain the Austrian State
Treaty by having dominant military strength in Western Austria. What is usually
needed is a combination of local and global strength.

Mr. Blechman. You know, the $1.6 trillion, five-year program is completely
unrealistic compared to the country's fiscal situation.  It's obvious the
Administration is putting it out for the Congress to do its work for it. And the
trouble with that is that when decisions are made by the budget process, they're
not as rational, candidly, as they are when made by an executive in a hierarchy.

Q. Is Congress so inherently irresponsible?

Mr. Blechman. No, of course I'm not saying that. To save money in the short
term, to cut outlays, to affect the deficit for fiscal '83 significantly, you
have to cut operating and maintenance accounts - or the payroll.

Q. Mr. Ikle, if Congress is going to sacrifice readiness to expansion, aren't
you really ending up with the worst of both possible worlds?

Mr. Ikle. No, the Administration's defense program places high priority on
readiness. Force expansion is rather modest in most areas.

Mr. Aspin. I think our whole system of dealing with defense is in very serious
trouble. How do you increase American forces in a way that makes any sense? For
some reason the Army is unable to procure anything that's worth anything. We
cannot get a consensus on the basing modes for the MX. Congress cuts the wrong
thing.

Q. On procurement alone, as one of his parting shots, Admiral Rickover proposed
nationalizing the defense industry. Would it make any difference?

Mr. Ikle. Yes, it probably would be disastrous. It is curious that those who
criticize Government waste and inefficiency most vigorously should want the
Government to run major industries. The Reagan Administration has initiated
several major reforms; if Congress permits these reforms to take hold, we can
expect major savings.

Mr. Blechman. The main thing that could be done is to give individuals
responsibility and accountability - rewarding them, or not rewarding them, in
terms of their careers, according to their performance in bringing in a weapons
program that's meeting certain standards.

Q. Absolutely revolutionary.

Mr. Blechman. It's my Calvinist upbringing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Barry Blechman, Fred C. Ilke, Les Aspin table
of military spending, broken down graph of national defense budget outlays from
'76 thru '87

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MAYAN WAR GOD IS UNDER NEW MANAGEMENT

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1075 words

DATELINE: SOLALA, Guatemala


Dressed in their bright skirts and blouses, their long black hair in tight
braids, a cluster of Indian women squatted in the dirt, weighing vegetables on
crude scales and counting stacks of tortillas. Across the way, Indian men
repaired the village church. Their gaily colored trousers, held up by wide
swatches of cloth, reached to their calves. Their feet were toughened by years
of walking without shoes.

In the cliffs above Lake Atitlan, Aldous Huxley once exclaimed, ''It touches the
limit of the permissibly picturesque.'' But tourists do not come here anymore.
In October, guerrilla forces overran Solala and executed an army colonel who was
the governor of the province; now soldiers in groups of 60 patrol among the
Indians.  Wearing Korean-made camouflage uniforms and carrying Israeli-made
automatic rifles, they are members of a disciplined army that is engaged in
almost nightly combat with tough, predominantly Indian guerrilla forces.

For a few days recently, the civil war took a brief respite as Guatemalans cast
ballots and civilian politicians hurled charges of fraud at the military
Government. But on Tuesday, a guerrilla force reported to be about 100 strong
attacked military positions in the surrounding hills.

United States foreign policy has focused international attention on the civil
war in neighboring El Salvador, while a revolution of the same or even greater
magnitude here has gone comparatively unnoticed.

Spawned by years of repression, military governments and economic inequality,
the leftist revolution here predates Fidel Castro's assumption of power in Cuba.
It has escalated in recent years against the Government of General Romeo Lucas
Garcia, which is accused of being among the most repressive in Latin America. No
one expects the fighting to abate in July, when General Angel Anibal Guevara,
the winner in last Sunday's disputed elections, is to take power.

The Government is defended by an army considered to be the besttrained,
best-equipped and most professional in Central America.  Its manpower is
estimated at between 20,000 and 22,000, although the army chief of staff said
recently that it numbers about 35,000. The Government has begun pressing Indians
into service, though there is still some concern about their loyalties.

Leading the army is Brig. Gen. Benedicto Lucas Garcia, the President's
49-year-old brother. A graduate of the prestigious St.  Cyr Academy, the French
equivalent of West Point, General Garcia gained fighting experience in the war
in Algeria.

He has revitalized the Guatemalan Army, taking the soldiers out of their fixed
barracks into the rebels' mountain strongholds. Near Santa Cruz del Quiche, the
army has set up an impressive field headquarters unlike anything seen in El
Salvador. Neatly painted signs mark the motor pool area, latrines, mess hall and
dispensary.  Sand bags protect the large black rubber bladders that hold fuel
for Israeli-made troop transport planes.

Pacifying, as in Vietnam

Guatemala's elite troops are called Kaibiles, in honor of Kaibil, the Mayan god
of war. In small units, they often go on mountain patrols, sometimes for as long
as two weeks. Night patrols are frequent and effective. By contrast, most
Salvadoran Army missions are carried out by large units and rarely last more
than 10 days.

General Garcia has said that he intends to ''pacify the country,'' employing the
strategy used by the French in Algeria and the French and Americans in Vietnam.
Schools and health clinics are built under ''civic action'' programs.
Unfortunately, large numbers of peasants are often killed to deny the guerrillas
their support.

Last week, the local press reported the ''massacre'' of some 200 persons,
including women, children and old people in Zacualpa, which is just east of
Santa Cruz del Quiche. The victims' throats had been cut by armed men in
civilian clothes. The Government denied that a massacre took place.

The local press often reports that killings are carried out by ''desconocidos,''
or unknowns; the Government routinely blames the guerrillas.

The State Department's 1981 Human Rights Report lists several Guatemalan
villages in which ''circumstantial evidence links the military with the deaths''
of many peasants. ''I don't think anyone believes'' that the guerrillas are
responsible for the massacres, a moderate religious leader said last week.

In fact, little is known about the guerrillas here. One diplomat called this ''a
faceless revolution.'' Unlike their Salvadoran counterparts, the Guatemalan
rebels have not invited foreign correspondents to travel with them in the
mountains, where many have been fighting 10 years or longer.

The number of revolutionary combatants is placed at 4,000 to 6,000. They are
said to be inflicting a far higher number of casualties on government soldiers
than their Salvadorian counterparts. The military reported about 50 soldiers a
month killed last year. The actual number may be four times that, according to a
diplomat.

The provinces of Quiche, Huehuetenango and San Marcos ''can practically be
considered liberated zones,'' said another diplomat.  United States officials
are not permitted to travel farther west than the colonial city of Antiqua.

For the most part, the war is being fought in the mountains. The relative calm
in the capital is shattered only occasionally by dynamite charges planted in
banks, insurance companies and the Chamber of Industry offices.

Displaying considerable sophistication, the rebels are now able to broadcast
their messages by cutting into a radio station's wavelengths. One message last
month announced the formation of the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity,
composed of the four main guerrilla groups.

Last week, after a long day of listening to conservative politicians denounce
election fraud, reporters discovered that the leftists had also been at work.
Returning to their rooms, they found that someone had slipped under their doors
a three-page mimeographed letter from the guerrillas that listed, among other
things, the taking of the city of Solala by the guerrillas on Oct. 28.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Region in Summary;
A Tough Week For Republicans

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 249 words


Edward V. Regan wasn't the only Republican candidate who bowed out last week.
Caught in a ''misstatement'' that cost him his major endorsements - and his
credibility -Bruce M. Caputo ended his campaign for the United States Senate.

The former Yonkers Congressman expressed regret that he didn't have a chance to
present his version of ''recent events,'' but it was his version of some other
ones that brought on his troubles. He told reporters on several occasions that
he had been a Vietnam-era draftee and Army lieutenant. He later admitted he had
been neither, but without conceding he had claimed to be.

It was generally conceded that Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the Democrat Mr.
Caputo had sought to oppose, strengthened his hand with Mr. Caputo's withdrawal.
But if he was tempted to gloat, he didn't show it. He said he could not ''take
pleasure in another person's pain.''

Republican state chairman George L. Clark Jr., who had joined Conservative Party
leaders in ''suspending'' his endorsement of Mr.  Caputo, mentioned United
States Representatives Hamilton Fish Jr., Gregory Carman and Gary Lee as
possible replacements on the ballot.  Serphin R. Maltese, the executive director
of the Conservative Party, said his party might support Assemblyman Glenn
Warren, ''a hero helicopter pilot'' in Vietnam. Eventually, Mr. Clark and Mr.
Serphin are expected to agree on a single candidate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Foreign Affairs;
LEAKS AND STORIES

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 875 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 13


The press is not just reporting but making news again. It is always
uncomfortable when gamekeeper and poacher trade places. But there are serious
issues about national policy involved, and they have to be faced.

There are two seemingly separate elements in the current argument.  One is about
Washington leaks reflecting the bitter personal and policy feuds in the
Administration. The other is about Central America and what is and is not valid
information on which policy judgments should be made.

They are obviously related, since both problems involve the responsibility of
the media to its own standards and to the public, and both affect what the U.S.
can and will do in foreign affairs.

Washington leaks are an old story. Henry Kissinger used to say that information
is power, and he was a master wielder. There are also amateur leakers, people
whose aim is not so much to manipulate the daily course of events as to blow the
whistle on abuse, deceit, wrong headedness that they have come to find
intolerable and impossible to stop through government procedures.

Inevitably, some damage is done when normal channels are punctured in this way.
The question then is the value of public exposure. The reporter's creed denies
the right to set one's self above history as well as temporal powers and to
judge what is good or not good for people to know. But it requires constant
judgment on what is news.

It shouldn't be self-evident that any leak, when authenticated, deserves
publication. Thus, I found distasteful the printing of a highly selective set of
notes from Secretary of State Alexander Haig's staff meetings. There was no
substantive news in it, just language more candid than diplomatic.

The only story was that in-fighting and disorder in Washington have reached a
terrible state when a Government official high enough to attend staff meetings
chooses to snipe se-cretly with such a leak.  But the story was only implied,
not told.

Already, senior officials say, the revelations of recent years have led to
reduced record-keeping. Some things just aren't put on paper.  Now, there is
bound to be more care in talking at formal meetings.  Such an atmosphere of
suspicion makes the worst possible climate for the frank and sometimes
forcefully dissenting exchange a decisonmaker needs with his advisers. Bad
communications make for bad government. It may be more fun to read how they
actually talk, but it doesn't shed any light on policy.

The Washington Post report of a national security council decision for covert
action in Nicaragua is an opposite example. That was important and useful news,
evidently leaked to blow a whistle.

In part, the controversy about coverage of El Salvador is the same issue. Some
of the stories reflect leaks from officials on the spot grown frustrated with
seeing their reports to Washington distorted to make propaganda and justify
previously decided policy. These are conscience leaks, of the greatest value
because they are an attempt to prevent decisions based on bad information.

David Halberstam has recognized the clear parallel of his own experi-ence with
field officers in Vietnam. He explained the dilemma, both for the reporter and
the official, with moving eloquence in a recent article in The Wall Street
Journal. He also reminded how much is at stake when the people at the top begin
to lie and manipulate to suit their views.

Another part of the argument about the press and Salvador came in a Wall Street
Journal editorial attacking reporters for lending credence to guerrilla
propaganda. This wasn't a problem in Vietnam because the U.S. press had
virtually no access to the Vietcong.

But it is a result of Vietnam because there the press learned the hard way to
detect the symptoms of official lies and distortions, and to notice that
opposition propaganda can contain some facts just as our own does. It was a
vital lesson.

The editorial pointed out that the fall of friendly regimes in Cambodia, China,
Iran etc. didn't necessarily improve things in those countries, and it seemed to
blame the reporters who exposed their failings. The fallacy is common. If one
side has black hats, the other must be the white hats. But they can all be
black, or gray. And friendly tyrants can fall of their own weight, damaging the
U.S. in their debacle.

A reporter who tries to judge, or cover-up, is an irresponsible reporter, not
one who tries to reflect the actual colors of the battlefield.

It is not, and must not be, the reporter's job to foresee the consequences of
telling significant facts. That is trying to play God and stop history. Truth is
the hardest substance in the world to pindown. But the one certainty is the
awesome penalty exacted sooner or later from a society whose reporters stop
trying.

Which side attracts your sympathies, where and how you get the information is
not the crucial issue. If you're on the side of democracy, freedom, the fate of
the U.S. and human decency, then you have to be on the side of chasing truth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONSIDER A BILLION GERMANS

BYLINE: By JOHN LEONARD; John Leonard is a book critic for The New York Times.By
John Leonard

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1999 words


HEADBIRTHS OR THE GERMANS ARE DYING OUT By Gunter Grass.Translated by Ralph
Manheim.  A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book.136 pp. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich. $9.95.

ZEUS, you will remember, had the first ''headbirth,'' springing Athene. It is,
says Gunter Grass, ''a paradox that has impregnated male minds to this day.'' It
is also a parable of art. Grass Zeusifies. His own ''Headbirths'' - part
fiction, part travelogue, part screenplay and part political pamphlet - is a
wise, sad, witty mess.

(The bad boy of German letters has more structural problems with his short books
than with his long ones, as if he felt that such baggy monsters as ''The Tin
Drum,'' ''Dog Years'' and ''The Flounder'' needed elaborate skeletons, whereas
''Cat and Mouse'' and ''The Meeting at Telgte,'' so skinny, could be spineless.)

In no particular order, although sometimes in circles, ''Headbirths''
contemplates the 1980 elections in the German Federal Republic; children;
movies; Asia; balls of thread; liver sausage; a dead friend and a fictitious
pair of civil servants, Harm and Dorte Peters, who lack the capacity to imagine
what history will do to them and their Volkswagen.

(Grass has been unhappy about politics in the Federal Republic since the
abdication of Willy Brandt, but nevertheless campaigns, with zesty venom, on
behalf of the Social Democrats.

(He approves of children, having sired a bunch of them, but isn't sure the world
needs any more Germans, no matter how much the authorities deplore a declining
birth rate that makes necessary the importation of so many Turks and Italians to
do the coolie work of the Republic.

(He admits here that he was a royal nuisance on the set while Volker Schlondorff
finished his reverential film version of ''The Tin Drum.'' Still Grass found
himself fascinated. Lights! Camera! Action! With ''Drum'' in the can, he and
Schlondorff went off together to the Orient, thinking cinematic. Perhaps they
would make a movie about overpopulation. Like nuclear reactors, overpopulation
is bad for ecology. Grass took acerbic notes. We don't know what Schlondorff
did.

(Never mind the ball of thread and the liver sausage. Later...  (The dead friend
is Nicolas Born. Grass, always proselytizing, talked Schlondorff into reading
Born's novel ''The Falsification.'' Schlondorff then decided he would rather
make a movie - the recently released ''Circle of Deceit'' - out of the book Born
wrote than the one Grass is writing and we are reading. Bad faith.

(If such ''headbirths'' as Harm and Dorte, who can't decide whether to have a
child, lack an apocalyptic imagination, Grass does not. His brain runs overtime,
cutting and dissolving. It is pregnant with terrible dreams, with those horrific
images we first encountered on the television screen in the dentist's office in
''Local Anaesthetic.''

(If this makes sense, it's because I'm doing most of the coolie work.)
Meanwhile, Zeus looks over his shoulder at those critics who ask him to stick to
the past and butt out of contemporary politics - as if wisdom were the last
child anybody wanted, as if this morning's politics weren't a headbirth of
history. At one point he imagines himself 10 years older than he really is in
order to understand the compromises artists of that age must have made with
Hitlerism. He digresses, breaking the heart, on clandestine meetings between
German writers from both sides of the Berlin Wall. To Nicolas Born, he speaks
out loud:

''Now that you are dead, I am aging more perceptibly. My courage, which was
doing fine only yesterday, has furled several sails.'' Don't believe him.

Besides, having propagated Harm and Dorte and forced them to follow him to Asia,
at a later date he is aware that they will know certain facts about the future
that he isn't permitted to guess at as he writes. (Art is hard.) And, having
made them take along a ball of thread and some liver sausage, he can't think
what to do with the symbolic baggage. He intends them to ''fly back with their
foreknowledge''; is this the liver sausage? Then, maybe, the yarn is his story -
not to mention Ariadne's - unraveling.

(It is as if his headbirth, like this review, were a series of parentheses
wanting to be a Mobius loop.) Too much as if; consider what if. In Shanghai,
among 11 million bicycles, Grass wonders: What if the populations of China and
the two Germanys were reversed? What if there were only 80 million Chinese and a
billion Germans in ''the alarming process of self-discovery''?  That such a
dreadful idea has occurred to most Russians for most of this century may in part
explain Soviet foreign policy.

BUT Germans, unlike Chinese, are dying out. Will they end up stuffed in their
own museums? On your left, Hittites, Sumerians, Aztecs; on your right, Germans,
who were ''not mere warlike barbarians, concerned only with sordid gain, mere
function without spirit,'' but victims of an industrial society that depended,
parasitically, for its extravagant standard of living, on the ''South'' - on oil
and Turks - which it exhausted. Ought those Germans to have denied themselves
anything, including animals, vegetables, minerals and Kinder? Kinder, after all,
eat up one's personal space in the Garten.

Grass must invent Harm and Dorte. They teach, and Grass is usually hard on
organized pedagogy, but they met at a 1960's antiwar rally, and he is usually
soft on liberal puppy love. If Harm quotes Marx on the capitalist law of
accumulation through redundancy, Dorte frisks among curves and computer
projections. Harm ''deplores the lack of long-range views''; Dorte, ''the lack
of meaning in general.'' Both feel bad about their civil-servant privileges,
both will vote against Franz Josef Strauss, and neither can make up his/ her not
very interesting mind on whether to have that German baby.

Since Harm and Dorte have to go to Asia, the Sisyphus Travel Agency will arrange
''destitution as a course of study.'' (As well as Zeus, Grass wants to be Albert
Camus; what's the matter with Grimmelshausen?) They will be booked into slums
from Bombay to Bangkok. They will be asked to ''tabulate and classify'' squalor.
They will not be allowed to visit revolutionary China - where students explained
the Gang of Four to Grass - because revolutionary China is insufficiently
squalid.

Grass directs: ''Long shot of the Indian subcontinent. She, cut off at the
waist, covering half the Bay of Bengal, all Calcutta, and Bangladesh, casually
takes the pill, slaps a book shut (she is not wearing glasses), and says, 'It is
safe to say that birth control as a means of family planning has been a failure
in India.' ''

Grimmelshausen has more fun with his screenplay, which would bankrupt any
studio, than he does with Harm and Dorte, who will weary any reader. When Dorte
- in the shade of a holy tree or under a volcano or inside the Cave of Bats -
undergoes a mystical conversion to the cause of the Mother Goddess and withholds
her sexual favors from Harm unless he agrees to procreate, even Grass is
exasperated.  Why, with her ball of thread, doesn't she knit herself a child?
Only a movie could make us care about these two. One of Grass's points is that
movies are a substitute for the imagination. Take that, Schlondorff.

(The Cave of Bats on Bali, however, is neat. The black bat tangled in Dorte's
blond hair belongs in the bestiary Grass elaborates in book after book: the
severed horse's head full of eels, the mouselike Adam's apple, the snail, the
mechanical scarecrow, the talking turbot and the dachshund that Scherbaum wanted
to burn in public to protest American napalm in Vietnam. His mind is a zoo.)

ANOTHER of his points is that card files, fact sheets, summaries and tabulations
are also a substitute for the imagination; they furnish a ''vacuum.'' Even
travel may be such a substitute. Certainly Grass doesn't waste much space here
on seeing sights; picture postcards from the Great Wall are so much liver
sausage. Asia exists so that Harm and Dorte can go there. They exist because
somebody had to go and come back with ''data'' and talk about ''energy needs''
and ''rice shortages'' and ''fatalistic structures.'' Somebody must fail to
comprehend.

What exactly is to be comprehended? This, among other acts of the imagination:
''In the course of the eighties Asia will discharge its demographic pressure and
flood the European continent.'' In other words, the Chinese are going to become
Germans.

And the worst possible substitute for the imagination is politics, a headbirth
gone out of control, metastasized. Grass, like Oskar in ''The Tin Drum,'' is an
anarchist; he would shatter windows with his scream. Yet he is also, like such
of his earlier characters as Brunies and Starusch and Ott and the Flounder, a
pedagogue in spite of himself. He will beat the stupidity out of us. Only women
should have children. What nonsense to seek disarmament through rearmament, to
combat the energy shortage by stepping up production, to breed reactors instead
of Germans or Chinese, to pile up pork and butter mountains in a world in which
15 million children starve to death each year!

If the anarchist were in charge, says the pedagogue, he would abolish compulsory
education and ''emancipate'' all civil servants from the ''isolation'' of their
privilege by firing them. (In Germany? As soon abolish beer.) He would cut off
the electric current at night, in order to raise the birth rate, and he would
reintroduce as bedware the traditional German nightcap, to save all the heat
that escapes through the holes in our heads. (He begins to sound like Norman
Mailer.) He would dictate a switch of political systems, every 10 years, between
Germanys East and West, giving the Democratic Republic ''an opportunity to relax
under capitalism, while the Federal Republic would drain off cholesterol under
communism.'' (Perhaps he is Norman Mailer, or Sisyphus.)

MORE radically, he would ''deal with property as my spiritual property and that
of others have been dealt with: 70 years after the author's (that's me) death,
his (my) rights enter the public domain; I (as dictator) would extend this
benefit by law to all earned or acquired possessions - house, factory, field -so
that only the children and some of the grandchildren will be obliged to inherit
it or hold it in usufruct. Ones born later will be exempt from this hereditary
burden ... they will be free to make a fresh start.''

Ridiculous, of course. Without surplus, there can be no value.  Finally, he
would ordain a National Endowment, a museum without walls in the psychic space
between the two Berlins, promoting the history and, much more important, the
literature (the male Mother) of all the Germanys. Writers are the best patriots;
even a ''wounded'' language will somehow heal the body politic. ''What's wrong
with us,'' says Grass, ''is neither material nor social, but an emergency of the
spirit.'' Dorte, in her Indian sarong, confesses: ''I'm afraid, Harm. Of us, of
everything.'' Grass would advise her: Read Holderlin and Trakl.

This mystifies. In ''The Meeting at Telgte,'' he called this same language a
''rhymed yearning for death.'' In ''The Flounder,'' he seemed to suggest that
German literature, including the punitive and misogynistic Grimm fairy tales,
had helped invent nationalism and self-righteousness, those head-birthed
monsters. None of his high literary culture, including the novels of Thomas
Mann, prevented the 20th century from turning into the Grimmest of fairy tales.
Gunter Grass himself had to teach us how to speak German again without a taste
of shame.

Enough. By turns sarcastic, grief-stricken, bemused, hortatory, punprone,
furious, dreamy, fishy, catlike and dog-yeared, he drums on our tin skull, our
brain pan. ''Headbirths'' is minor Grass, which would be major for almost any
other writer. When the gnomes of Stockholm get around to giving him his Nobel
Prize, they should give one as well to his admirable translator, Ralph Manheim.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of a face

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AN OASIS IN APPALACHIA

SECTION: Section 10; Page 21, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1958 words


BEN A. FRANKLIN is the Middle Atlantic correspondent for The Times

BY BEN A.FRANKLIN

In Williamson, W. Va., deep in the Appalachian outback, the Lock, Stock and
Barrel - a restaurant that serves Steak Diane to railroad workers at 3 A.M.
-would be unusual enough for its timeless menu.

But the Barrel, as its patrons in the Mingo County coalfields call this 24-hour
oasis of good food and drink, is much more than a fine restaurant. It is a
museum of two kinds of antiques, each charming in its way.

Hundreds of century-old artifacts of the harsh mining and timbering trades of
pioneer times in the mountains - the post-Civil War era of the Hatfield-McCoy
feud - decorate its walls and ceilings.

The Barrel is also owned and run by two ''antiques'' - well, they're over 30.
Jerry Hildebrand and James Hannah are relics, still in good condition, of the
idealistic time barely a decade ago when young antipoverty activists moved into
the Appalachian hills and hollows as community organizers to bring ''power to
the people.'' The ambiance at the Barrel is that of Alice's Restaurant
-preserved as if the clock had stopped in the 1960's.

The Barrel was founded in 1970, in the same done-over storefront that is its
home today, by young New Frontier-Great Society poverty warriors. it was
capitalized by an $18,000 grant from the late O.E.O. - the Office of Economic
Opportunity. The project was to train jobless Appalachians as busboys,
waitresses and cooks.

And despite natural and political disasters that would have done in the less
hardy, it is still a genteel outpost of 1960's militancy - as much a museum of
that bygone ideology as of the tools and tunnels of early times in the mines.

A few young activists remain, and the young middle class is still doing a bit of
its thing in Mingo County - reporting for and editing ''The New Era,'' a protest
newspaper begun by the Barrel's owners, and working as nurses at Williamson's
Appalachian Regional Hospital.

During a steak dinner recently with Mr. Hildebrand, an ex-Peace Corps volunteer
who was a co-founder and is now co-owner of the Lock, Stock and Barrel, he was
continually greeted by a parade of young post-collegians who passed our booth in
the rusticated 100-seat dining room en route to their own meals.

They could choose from a menu listing among other specialties homemade French
onion soup ($1.85), baked red snapper ''almadine'' ($5.50) and ''the John L.
Lewis - an indefatigable 12-ounce cut of choice sirloin strip firebroiled in
management-busting brandy and served with a bold mustard sauce'' ($10.95).

There are no wines, but the beers include Heineken and Foster's Lager - a
special beneficence for patrons from across the Kentucky line, where most
counties are dry. Desserts include pecan pie and cheesecake, and there is
sassafras tea and a blend of cocoa, coffee and whipped cream called ''house
brew.''

The Barrel's menu is relentlessly militant. The Chateaubriand for two is ''The
Worker's Alliance'' ($17.95). Steak Diane, with a raisin-onion-mushroom sauce,
has been re-christened ''The Mother Jones Striker's Special -the 'Hell-Raising'
Chef's speciality'' ($10.95). And the conversation, issue-oriented as it is,
complements these selections.

Last summer an entire class of graduate students from the University of Iowa
School of Social Work arrived in a fleet of vans to study at first hand the
abysmal life of the ''truly needy'' in West Virginia's poor belt. They came to
Williamson - to what the Tug Valley Chamber of Commerce calls ''the heart of the
billion-dollar coalfield'' - chiefly because of the Barrel's reputation.

And as part of their ideological menu - in addition to countrycooked entrees -
they were treated to two days of seminars and workshops on issues of current
concern here. The sessions were led by Mr. Hildebrand, who is 38 now, and Mr.
Hannah, a 35-year-old native of Mingo County who is the other
co-founder/co-owner of the Barrel.

T he two are older hands at community organizing than at running a restaurant,
and their issues are strip mining and the disastrous floods along the Tug Fork
of the Big Sandy River, which many believe are a result of a channel clogged
with strip-mine silt.

Downtown Williamson, including the Barrel, was last flooded in 1977, in a
disaster that put the two restaurant entrepreneurs back in the protest business.

They quickly organized the Tug Valley Recovery Center to goad state and Federal
relief agencies into action. They helped form the first countywide housing
authority, with power of eminent domain. Mr.  Hannah, a 6-foot 6-inch miner's
son from Dingess, W. Va., had been an organizer of Save Our Mountains, an
anti-strip mine group. The summer after the April 1977 flood he and Mr.
Hildebrand also organized the Appalachian Alliance, an umbrella group with
constituencies in six mountain states committed to strip-mine resistance, tax
reform and health issues.

''You won't find another restaurant like this one,'' Mr. Hannah said, thinking
back on a decade of public controversy. ''We took a stand on everything that was
controversial, that's for sure.''

But a strong stand on public policy is not required at the Barrel, any more than
a plaid shirt or blue jeans.  Last June the Norfolk & Western Railway, whose
huge switchyard for coal cars overwhelms Williamson - and whose main line
pierces the center of town - began paying the restaurant a stipend of $2,000 a
month to stay open 24 hours a day, seven days a week, for hungry railroad men on
the last shift. They can order steak and eggs with hot biscuits and wash it down
with beer.

Between 11 P.M. and 5 A.M., while the kitchen is baking tomorrow's homemade
honey whole wheat bread and the hamlet is otherwise sound asleep, the Barrel is
patronized by an average of 60 to 100 railroad men.

''We get over 200 on Friday and Saturday nights,'' Mr. Hildebrand said.  On an
average day the Barrel's quilt-draped booths contain an assortment of railway
brakemen, college students from Scarsdale, traveling salesmen, local merchants,
Pakistani doctors from the hospital and professors from the nearby community
college. The restaurant's guest book contains names - and raves about the food
and the antique-crammed atmosphere - from every state in the Union and 35
foreign countries.

The signatures include those of John D. Rockefeller 4th, West Virginia's Ivy
League
Governor, United States Senator Robert C. Byrd and Mrs. Robert F.  Kennedy - in
a way the fairy godmother of the place.

Mr. Hildebrand, a Chicagoan who worked on Robert Kennedy's 1968 Presidental
campaign staff until the candidate was assassinated, was later hired by Ethel
Kennedy as the summertime guardian and overseer of her children at Hyannis. He
then became a fellow of the Robert F.  Kennedy Memorial in Washington.

It was as a Kennedy Fellow that he came here in 1969 and helped found the
economic development corporation that sired first a moccasin factory and a
low-income food store, and then the Lock, Stock and Barrel.

The menu then featured fillet of sole and steak Diane and was distinctly
Continental. Black curtains draped the storefront windows. There was carpeting
on the floor, and the booths, set off by a massive center stanchion of red-brick
arches that called to mind a wine cellar, were bathed in the light of candles in
wine bottles.

W hen seven years of hard work were washed away in the 1977 flood, ''we learned
an awful lot from the friends who helped us rebuild,'' Mr. Hildebrand said.
''People came right out and told us not to replace the black curtains - they
said it made us look like a bordello or a funeral parlor -and they said 'forget
the carpet and the candles and the steak Diane.' ''

''We switched to kerosene lamps and country cooking, things that people here
feel familiar with, and they started bringing us fresh vegetables from their
gardens.''

At first, as an economy, the Barrel used pint jelly jars, with threaded tops, as
water glasses. They proved so popular and such a talking point -with the
suggestion of white lightning put up in Mason jars - that the house beer steins
with handles were specially ordered with screw tops too.

The quilts that drape the restaurant's booths are brightly colored throws that
come on consignment from Appalachian housewives and are sold, mainly to
tourists, at no profit to The Barrel. The hundreds of antiques are mainly
century-old tools of Williamson's historic trades of railroading, timbering and
coal mining, and are not for sale.

The restaurant's intensely country ambiance - still full of original Tiffany
lampshades and a magnificent saloon mirror (actually a salvaged relic from
behind a drugstore soda fountain) - has helped a business that even before the
flood was brisk.

Williamson is an interesting but taxing two-hour drive south from Interstate 64,
on U.S. 119 from Charleston or on U.S. 52 from Huntington. Both roads have
serpentine mountainous sections with overloaded coal trucks crawling around
180-degree switchbacks and adding new potholes by the hour to what is already a
world-class collection. But the diners still come.

By de-emphasizing the Continental touch, and winning friends even among its
owners' political adversaries on social and environmental issues, the place is
now doing well, according to Mr. Hildebrand. A planned profit-sharing system for
employees has not begun yet, however, because the restaurant's income is heavily
mortgaged against the $150,000 Small Business Administration loan required after
the flood.

The 1977 flood was not the first ''biblical event,'' as they call it, visited on
the Barrel's owners. It took a $1,500 loan from Mr.  Hildebrand's friends in
Washington to buy enough food to open, and no wages were paid for several weeks.
Then resentment in the business community at the founders' ''radical'' politics
and their Governmentsubsidized opening turned to open hostility.

''On charges trumped up by the board of directors,'' Mr. Hildebrand says, he was
abruptly fired as director of the economic development corporation that then
owned and ran the restaurant and the moccasin factory. The Mingo County project
had just been certified by the O.E.O. as the best rural antipoverty program in
the country.

Moreover, the critics underrated Mr. Hannah's experience as a union organizer at
the succession of factory jobs he had held ''up north'' after finishing a
three-year hitch in the Marine Corps, including a tour in Vietnam. To a man, the
restaurant employees formed a picket line outside.

After the poverty board closed the restaurant, Mr. Hildebrand and Mr. Hannah
bought it outright in December 1971 for $8,500 in loans co-signed by sympathetic
merchants. The Kennedy chef had departed, leaving Maxine Young, now the manager,
to run the kitchen. A former Representative, Ken Hechler of West Virginia, among
others, pitched in as a waiter during the reopening.

The Lock, Stock and Barrel was saved, fulfilling finally both its job-training
commitment (one graduate is now a Hilton chef) and its founders' dream of a
''real goor-met restaurant in West Virginia''.

''We're independent as a hog on ice,'' Mr. Hannah drawled.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of pioneer artifacts photo of menu photo of
restaurant

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EFFORT TO 'FREEZE' NUCLEAR ARSENALS SPREADS IN U.S.

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1247 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


A growing number of political, religious and civic groups throughout the country
are coalescing into a significant movement to try to halt the nuclear weapons
race between the United States and the Soviet Union.

The movement gained momentum and political legitimacy last week when 150 members
of Congress sponsored a resolution calling on the superpowers to ''pursue a
complete halt to the nuclear weapons race.''

Some political analysts view the resolution as an important bridge between the
grass-roots movement around the country to halt production of nuclear arms and
those scholars and present and former Government policy makers who have long
advocated arms control.

The measure, introduced by Senators Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of
Massachusetts, and Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, prompted the Reagan
Administration to respond. On Thursday, the State Department issued a statement
seeking to align the Administration with the goals of arms control proponents,
while rejecting the bipartisan proposal as ''dangerous'' and destabilizing.
Officials argued that a freeze now would give the Soviet Union a permanent
advantage in long-@and medium-range missiles.

An official said the Administration was planning to complete proposals soon for
a new round of strategic arms negotiations with the Russians.

While analysts agree that the movement was broad-based and encompassed liberals
and conservatives, they also note significant political tensions within the
movement.

Nevertheless, proponents of the freeze were delighted by the attention the
Congressional resolution received. G. Randall Kehler, executive director of the
Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign Clearinghouse, said his office in St. Louis had
been ''swamped'' by inquiries and offers of help since the measure was
introduced Wednesday.

''I feel like I'm on a comet,'' Mr. Kehler said, ''but I don't know whether I'm
leading it or on its tail.'' The ''comet'' is getting its power and force from
hundreds of separate developments around the nation.  More than 80
organizations, from church groups to state legislatures and city councils, have
endorsed the freeze proposal, according to the clearinghouse, which was set up
three months ago to inform local advocates of activities around the country.

Although the wording varies somewhat, most of the resolutions focus on an end to
the production of atomic weapons by the two superpowers.  According to the
clearinghouse, initiatives for a freeze have been approved in 159 of 180 town
meetings in Vermont, in 28 of 34 gatherings in New Hampshire, five in
Massachusetts, seven in Maine and three in Connecticut. A freeze has been
endorsed by the full legislatures in Massachusetts, Oregon and Connecticut, and
by one legislative chamber in New York, Vermont, Wisconsin, Minnesota and
Kansas.

California supporters have collected 500,000 signatures to place an initiative
on the state ballot in November. Half a million more people have signed ballot
initiative petitions in Michigan, New Jersey and Delaware, according to
clearinghouse data.

Interest in the concept of a weapons freeze has been growing for several years,
fueled by military buildups under both the Carter and Reagan Administrations,
the huge antinuclear demonstrations in the streets of Europe and the
increasingly frequent mention by military personnel of the possibility of
''limited nuclear war.''

Rising military budgets amid economic stagnation have intensified liberal
discontent with military spending priorities. American involvement in El
Salvador and Central America is growing. Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of
Vermont, says some of his constituents fear a possible confrontation with the
Russians that could lead to a nuclear exchange.

Setback for Carter Plan

Movement supporters, however, say the early impetus came in 1980 when the Carter
Administration failed to win Congressional ratification of the second treaty
aimed at limiting strategic arms, known as SALT II.

Randall Forsberg, director of the Institute for Defense and Disarmament Studies
in Boston and among the first to call for a freeze, said President Carter's
withdrawal of the troubled treaty after the Russians intervened in Afghanistan
convinced her that a grass-roots constituency for arms control had to develop if
future proposals were to succeed.

''It had to be simple, something ordinary people, not just defense experts,
could understand,'' she said.  Adding to the movement's growth and legitimacy in
the United States has been the active participation by religious groups. At
least 20 denominations have issued statements warning against the arms race.
Although heavily Roman Catholic countries in Europe have had less antinuclear
ferment than their neighbors, priests and nuns are in the vanguard of the
movement in the United States.

In Seattle, Archbishop Raymond G. Hunthausen announced plans to withhold half
his Federal income taxes this year to protest the arms race.

In Amarillo, Tex., Bishop Leroy Matthiesen urged Catholics working at a weapons
assembly plant to consider finding more peaceful employment.

Rabbi Alexander M. Schindler, president of the Union of American Hebrew
Congregations, has predicted that the nuclear arms race would become the
''central moral issue'' of the decade, as the Vietnam War was in the 1960's.

Broader Than Vietnam Movement

''But this movement is far broader than the Vietnam peace movement,'' said Mr.
Kehler, who was jailed two years for draft resistance. ''It appeals to a far
broader political spectrum.''

Some who are familiar with the matter say that such a broadly based movement is
bound to develop schisms. There is already some uneasiness between supporters of
the freeze campaign and the military analysts, arms control specialists and
academics who comprise what is called the arms control community. Several
Democratic arms control specialists refused to endorse the Hatfield-Kennedy
resolution, which does not call for an immediate freeze but for Soviet and
American efforts to ''decide when and how'' to achieve ''mutual and verifiable''
freeze and eventual arms reductions.

Idea Called 'Too Simplistic'

Roger Molander, a former National Security Council staff member who heads Ground
Zero, a group attempting to educate communities about the dangers of nuclear
war, argued that the campaign for an immediate weapons freeze was too
simplistic.

''Arms control is complex,'' said Mr. Molander, who has not endorsed the joint
resolution. ''It's not good to encourage people to think that nuclear holocaust
can be avoided by simple technical fixes.''

Reagan Administration officials, however, suggest that just as President Reagan
was able to cool disarmament sentiment in Europe by proposing that Europe be
cleared of medium-range nuclear missiles, he will be able to deflate antinuclear
weapons forces here with an earnest effort to negotiate strategic arms
reductions with the Russians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHEMICAL WEAPONS MUST BE ELIMINATED

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 504 words


To the Editor:

Two letters in The Times of Feb. 3 call for comment. John Kester and Dr. Richard
Harruff assert that there is ''impressive'' evidence that the Soviet Union,
directly in Afghanistan and through proxies in Indochina, is ''killing
thousands'' with lethal chemical weapons, and Kester argues that the U.S. should
now produce ''some of these hideous weapons.''

he evidence of chemical warfare is indeed disturbing, but it must be examined in
an open-minded way. At this point, it is not clear that the Soviet Union is in
flagrant violation of either the Geneva Protocol or the Biological Weapons
Convention.

Refugee reports from Afghanistan do not unambiguously point to lethal chemicals,
but perhaps to ''incapacitants'' or ''riot control agents'' analogous to those
we used in Vietnam. The Soviets assert that they are innocent. Until more
evidence is assembled, the situation must be regarded as troubling, but not as
proven. The Soviets, of course, have no business there. They should simply get
out.

Chemical warfare in Indochina is a separate question. Chemicals have apparently
been used against the hill people, but the evidence seems weaker on Soviet
complicity, and on mycotoxins as the agent.  Indeed, the two elements work
against each other, since mycotoxins might be chosen by a government of limited
technical sophistication and their presence in samples does not buttress the
case for Soviet involvement.

It is a long leap from this to U.S. production of binary munitions. Both we and
the Soviets have stocks of nerve agent. No one at all has a reliable estimate on
Soviet stocks. Mr. Kester may have more precise information than I on U.S.
stocks, both here and in Germany, but recent testimony before the Congress is
that they are substantial and usable. The Soviets could hardly expect that first
use by them of poison gas would be ''cost free.''

German opinion is negative toward nerve gas production. The Bonn Government is
satisfied that the present military posture is an effective deterrent to Soviet
first use and would not want more gas on its territory. Certainly, before we
produce more nerve gas, we should thoroughly discuss it with the ally
principally concerned.  The mishandling by the last two Administrations of the
neutron bomb should have taught us this lesson.

The Administration is correct in pressing the U.S. investigation of Afghanistan
and Indochina. But it should parallel its proposal on nerve gas production with
a renewed effort to negotiate a treaty leading through verified stages to the
complete elimination of chemical weapons.  JAMES F. LEONARD Washington, March 8,
1982

The writer, chairman of the Committee for National Security, is a former U.S.
representative in negotiations on chemical weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 17, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WHY AMERICA MISSED THE 'COMPETITIVE BUS'

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 249 words


To the Editor:

Rudy L. Ruggles Jr. and Vijay Kumar (''The Dark Side of Ford's Contract,'' Op-Ed
March 1) point up problems with the arrangements that mainly illustrate the old
saw that when labor and management go to bed together, the customers get raped.
There is much more to it.

For decades, the U.S. provided ever higher real income by raising productivity,
and it did that to a large extent by technological innovation. For instance, new
materials-handling equipment was importantly responsible for the great post-1945
productivity surge.  By contrast, the U.S. appears to have missed the
competitive bus on robots and fifth-generation computers, the latest potential
great leaps forward.

After military expenditures soared in the wake of President Kennedy's alleged
missile gap and the Vietnam War, innovation that might have fueled continuing
progress dried up, and war-caused inflation soon reached levels for which no
reasonably sensible technical developments could compensate. That started the
great industrial slide and our losses to competitors like Japan and Germany,
which did not join in the technical-economic potlatch.

There is today no U.S. capability for the ''creative destruction'' of obsolete
industries mentioned by the authors. Alas, when Joseph Schumpeter coined that
phrase he mainly meant the flexible and creative response of U.S. capitalism.
Those were the days!
JOHN E. ULLMANN, Professor of Management, Hofstra University Hempstead, L.I.,
March 1, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 17, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
Reagan's Failing Tactics

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 924 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 16


You can always tell when an administration is drifting into serious trouble when
the President begins hitting the road, attacking Congress and blaming his
problems on the press.  It's a sure sign that the first-year political honeymoon
is over.

In his latest trip down South, Mr. Reagan denounced what he called the
''propaganda campaign'' of his critics on Capitol Hill, and characterized them
as ''big spenders'' and ''parade walkers who march out to denounce the projected
deficit on television, and then slip back behind closed doors to bust the budget
in their committees.''

Complaining of reports in newspapers and on television about the coverage of the
war in El Salvador, the President said in an interview with TV Guide magazine
that ''There has been a kind of editorial slant that has something almost of the
Vietnam syndrome, which challenges what we are doing there (in Central
America).''

He appealed to reporters to ''trust us and put themselves in our hands'' when
dealing with sensitive information that if published might embarrass the
Government. The response to this in Congress and the press has not been
excessively enthusiastic.

In Montgomery, Ala., Mr. Reagan went back to one of his favorite campaign
tactics of attacking Washington, as if he were still opposing the Government he
now represents.

''As long as I can cross the Potomac River,'' he said, ''and get out here with
the real people, I'll keep the faith.'' This line of argument is beginning to
spread through the Cabinet and the White House staff. When President Brezhnev of
the Soviet Union proposed to withdraw his medium-range missiles from Eastern
Europe if the U.S. would agree not to put new modern missiles in Western Europe
next year, Ed Meese, the President's counselor, said this was like a football
team, ahead 50-0, proposing to freeze the score at that point in the third
quarter.

And when Mr. Meese was asked whether the C.I.A. was using subversive warfare
against Nicaragua, which the U.S. is committed by treaty not to do, he replied
that he didn't discuss such things.

The point is not that the Administration is wrong to defend its policies or
oppose its opponents or its allies when it thinks they're wrong, but whether,
needing the support of both, this is the most effective way to get it.

Ronald Reagan is at his very best when he addresses serious subjects in a
prepared speech, as he did last November in his first major statement on the
control of nuclear weapons. He is at his worst when he reverts to his old
campaign style at Republican rallies and tries to substitute his amiable
personality, his old familiar anecdotes and partisan ridicule for carefully
constructed explanations of his policies.

This is particularly true on the problem of dealing with the rising mass
protests against the nuclear arms race. Actually, Ed Meese is quite right in
suggesting that Brezhnev wants to freeze the present nuclear balance when the
Soviet Union is ahead, for even if Moscow withdrew all its medium-range missiles
behind the Ural Mountains, it would still be able to hit every European capital
from there.

But this subject is so serious and complicated that it has to be explained and
not merely dismissed by casual remarks. For in addition to the world economic
crisis, it is likely to be the prevailing issue in allied and East-West
relations for the rest of the decade, and maybe the rest of the century.

Anybody who wonders why hundreds of thousands of people have been protesting in
the streets of Europe against the nuclear arms race, or why this mass movement
is now spreading in the churches, universities and even meetings in the U.S.,
should read Jonathan Schell's startling series of articles in recent issues of
The New Yorker magazine, soon to be published by Alfred A. Knopf under the title
of ''The Fate of the Earth.''

It addresses a worldwide fear. No government in the free world favors a freeze
on nuclear weapons at the present level of terror, but no government, including
the United States, is likely to get consent for present nuclear policies unless
it deals with this rising human uproar against them.

This is especially true as opposition grows in the United States against the
Reagan military policies, Al Haig's mystifying clarifications of Central
American policy and the Administration's cuts in taxes, social benefits for the
poor and student aid.

A coalition of forces is gathering here against the Administration, not because
of but in spite of the clumsy Democrats. The President is trying to tough it out
in the conviction that he's right and the opposition is wrong, even including
his old buddies in Big Business, who are no longer laughing much at his jokes.
The President is not trying to educate the public on these complicated questions
or trying to persuade his critics in Congress and the country. Instead he is
playing confrontation politics at home and abroad and evading the deeper
philosophical questions with glib one-liners on television.

The trouble is that this device is not working. It is not reducing the
opposition to the President's policies but increasing it, and even Ed Meese
agrees in private that the President must and will soon begin to speak out in a
different way.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 17, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'IT WAS A MOST UNUSUAL COOKING CLASS'

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1195 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Eileen Yin-Fei Lo teaches and writes about Chinese cooking and is the author of
''The Dim Sum Book: Classic Recipes From the Chinese Teahouse.''

By EILEEN YIN-FEI LO

MIN FENG CHANG is a Buddhist and would not eat beef. Mahboob Ahmad is a Moslem
and would not eat pork. The whole class was appalled at the very idea of eating
cheese. ''Olive'' was an unknown, a word to confound when it was looked up in
the English-Chinese dictionary.

It was indeed a most unusual cooking class. Held in a Brooklyn high school
classroom, it consisted of recent immigrants, mostly teenagers, from China, Hong
Kong and Taiwan, with a few from Vietnam and a smattering from Afghanistan and
Pakistan.

All were from families in which both parents work. Few spoke English, and those
who did were able to manage only a few words.  Most speak Cantonese, the
language of southern China, the language of my childhood, which was why I was
asked to be the teacher.

The cooking class, arranged between the China Institute in America here and the
Cultural Voucher Program of Museums Collaborative, was to concern itself with
non-Chinese cooking and was designed to be culturally educational. The aim was
to deal with unfamiliar food, to offer new tastes, to instruct in shopping for
basic items in supermarkets so the students could assist their parents.

Museums Collaborative is a private, nonprofit organization founded in 1970 to
promote broader public understanding and use of the city's cultural
institutions. Communities receive ''vouchers'' with which to ''purchase''
educational services and programs of their choice. That morning I was vouchered.

The class, at Junior High School 220, at 4812 Ninth Avenue, consisted of sixth,
seventh and eighth graders, grouped according to their ability to understand
English. Their teacher, Dianne Mortensen, told the class: ''This is Miss Lo. We
are all going to go shopping.'' Off we went to a local supermarket.

First we visited the vegetable section and discussed how to test for crispness
and what to look for in freshness. ''Choose the best,'' I said, repeating what I
remember an aunt telling me when I was young. ''Choose as you would a
son-in-law.'' When that was reiterated in Cantonese there was quite a bit of
laughter.

We bought parsley, celery, green peppers, onions and carrots, then stopped at
the meat counter to pick up a pork bone that was to be the base for tomato
sauce.

''I cannot eat pork,'' Mahboob Ahmad said. My reply was, ''All right, then we
won't use it.'' The need to work in a limited time forced us away from fresh
tomatoes for our sauce, so we bought cans of tomato sauce, which offered an
opportunity for an explanation of the difference between tomatoes, sauces and
purees. We bought two boxes of pasta, some eggs, breadcrumbs, grated Parmesan
cheese and a chunk of mozzarella cheese.

From my larder at home we would use chicken cutlets, ground beef, fresh ginger,
garlic, soy sauce, oyster sauce, sesame oil, flour, salt, pepper, sugar, peanut
oil and white wine.

After about 45 minutes at the supermarket we marched back to the school. Then we
set to work writing recipes - which the students were told was the most fun -
for spaghetti sauce with Italian meatballs, for stir-fried chicken with
vegetables and for chicken cutlets Parmesan, a selection that seemed to offer
enough variety and spice.

All the ingredients were listed on the blackboard in Chinese calligraphy and
then Miss Mortensen asked the students to translate them into English. When
''meatballs'' was reached, Min Feng Chang said she would not eat beef, so she
and Ahmad were told that the stir-fried chicken was for them.

Min Feng, smiling, replied: ''I don't have to eat. It's fun to learn.'' Told
that the recipes could be made with veal as well, she said: ''My parents
wouldn't eat it anyway. They won't eat anything but Chinese food. They wouldn't
even taste.''

''When you're older, have a party, make spaghetti and veal meatballs and have
fun with your parents,'' she was advised, and she smiled again.

First the meatballs. To the chopped meat were added eggs, breadcrumbs, parsley,
salt and pepper, sugar, oyster sauce, soy sauce, sesame oil and ginger juice
(they were, after all, Italian meatballs with a Chinese accent). Then students
took turns kneading the ingredients together. They didn't want to touch them
until they were told, ''That's food!'' and were shown how it is done.

Soon they were fashioning meatballs of varying sizes and shapes, all of which
went in a pot into which the tomato sauce had been poured. While the meatballs
were cooking and the sauce was brewing, the students learned how to shred
vegetables and to slice the chicken into slivers for stir frying.

Some of the chicken was carefully cleaned of fat and membrane and pounded thin -
the students liked that - for the chicken cutlets Parmesan, an adaptation of
sorts of an Italian recipe. The students had no trouble with ''Italian'' or
''chicken'' in their dictionaries, but ''Parmesan'' was not to be found. Tried
phonetically in Cantonese, ''Parmesan'' becomes, somewhat loosely, ''pah mah
jon,'' three characters that literally translate into ''one of many things,''
''sesame'' and ''warehouse.'' The students exploded in laughter; it was a funny
name for a food.

The cutlets were dipped in egg and flour, fried lightly in peanut oil, placed in
a baking dish and covered with slices of mozzarella.  Virtually all the students
showed disgust over the idea of cheese since dairy products are uncommon, and
often nonexistent, in much of Asia.

''Smell it,'' they were urged. ''It's like pizza cheese. You all eat pizza don't
you?'' Most nodded. Small bits were offered around.  After some hesitant
tasting, some said they liked it and some did not.

The cutlets went into the oven and the rest of the chicken was stir fried with
shredded vegetables. Soon all the food was ready. The pasta was cooked, but
without an explanation of ''al dente''; the sauce was rich with the meat and
parsley and oil; the cutlets were baked.

Except for those who would eat neither pork nor beef everyone ate everything.
They all even ate cheese. Miss Mortensen commented that for the cheese
experience alone the class had been a success. ''I don't think any of the
Vietnamese ever even looked at cheese before,'' she said.

Finally, each student came up to expressed thanks. The thanks should have been
extended to them: I enjoyed it so much because they enjoyed it so much. What
made the experiment successful is that they saw me, Chinese like most of them,
eat all those things too, and it imparted a warm feeling, some confidence and,
ultimately, the courage to taste even a piece of cheese.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Eileen Yin-Fei Lo teaching Chinese cooking

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR REBELS: FIVE-SIDED ALLIANCE SEARCHING FOR NEW,;
MODERATE IMAGE;
The leaders in profile, page A16.

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3313 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, March 15


The five guerrilla groups that are fighting to topple El Salvador's
civilian-military junta are headed by Marxists who now say they are ready to
accept a negotiated settlement instead of holding out for a socialist
revolution.

In recent weeks, they have drawn up a peace plan that is more moderate than any
previous leftist platform. It includes an offer to preserve the
''institutionality'' of the Salvadoran armed forces and to form a broad-based
government that would lead the country to ''democratic'' elections.

In scores of interviews in Mexico and Nicaragua, senior rebel commanders have
denied that their objective is to install a Marxist-Leninist regime.

Arms Supplied by Cuba

Yet the guerrillas acknowledge that, in the past, they received arms from Cuba
through Nicaragua, as the Reagan Administration maintains.

Whatever their present position, the guerrillas' own past radicalism raises the
possibility that, as Marxists, they would try to subvert and seek control of any
regime that might emerge from negotiations.

Further, there is the example of Nicaragua's Sandinists, who before their 1979
victory over the regime of Gen. Anastasio Somoza Debayle also pledged to hold
early elections and restore democracy. They have since tightened their political
grip over the country.

Questions About Guerrillas

So as support for the idea of negotiations grows, the Salvadoran guerrillas
themselves are coming under closer scrutiny. Who exactly are they? What do they
want? Can they be trusted to live up to their word?

The guerrillas insist that their political transformation is genuine and that
their alliance with democratic forces is not merely strategic. ''The Sandinists
won an outright victory because Somoza's National Guard collapsed,'' one rebel
leader said. ''We're willing to make concessions in a negotiated solution before
the Salvadoran Army collapses.''

They also point out that their new negotiating stance is based on the realistic
premises that a military victory by either side is unlikely and that any future
Salvadoran government will need to be accepted and supported by the
international community, including the United States, if it is to survive.

A Push Toward Negotiations

The United States and the Salvadoran junta have repeatedly rejected past
opposition calls for negotiations, but the guerrillas are now hopeful that both
the military stalemate and mounting international pressure could result in peace
talks after the elections for a constituent assembly in El Salvador, scheduled
for March 28.

The guerrillas' present military actions therefore appear aimed at forcing the
United States to accept a negotiated settlement rather than at toppling the
Salvadoran junta. ''We see the offensive as consolidating our military position
for negotiations,'' Ferman Cienfuegos, a member of the rebels' five-member
general command, said, recalling the Reagan Administration's vow not to grant
the rebels concessions at the negotiating table that they could not win on the
battlefield.

Rebel Groups Join Forces

To achieve their aims, the guerrillas have joined forces in the Farabundo Marti
National Liberation Front, but the fact that five different groups exist is a
reflection of the sharp disagreements over ideology and strategy that
characterized the Salvadoran insurgency movement in the 1970's.

Even before then, the impact of the Cuban revolution and the example of leftist
guerrillas elsewhere in Latin America had sowed tensions inside the Salvadoran
Communist Party, which had rejected the armed struggle in favor of electoral
alliances with Social Democrats and Christian Democrats.

Finally, in 1970, the party's secretary general, Salvador Cayetano Carpio, led a
walkout of militant youths, who formed the country's first guerrilla unit, the
Popular Forces of Liberation Farabundo Marti, taking the name of the Communist
leader who organized a peasant insurrection that was crushed with the loss of
some 20,000 lives in 1932.

In 1972, a group of Maoist university students and radical Christian Democrats
formed the People's Revolutionary Army, partly in response to fraudulent
elections that year. Three years later, a bitter feud erupted inside the group,
leading to the ''execution'' for ''treason'' of the revolutionary poet Roque
Dalton and prompting other dissidents to create the Armed Forces of National
Resistance.
pu first & last add

A Change in Strategy

By 1975, three guerrilla groups were active in El Salvador, although they were
barely on speaking terms, The police would later distinguish them by referring
to the Popular Forces of Liberation as the ''pistoleros,'' or gunmen, the
People's Revolutionary Army as the ''bomberos,'' or bombers, and the National
Resistance as the ''pisteros,'' or money-chasers, because of the huge war chest
they had built up from assaults and kidnappings.

During the second half of the decade, however, the groups gradually concluded
that their strategy of bombings, assassinations and kidnappings for ransom was
isolating them from the population and they decided instead to sponsor ''mass
organizations'' of students, peasants, workers and slum-dwellers.

The guerrilla leaders remained firmly committed to a Marxist-Leninist
revolution, but they stayed in the shadows, using their political fronts to
address the concrete demands of the poor, such as wage increases, cheaper food
and improved public transport.  As the regime moved violently against strikes,
street marches and occupations of foreign embassies, the ''mass organizations''
began to radicalize on their own.

Several peasant groups belonging to the new political fronts had been organized
by liberal Roman Catholic priests. And, as the army turned against both the
peasants and the priests, an important sector of the church, led by Archibishop
Oscar Arnulfo Romero of San Salvador, began to denounce human rights violations
by the regime.

A Class Struggle Erupts

By early 1979, it was apparent that the ''mass organizations'' were more
successful in destabilizing the military regime than were isolated acts of
terrorism. In less than a decade, a genuine class struggle had also erupted in
which those fighting for ''la revolucion'' were mainly devout Roman Catholic
peasants and workers who had no more knowledge of Marxism than that provided by
a handful of ''anti-imperialist'' slogans.

But in the second half of 1979 two events threw the left into disarray. In July,
the Nicaraguan revolution convinced some Salvadoran guerrillas that they too
were ready to seize power through a popular insurrection. And in October, young
army officers overthrew Gen. Carlos Humberto Romero and promised sweeping social
changes, prompting other leftists to cooperate with the new regime.

By January 1980, though, reformist officers had ceded power to the conservative
army high command and the leftists resigned from the Government in protest at
the repeated postponement of the promised changes. The guerrillas thought that
once again the revolutionary path seemed justified.

For 1980 the Marxist left therefore set itself the tasks of uniting the
guerrilla groups and forming an alliance with democratic sectors that had
reluctantly accepted the need for the armed struggle.

Within weeks, a new Democratic Revolutionary Front was formed, linking the
''mass organizations'' of the three guerrilla groups with the social democratic
Nationalist Revolutionary Movement and the Popular Social Christian Movement,
which was made up of Christian Democrats who objected to their party's decision
to join the armydominated Government.

Military Actions Are Stressed

During the year, though, the dramatic increase in rightist terrorism, marked by
the murder of Archbishop Romero and the top leadership of the Democratic
Revolutionary Front, reduced the room for political activities and prompted the
guerrillas to emphasize military actions.

But the rebel groups were torn by internal differences. Early in 1980, the
Communist Party had endorsed the armed struggle for the first time, while a new
group, the Revolutionary Party of Central American Workers, had appeared on the
scene in late 1979. Of the three other movements, National Resistance favored
support for a coup by more liberal members of the army, the People's
Revolutionary Army called for an early insurrection and the Popular Forces of
Liberation insisted on continuing a Vietnam-style ''prolonged popular war.''

Adding to the disarray were the rebels' allies in Cuba and Nicaragua who, as
successful revolutionaries, felt qualified to offer advice. But while their aid
and support were welcomed, their influence over the Salvadoran guerrillas proved
limited.

Unlike Nicaragua's Sandinists, whose propaganda campaign abroad was crucial in
undermining support for the Somoza regime, El Salvador's guerrillas had
traditionally been inward-looking. And because the Communist Party had long been
the sole representative of the Salvadoran left in Moscow and Havana, the rebels
owed little to the Soviet bloc.

Moscow Viewed With Suspicion

Only after the Sandinists' first, unsuccessful insurrection in mid-1978, in
fact, did the Cuban Government of President Fidel Castro renew its interest in
the revolutionary potential of Central America. But in El Salvador, at least,
Cuban officials encountered a strongly nationalistic guerrilla movement that was
not inclined to take orders from abroad

With the exception of the Communist Party, all groups viewed Moscow with
suspicion, while the People's Revolutionary Army, with its pro-Chinese roots,
was openly critical of Havana, on one occasion even seeking support in
Yugoslavia on the ground that it was anti-Cuban.

By October 1980, however, the left's relations with Havana had warmed and
President Castro reportedly played a role in unifying the five guerrilla groups
in the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, now known by its Spanish
initials of F.M.L.N.

Until then, President Castro, while endorsing the general idea of an armed
revolution, had backed the National Resistance's strategy of promoting another
army coup by Col. Adolfo Arnoldo Majano, a liberal who was then a member of the
junta. But Colonel Majano was outmaneuvered by the Defense Minister, Gen. Jose
Guillermo Garcia, and the idea fell through.

By late 1980, most of the rebels were determined to launch a major bid for
power. And finally, the guerrillas now concede, Cuba agreed to supply them with
the necessary armaments - many of them transshipped through Nicaragua - to
enable them to open their ''final offensive'' on January 10, 1981, just days
before President Reagan took office. The guerrillas say that the supply of arms
from Cuba has since been halted.

Strategy Is Again Revised

In political terms, the offensive was a spectacular failure since it sparked no
general insurrection, although the guerrillas suffered few casualties. But it
did prompt them to redesign their strategy yet again. They called for a
negotiated solution to the war at the same time as they rebuilt their military
strength in mountain havens.

The success of their new political offensive, though, depended on their
surviving militarily. And only after they held off numerous army offensives and
began to strike out with a campaign of ''economic sabotage'' against bridges,
railroads and electricity supplies did support for negotiations begin to grow
abroad as an alternative to a prolonged war or direct American intervention.

One important consequence of the decision to seek negotiations was a change in
the relationship between the Liberation Front and the Democratic Revolutionary
Front, known as the F.D.R., which had been reduced to its democratic components
by the dismantling of the ''mass organizations'' by the army.

Unable to act politically in El Salvador because of repression and with no
''democratic'' guerrilla force of its own, the Revolutionary Front held the key
to support from Western governments and political parties who could press the
United States to accept a negotiated solution.

The social democratic president of the F.D.R., Guillermo Manuel Ungo, for
example, was able to open doors to the leaders of Mexico and France, who last
August responded by recognizing the coalition as ''a representative political
force.'' His party's membership of the Socialist International also mobilized
support for the Salvadoran opposition within that social democratic movement.

Rebels' Position Moderated

As a result, within the coalition, Mr. Ungo's voice began to be heard and, using
his enormous political experience to advantage, he was able to convince the
guerrillas of the need to moderate their positions. To some he even became known
as the ''sixth comandante.''

Early last year, for example, the Liberation Front was still fighting for
installation of a more radical ''democratic revolutionary government'' and
insisted on negotiating only with the United States on the ground that it alone
was sustaining the Salvadoran junta.

But by last October, in an address to the United Nations General Assembly, the
coordinator of Nicaragua's ruling junta, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, announced the
willingness of both the guerrilla Liberation Front and Mr. Ungo's F.D.R. to
negotiate directly with the junta, demanding that the talks be ''witnessed'' by
foreign governments and that the Salvadoran people be kept informed of their
progress.

In the lengthy and often-heated internal debate that followed, the coalition's
peace plan was thrashed out, with the more moderate approach favored by the
F.D.R. and the People's Revolutionary Army prevailing over the radicalism of the
Popular Forces of Liberation, which in the end accepted the majority view.

Coalition Tests Its Ideas

For the moment, the F.M.L.N.-F.D.R. has chosen not to formalize its proposals to
avoid being rebuffed by Washington or the Salvadoran junta before the
''failure,'' in its words, of the March 28 elections. But it has begun testing
its ideas on sympathetic governments, among them those of Cuba, Nicaragua,
Mexico and France.

In essence, the coalition is now proposing:

- The formation of a broad-based interim government that would include
representatives of the army, conservative political parties and the private
sector as well as of the F.M.L.N. and the F.D.R., with no single group
exercising control,

- The holding of a plebiscite to ratify this government within six months of its
formation followed by early municipal elections and adoption of a democratic
electoral law to guide full-scale elections.

- The preservation of the ''institutionality'' of the army, which would ''purge
itself'' of officers blamed for the current repression and would subsequently
incorporate elements of the guerrillas.

- The completion of the land redistribution plan and banking nationalization
initiated by the junta, respect for existing foreign investment and the drawing
up of regulations for new investment

- The adoption of a nonaligned foreign policy, with special emphasis on
maintaining friendly relations with the United States Once serious negotiations
have begun, the coalition believes a cease-fire can be worked out.  ''What we're
suggesting is not necessarily what they have to accept,'' said Ana-Guadalupe
Martinez, a 28-year-old leader of the People's Revolutionary Army. ''We're
simply addressing the central points that have to be discussed, but everything
is subject to negotiation.''

'Self-Purged' Army Supported

Perhaps the most surprising feature of the opposition's proposals is its
willingness to accept the ''institutionality'' of an army that has traditionally
defended the interests of a tiny ruling minority and against which the rebels
have been fighting for over a decade.

But Roberto Roca, who heads the Revolutionary Party of Central American Workers,
argued that if a ''self-purged'' army could become a guarantor of the democratic
process, a nonviolent political struggle could then take place. ''We took up
arms because the political struggle was not possible in El Salvador,'' he said.
''If there is political pluralism, there's no need for the military struggle.''

Significantly, many Western diplomats in Central America believe that a
negotiated solution offers the best hope of preserving the political influence
of such democrats as Mr. Ungo and the Social Christian leader, Ruben Zamora.
Similarly, they argue that the failure of negotiations would strengthen
guerrilla sectors that favor a ''prolonged popular war''.

For the moment, though, while the war goes on, the opposition is still dominated
by the five top guerrilla commanders.  The five are Salvador Cayetano Carpio,
the 62-year-old leader of the Popular Forces of Liberation; Joaquin Villalobos,
30, the head of the People's Revolutionary Army; Ferman Cienfuegos, 35, the
leader of National Resistance; Jorge Shafick Handal, 51, leader of the
Salvadoran Communist Party, and Roberto Roca, 34, leader of the Revolutionary
Party of Central American Workers.

U.S. Rebuffs Guerrilla Chiefs

All five men profess to be Marxists, but they stress that their Marxism is
leavened by nationalism and pragmatism and comfortably accommodates the strong
Roman Catholicism of most of their followers. And they insist that the closer
they have come to power, the more realistic their positions have become.

Although the two older commanders - Mr. Carpio and Mr. Handal - have visited
Moscow and the three younger men have spent time in Cuba, only recently have
they begun to travel regularly. Nicaragua has become a useful meeting place, but
they also appear frequently in Mexico and Panama for talks with foreign
diplomats and politicians.

Some commanders have even offered to visit Washington to explain their position,
but they have been rebuffed. Their greatest challenge, though, remains how to
convince the Reagan Administration that a negotiated solution will not pose a
threat to United States security interests. ''Our negotiating position
guarantees that,'' noted Mr. Roca. ''The best guarantee is to avoid the total
defeat of the army. And we're calling for negotiations before the collapse of
the army.''

In private, they also argue the need for a genuinely nonaligned foreign policy
and criticize Nicaragua's decision to echo the position of Cuba on most foreign
policy issues. ''We don't want an isolated regime that is under constant attack
from abroad,'' one rebel leader said. ''We want democracy and stability and
we'll want help from abroad.''

But the strongest assurance of political pluralism, the guerrillas maintain, is
the broad spectrum of Marxist and democratic views represented in the
opposition. ''We're an expression of this pluralism,'' Mr. Roca said. ''Our new
society cannot be built under the domination of one political force.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SKETCHES OF LEADERS OF SALVADORAN OPPOSITION FACTION

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


Salvador Cayetano Carpio Leader of the Popular Forces of Liberation. A legendary
figure who is frequently called El Salvador's Ho Chi Minh, Mr. Carpio was born
into a poor San Salvador family and entered politics as a labor organizer. He
joined the Communist Party at the age of 28, eventually becoming its secretary
general, but resigning in 1970 when it refused to take up arms. A decade later,
the party followed his example by backing armed revolution. The 62-year-old Mr.
Carpio, who has adopted the nom de guerre of Marcial, is considered the most
orthodox Marxist-Leninist in the general command and the least enthusiastic over
the prospect of a negotiated settlement.
Joaquin Villalobos Leader of the People's Revolutionary Army. Born into a
middle-class family in San Salvador, the 30-year-old Mr. Villalobos studied
economics for three years at the National University of El Salvador before
dropping out to join the guerrillas. He became the leader of his group in 1977.
Although the People's Revolutionary Army has demonstrated ideological
inconsistency, it is the strongest military force among the guerrillas. Mr.
Villalobops is considered a skilled military strategist and a political
pragmatist.
Ferman Cienfuegos Leader of National Resistance. Born in Costa Rica of a
Salvadoran mother of middle-class background, Mr. Cienfuegos -his real name is
Eduardo Sancho Castaneda - attended a Jesuit-run high school in San Salvador
before participating in student politics. After working briefly as a history
teacher, he joined the People's Revolutionary Army and remained a member until
National Resistance was formed in 1975. When its leader, Ernesto Jovel, was
killed in a plane crash in 1980, he became its commander in chief. The
35-year-old Mr.  Cienfuegos is regarded as a moderate who favors links with
non-Marxist sectors.
Jorge Shafick Handal Leader of the Salvadoran Communist Party. The son of
Palestine Christian immigrants from Bethlehem, Mr. Handal was born in the
eastern Salvadoran city of Usulutan and joined the Communist Party at the age of
20 while studying law at the National University. Much of his life has been
spent in hiding, exile or jail, but after succeeding Mr. Carpio as the party's
secretary general in 1972 he formed alliances with Social Democrats and
Christian Democrats for the 1972 and 1977 elections, which were won by the
army's candidate in voting marked by widespread fraud. After the party endorsed
the armed struggle in 1980, Mr. Handal traveled to Eastern Europe and Vietnam in
search of military support, but the party still has few men in arms. A loyal
follower of the Moscow line, the 51-year-old Mr. Handal is said to favor a
political solution since his party's strength lies in union organizing rather
than guerrilla warfare.
Roberto Roca Leader of the Revolutionary Party of Central American Workers. Born
in Usulutan of middle-class parents, Mr. Roca - an assumed name; his real name
is not known -emerged first as a student leader, then dedicated several years to
the formation of his party as a regional movement. Only in El Salvador has it
flourished, although it remains the smallest group in the guerrilla movement.
The 34-year-old Mr.  Roca is considered a political realist and a strong
advocate of negotiations
Ruben Zamora A member of the political and diplomatic commission of the
Democratic Revolutionary Front and a representative of the political arm of the
guerrillas' Farabundo Marti Liberation Front. Mr. Zamora, who is now living in
Mexico, was one of two guerrilla representatives - the other was Francisco
Altschul - who went to Washington to meet with State Department officials last
December. As a spokesman for the guerrillas, Mr. Zamora has presented their
objections to the March elections, which he says will not be free.
Guillermo Manuel Ungo President of the Democratic Revolutionary Front. Born into
an uppermiddle-c lass family in San Salvador, he attended a Roman Catholic high
school before being sent by his father to the University of Pittsburg to study
printing so that he could take over his father's printing plant. But on
returning to El Salvador in 1952, he decided to study law at the National
University and it was there that he first became active in politics. In 1972,
Mr. Ungo ran for Vice President on a ticket headed by Jose Napoleon Duarte, the
Christian Democrat who is now President of the ruling civilian-military junta.
Although they won easily, the army refused to recognize their victory and both
men were exiled. The 50-year-old Mr. Ungo opposes the March elections.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of each of belowmentioned Salvadoran leaders

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DANCE: JOANNA BOYCE' 'COMING OF AGE'

BYLINE: By Jack Anderson

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 425 words


JOHANNA BOYCE is known for dances that, though gamelike, are by no means
trivial, for their underlying earnestness makes one suspect that she regards
dancing as a moral, as well as a physical, good.  Earlier this season, in a
collaboration with Arnie Zane, she raised questions of moral responsibility. And
in her new ''Incidents (in Coming of Age),'' presented Sunday afternoon in the
Bessie Schonberg Theater, she has tried to tell a moral tale.

But ''Incidents'' also contained games for Miss Boyce, Margot Perron and Robbyn
Scott, who jumped, tumbled, tossed balls and balanced cups. These games were
totally fantastic. Yet they did convey a sense of actual children at play and Y.
Polly Pen's music was reminiscent of children's songs.

That was as it should have been, for ''Incidents'' was danced autobiography.
Miss Boyce reminisced about growing up in Vermont, and showed family snapshots,
including charming photos of her pet dogs.  Recorded voices read family letters.
Most concerned everyday life.  But others were from a brother who served in
Vietnam, and in one scene, as he recounted wartime experiences, the women in the
cast fussed with handbags. Later, they became warriors themselves. But they soon
turned pacific and gently passed a flower about.

That scene juxtaposed conventional notions of male and female behavior and the
psychology-textbook quotations about gender differences that Bob Gober read at
various points treated the same theme. These statements, often pedantic,
arrogant and even insulting, emphasized that boys and girls are raised in
different ways and, presumably, the stage action questioned whether all these
differences were desirable.

Nevertheless, it was sometimes hard to tell what Miss Boyce had in mind for,
despite the funny and touching things she told us of her past, she never quite
made clear just how particular events shaped her life.

And the fatuous textbook statements permitted Miss Boyce to evade issues
because, by quoting the texts, even in disapproval, she was relieved of the
necessity of drawing her own conclusions about her background. Nevertheless, one
always felt that here was a mind at work.

That alone makes Miss Boyce remarkable. Her choreographic thoughts may not be
fully formed at times. Yet it is always interesting to watch those thoughts in
motion.  Jack Anderson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN EVOKING RISING CONCERN, NEW POLL SHOWS

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1564 words


The American public generally disagrees with President Reagan's unyielding
budget positions on taxes and arms spending and is registering sharply increased
concern about his foreign policy record, according to the latest New York
Times/CBS News Poll.

The poll indicates that four of five Americans consider the budget deficit for
the fiscal year 1983, projected at $91.5 billion, as ''something we should worry
about.''

Differing with the President in two budget areas that Mr. Reagan has insisted
are untouchable, those polled, by a margin of 53 percent to 32 percent, favored
eliminating a 10 percent cut in Federal income taxes that is to take effect in
July while a plurality, 49 percent to 41 percent, backed a reduction in Pentagon
spending.

New Cuts in Aid to Poor Rejected

In addition, the respondents, by a 2-to-1 ratio, rejected further reductions in
Federal programs designed to aid the poor. This is one area of Federal spending
in which Mr. Reagan's proposed 1983 budget now calls for further cuts and in
which he has invited Congress to make new reductions.

These key domestic disagreements are accompanied in the poll by increasing
dismay at Mr. Reagan's record in handling foreign policy.  One in six polled
expressed the fear that Mr. Reagan would get the United States into a war in El
Salvador or elsewhere in Central America. More broadly, 40 percent disapproved
his conduct of foreign affairs; 37 percent approved.

At the same time, approval of the President's job performance and confidence in
his economic program continued to slide. The latest poll, taken March 11-15,
shows 43 percent of those polled approving his handling of his job as President,
down from 49 percent in January, and 42 percent disapproving. Fifteen percent
had no opinion. Forty-eight percent of whites and 7 percent of blacks approved,
two new lows for Mr. Reagan.

Almost a year ago, 67 percent of those polled approved the way Mr.  Reagan was
handling his job, but that figure, in the Times/CBS News Poll of April 1981, was
almost surely affected by sympathy that followed the attempt on Mr. Reagan's
life.

His approval level now is a shade below President Carter's after a nearly equal
period in office, in April 1978, when 46 percent approved Mr. Carter's handling
of his job. Recent Presidents have tended to lose approval just a bit faster
than their predecessors; Mr. Reagan may be sliding more steeply than Mr. Carter,
who lost standing slightly faster than President Nixon, who, in turn, lost
public esteem more quickly than did President Johnson.

Unhappiness Over Economy

A similar decline was found in public confidence that the Reagan economic
program would eventually work. But here a majority still stuck with Mr. Reagan:
54 percent believed it would succeed, down from 60 percent in January.

Unhappiness with the economy, which grew most sharply among Republicans and
high-income respondents, appeared to account for the bulk of the Reagan decline.
Seventy percent of those polled identified some economic issue as the most
important problem, with about half of them citing unemployment.

But the results of the poll offered Mr. Reagan no incentive to turn to foreign
policy in search of increased political support. Even though only 9 percent of
those interviewed named some foreign issue as the nation's most important
problem, approval of his conduct of foreign policy fell precipitously.

The 37 percent of those polled who approved of his handling of foreign affairs
was a drop of 15 points from January's 52 percent.  That two-month period of
decline was marked by increased Administration concern, and increased news
coverage, regarding events in El Salvador and the elections in Guatemala, along
with growing protests against Central American policy in this country.

Fears on El Salvador

On some of his recent trips around the country, Mr. Reagan has been picketed
with warnings against greater United States involvement that compare the
military situation in El Salvador to the time preceding this nation's sending
troops to Vietnam. White House aides have acknowledged worry about the political
risk involved in that comparison, and they have begun criticizing newspapers and
television networks for what they depict as one-sided coverage that amplifies
those fears.

In several ways, this poll found support for Government efforts to aid the poor.
One key finding was that 56 percent said recipients of Aid to Families with
Dependent Children, the chief federally assisted welfare program, and users of
food stamps ''really need this help.'' Thirty-three percent said recipients
could get along without it.

On most questions relating to the poor, those with more money were less
sympathetic than the poor were. Among the entire sample, 37 percent said lack of
effort kept the poor in poverty, while 39 percent said outside circumstances
were more often to blame.  Thirty-one percent of people with incomes of $10,000
or less blamed lack of effort; 47 percent of those in the $40,000 bracket did
so.

Support on Transfers

One modestly bright spot in the poll for Mr. Reagan was approval of the concept
of transferring the handling of some major Federal programs, including aid to
dependent children and food stamps, from the Federal Government to the state
governments. This idea was supported, 54 percent to 36 percent, even though 76
percent of those polled believed it would cause state taxes to be increased.

But the poll gave no indication of great public interest in this concept, which
Mr. Reagan's Democratic foes have called a diversion from the troubled economy.
Only two of the 1,545 individuals polled by telephone, a man from Virginia and a
woman from Texas, identified Federal-state relations as the country's most
important problem.

Asked whether the Federal Government or the state governments were more
responsive, gave more value for tax dollars and had greater concern for the
poor, far more people in the poll believed that differences between the two
levels of government were insignificant than those who preferred either Federal
or state management.

Problem of the Budget

But the budget is Mr. Reagan's immediate problem. In recent travels, he has
insisted on his proposed levels of arms spending. In Cheyenne, Wyo., on March 2,
he said the alternative was ''American forces held together with chewing gum and
baling wire, unable to move for want of spare parts.''

In Nashville on Monday, he was equally firm on taxes, saying, ''The American
people have been promised tax relief. Last year the Congress passed tax relief,
and as long as I have any say in the matter, no one's going to take it away from
us.''

But those polled disagree. In all regions except the South, and in all standard
age and income groups, pluralities favored military reductions to help reduce
the Federal budget deficit.

A greater and comparably uniform consensus favored repealing the 10 percent tax
cut set for July. Support was strongest from the wealthy, with 58 percent of
those with family incomes of $40,000 or more favoring that course.

That same high-income group recorded a sharp decline in support for the
President's handling of the economy, from 67 percent in January to 52 percent
now. But in no standard demographic group did more respondents oppose
elimination of the July cut than supported it. The margins were even greater
when the respondents were asked if they favored reducing, not eliminating, the
tax cut.

Cutting Aid for the Poor

The most decisive answer in this series came to this question: ''To reduce the
size of the Federal deficit, would you be willing or not willing to have the
Government reduce proposed spending on programs for the poor?''

Just 29 percent said they would be willing, while 63 percent said they would
not. The only standard groups in which more than 40 percent favored such cuts
were Republicans (43 percent) and conservatives (41 percent).

One other deficit-cutting option, which the Administration has considered before
and says it is now considering for the future, is postponing cost-of-living
increases for Social Security recipients.  That was rejected by the poll
respondents, 57 percent to 37 percent.

Mr. Reagan, who argued again yesterday before the National Association of
Manufacturers that his program would bring long-range economic gains if given a
chance, still has far more Americans in agreement with him than in disagreement
on that issue.

But only 24 percent agree with his assertions that it has helped so far, down
from 32 percent in January. Fifty-three percent say it has hurt, but even that
group has not despaired. About two-fifths expect eventual improvement.

There is one economic measure on which Mr. Reagan comes out clearly ahead. When
the respondents were asked, ''Which President handled the economy better - Jimmy
Carter or Ronald Reagan?'' 45 percent said Mr. Reagan and 30 percent said Mr.
Carter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Adm. James D. Watkins, Gen. Charles A. Gabriel
table of poll results on public views on aid to the poor table of public
priorities of alternatives to reduce federal deficit

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE TWO SALVADORS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 18


With the approach of elections in El Salvador that could be critical to the
debate over increased American aid to that country, a gap appears to be widening
between the Reagan Administration's analysis of the Salvadoran situation and the
views of many moderate Salvadorans whom Washington's policy is ostensibly
designed to support.

In Washington, an almost total preoccupation with the role of ''outside'' forces
- Nicaraguan, Cuban or Soviet - has tended to cast the civil war as part of an
East-West struggle important to the strategic interests of the United States.

In El Salvador, the perspective is different. Two weeks of conversations there
with Salvadoran writers, artists, lawyers, business people and public officials
leave a reporter traveling between Washington and San Salvador with the feeling
that there are two El Salvador stories - if not two El Salvadors.

The Roots of the Crisis

Salvadoran intellectuals and professionals - including the psychiatrists and
psychologists who treat the unseen wounds of civil war - will talk readily about
the roots of the crisis and how to end it. But all request anonymity for fear of
violent retribution - sometimes not knowing whether it will come from the armed
left or the armed right.

Most well-educated people who have chosen to remain in El Salvador have
classmates, friends or relatives on the guerrilla side. Many also have ties to
prominent right-wing families who fled the country with the introduction of a
land redistribution program and the nationalization of banks and some
industries.

A poet who spoke with sympathy of intellectuals who had decided to back the
guerrillas was asked why he went one way and they went another.

He shrugged and said: ''I guess it is just something personal inside us. I was
not able to accept violence. They were.''

A Different Context

Discussions in El Salvador almost invariably take place within a completely
Salvadoran context. Salvadorans worry about the economic disruption that is
compounding problems brought on by recession, unemployment and overpopulation.
They worry about the effects of violence on children, particularly children who
have seen terrible atrocities.

Much of the talk is about bringing the political sides together before it is too
late; before two - or possibly three: left, right and center - conflicting
armies take the resolution of the conflict out of civilian hands.

Even among Salvadoran Government officials there is scant mention of foreign
involvement. Both the National Police and the Ministry of Defense play down
reports of captured Nicaraguans accused of being guerrillas. When pressed,
officials appear almost halfhearted in acknowledging outside subversion.

Although it is acknowledged that the insurgents have been supplied with weapons
from outside sources, opinions differ over the extent of that problem now.
''Guerrillas have been stockpiling weapons for years,'' a lawyer said. ''Where
they are getting more now is not really the issue.''

The Pursuit of Peace

The local, largely pro-Government press rarely dwells on the subject of foreign
involvement, leaving the international aspect of the crisis to news agency
reports from Washington.

Salvadoran officials appear to be under pressure from the Reagan Administration
to pursue this line more actively. But according to moderates in government and
many other Salvadorans, priority must go instead to ending the wartime killings
so that the deep roots of peacetime violence can be attacked.

Jose Napoleon Duarte, the President of El Salvador's governing junta, declared
last month that his country could live with the Sandinist regime in Nicaragua,
which he said he did not regard as a threat. He said that he disapproved of
reported United States plans to destabilize the Managua Government, saying that
''Nicaragua has to have the opportunity to fulfill its own revolution.''

''The solution here in El Salvador,'' Mr. Duarte said, ''is not military; it is
political.''

Vietnam Parallel Rejected

A writer and professor in San Salvador spoke with resentment of El Salvador's
being called ''another Vietnam.'' If Washington were not putting so much
emphasis on a military solution, according to some Salvadorans, opposition to
aiding El Salvador politically and economically would not be growing so fast in
the United States. Many Salvadorans speak bitterly of how their small, but to
them significant, successes in human rights and democratization are being
ignored or denied by Americans afraid of United States military involvement.

In the United States, opponents of continued aid to the Salvadoran Government
often appear to disregard the existence of a moderate, democratic center,
portraying the situation as a struggle between the leftist insurgents and the
Salvadoran armed forces, who are usually described as universal violators of
human rights.

Salvadorans, on the other hand, while not denying that there are abuses,
distinguish between units of the armed forces, some of which have made progress
in their treatment of civilians. They point as an example to the generally
highly regarded head of the National Police, Col. Carlos Reynaldo Lopez Nuila, a
lawyer by training who has by wide agreement brought about significant
improvements in the force's public image through new codes of conduct.

Rightist Victory Feared

The Salvadoran middle class is not united in its support of the junta's social
and economic changes. There are fears among political moderates in the
professions that business people may vote heavily for parties of the extreme
right in the March 28 elections for a constituent assembly.

The emergence of a rightist-dominated body charged with making the rules for
future legislative and presidential elections would quickly polarize Salvadoran
society, they say, causing many in the political center and center-left to flee.

Many Salvadorans still voice respect for political differences and express a
willingness to see the political left brought into discussions of the country's
future.

But there are also fears that as time passes the armed left's political
leadership will exert less and less influence over the guerrilla groups in the
field, who will want to dictate terms.

''Like marijuana,'' a poet said, ''the gun becomes a habit.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Salvadoran soilders

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
McCarthy Plans Bid To Regain Senate Seat

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 171 words

DATELINE: ST. PAUL, Minn., March 18


Eugene J. McCarthy, three times an unsuccessful Presidential candidate, set out
today to reclaim the United States Senate seat he gave up 12 years ago.

Mr. McCarthy, who will be 66 years old March 29, said he would seek the
endorsement of Minnesota's Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party and would run in the
Sept. 14 primary with or without party backing. He becomes the third Democrat in
the race for the seat now held by David Durenberger, a Republican. His opponents
for the nomination are Mark Dayton, a department store heir, and Grant Merritt,
a lawyer.

Mr. McCarthy gained national prominence in 1968 with a strong stand against the
Vietnam War. His Presidential campaign that year ended at the tumultuous
Democratic National Convention in Chicago, which nominated Hubert H. Humphrey.

After 12 years on the sidelines and further unsuccessful Presidential bids in
1972 and 1976, Mr. McCarthy said he felt he would be able to tell the Senate
where it had gone wrong.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Eugene McCarthy

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Seeing the World in Red and Yellow

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 691 words


The issue of yellow rain continues to bubble away, casting a miasma of doubt
over Soviet adherence to treaties on chemical and biological warfare, and
eroding American appetite for arms control treaties of any kind. But the
Administration, which defined the issue, has produced an astonishingly confusing
and incomplete set of evidence.

Refugees from Laos and Cambodia have long reported being attacked by a variety
of lethal chemicals, including one known as yellow rain. Last September the
State Department announced it had at last identified the poisons in yellow rain
as certain fungus-made toxins.  Facilities to manufacture them exist in the
Soviet Union but not in Southeast Asia, the department asserted.

Since the State Department case rested on analysis of material from a single
leaf and twig, further evidence was awaited with some eagerness. In November,
four more samples of yellow rain were produced. Like the first, they contained
fungal toxins in quantities measured in parts per million.

The department told a Senate committee that there was a perfect fit between the
symptoms reported by the refugees - itching, hemorrhaging and then rapid death -
and the known effects of the toxins in animals. Later, ABC News obtained a
sample of its own.

What does this evidence amount to? First, the numerous reports from refugees
strongly indicate that chemical weapons of some sort have been used. Yet the
Montagnards of Vietnam consistently claimed that deaths were caused by American
herbicides. Their reports were rightly rejected - the herbicides have no such
properties. The accounts from the refugees in Thailand may or may not be
reliable; they require the most careful evaluation. But assuming there are
deaths, could the fungal toxins of yellow rain be the cause?

From what is known so far, the answer is almost certainly no. The match between
the symptoms and known effects of the toxins is suggestive but far from perfect.
The toxins detected are present in such minute amounts that the possibility of a
lethal dose being delivered to a clothed human by yellow rain, as analyzed,
seems virtually nil. If yellow rain is lethal, it must be because of other
poisons it contains.

The fungus toxins so far identified account for a minute fraction of the
samples. Of what does the other 99.9 percent consist? Why has the Administration
been unable to perform a more complete chemical analysis? To rest one's case on
fungus toxins is to risk being unpleasantly surprised by whatever else the
substance contains.

Is the examined yellow rain authentic? Since the State Department declines to
say how it obtained its samples, the question is worth bearing in mind.

Is yellow rain a natural substance? Probably not, but the possibility cannot yet
be entirely dismissed; the man-made chemical detected in the ABC sample could
have come from the rubber stopper of the bottle in which it was carried.

Who could make yellow rain? If a graduate student at Rutgers University can
produce higher concentrations of toxin than those recorded in yellow rain, as a
recent letter on this page reported, it would seem that almost anyone could make
yellow rain. But for what purpose would they do so? To perplex the State
Department? As a kind of home-made poison against the rats that consume much of
the rice crop in Southeast Asia?

In offering conclusions on the basis of half-digested evidence, the State
Department risked placing itself in a false position as well as precluding
discovery of whatever agents are indeed being used against the populations of
Laos and Cambodia. The Administration is about to release a report on chemical
warfare that may clarify and extend what it knows about yellow rain. Should it
fail to do so, the wise course would be to appoint a panel of outside experts
competent to make sense of the available evidence, and direct the search for
more.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN APPOINTS 2 CHIEFS OF STAFF

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 339 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 18


President Reagan put his imprint on a majority of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
today by naming new chiefs for the Air Force and Navy.

At a brief White House ceremony, Mr. Reagan introduced Gen.  Charles A. Gabriel,
54 years old, as his choice for Air Force Chief of Staff and Adm. James D.
Watkins, 55, as his candidate for Chief of Naval Operations. Both men would take
office July 1.

On March 4 Mr. Reagan announced his decision to name Gen. John W.  Vessey Jr. of
the Army as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also effective July 1, to
replace Gen. David C. Jones.

If the nominations are all confirmed by the Senate, Mr. Reagan will have
installed three of the five members of the Joint Chiefs to replace senior
officers who are retiring. Next year, he will have an opportunity to choose new
chiefs for the Army and Marine Corps.

'Great Records in Service'

In presenting his nominees, the President praised them as having ''great records
in service to their country'' and said he would ''be seeking their advice at
every opportunity.''

General Gabriel, a fighter pilot in the Korean and Vietnam Wars, is now
commander of United States air forces in Europe.  Admiral Watkins, a Navy
propulsion expert and onetime submarine skipper, now commands the Pacific Fleet.
He has also commanded the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean.

Unlike General Vessey, who had been serving in relative obscurity as the Army's
vice chief of staff, General Gabriel and Admiral Watkins have figured
prominently in speculation for their posts.

2 Nominees Served Together

General Gabriel has already served closely with General Vessey. He was deputy
commander of United States forces in South Korea in the late 1970's while
General Vessey was commander there.

General Gabriel will replace Gen. Lew Allen Jr.; the Admiral will take over for
Adm. Thomas B. Hayward.  Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger recommended the
nominees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Adm. James D. Watkins (Page A1) Photo of Gen.
Charles A. Gabriel (Page A1) Photo of President Reagan with Adm. James D.
Watkins and Gen. Charles A. Gabriel

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
FIGHTER PILOT AT THE TOP

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 707 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 18


Gen. Charles A. Gabriel, the veteran fighter pilot nominated today to head the
Air Force, is ''a gentleman, very bright, very direct, has an ability to go
right to the heart of an issue,'' said

Lieut. Col. Lowell F.  McAdoo, a former aide.  ''He also has a sense of humor, a
real ability to laugh at himself,'' Colonel McAdoo said. ''I'm not surprised at
all that he was chosen Chief of Staff.''

''Charlie is a delightful person and - I guess this may be unusual for a
four-star General - very laid back,'' said Joseph Zengerle, a former assistant
Air Force Secretary who is now a Washington lawyer.  ''There's something
disarming about him. You can sit down and have a Coke with him. He had a casual
and genuine approach to human relationships.''

The background that makes General Gabriel unusual among Air Force chiefs of
staff: As a fighter pilot, he flew many combat missions in the Korean and
Vietnam Wars. Traditionally, the job of chief of staff has gone to bomber
pilots, those involved in strategic warfare, like Curtis E. LeMay. Most
recently, in the case of Gen. Lew Allen Jr., the post went to a nuclear
physicist.

'Signal' to Air Force

''I think this is a strong signal to the Air Force,'' said Mr.  Zengerle. ''Here
is a man who was engaged in fighting wars, who has a real grasp of people at the
fighting level. People will respond to him.''

A rugged six-footer with thinning black hair who keeps his weight at a steady
175 pounds with a rigorous agenda of tennis, squash and jogging, the 54-year-old
General is currently Commander of the United States Air Force in Europe. He also
serves as commander of North Atlantic Treaty Organization air forces in central
Europe and is now stationed at Ramstein Air Base in West Germany.

From 1979 to 1980, he served in the key Air Force job of Deputy Chief of Staff
for operations, plans and readiness, which made him, essentially, ''the guy who
worries about how the Air Force should fight a war,'' a Pentagon official said.

Charles Alvin Gabriel was born in Lincolntown, N.@C. on Jan. 21, 1928, and
attended the United States Military Academy, graduating 283d in a class of 670
in 1950. After a year's training as a pilot in Texas and Alabama, he was sent to
Korea, where he flew 100 combat missions in F-51 Mustangs and F-86 Sabrejets. He
was credited with shooting down two MIG-15 fighters. Years later, in 1977,
General Gabriel returned to South Korea and served as Deputy Commander of United
States Forces.

Three Tours in Europe

In addition to holding staff jobs in the Air Force command, General Gabriel has
had three tours in Europe, serving in the mid-1950's at Landstuhl Air Base in
West Germany. A decade later he worked at NATO military headquarters near
Brussels.

In 1971-72, as a colonel, he commanded a tactical reconnaissance wing at Udorn
Air Base in Thailand, and flew 152 combat missions in Southeast Asia in F-4
Phantom jets.

Maj. Gen. John T. Chain, who now holds General Gabriel's former job as Deputy
Chief of Staff, said in a telephone interview today: ''He's very
straightforward, looks you in the eye when talking, and I've never recalled him
chewing anybody out. If he doesn't like someone, he replaces them. The strong
survive with him and he turns you loose if he trusts you.''

General Chain added: ''Because he's easygoing, he gets a great deal out of
people. He enjoys talking about ideas and the economic situation and politics,
not just military-related issues. He's a fighter pilot and, I suppose, he just
has an independent mind.''

Friends say the years abroad have made General Gabriel and his wife, the former
Dorothy Cutts, somewhat sophisticated eaters who enjoy dining out in Chinese
restaurants. The couple have two children, Charles, who formerly worked on
Capitol Hill, and Jane.

''By nature, a fighter pilot is an individual sort, highly skillful and
confident,'' said General Chain. ''General Gabriel is that sort of fellow .''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 20, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
Navy Flier's Death Confirmed at Last

SECTION: Section 2; Page 30, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 169 words


The agonizing doubts of a Newburgh, N.Y., couple ended yesterday with the
positive identification of the remains of their son, a Navy flier shot down over
Laos 12 years ago. But the parents plan to go on with their work on behalf of
others lost in action during the Vietnam War.

Identification of the remains of the flier - Lieut. Comdr. Nicholas Brooks, a
bombardier-navigator whose carrier-based plane was downed on Jan. 2, 1970 -
brought to 80 the number of remains of servicemen killed in action that have
been returned to the United States since the end of the war in 1975. His remains
were among those recovered from Laos earlier this year.

His parents, George and Gladys Brooks, have been among the most active members
of the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Action
in Southeast Asia. Mr. Brooks, a 62-year-old engineer, is a director of the
organization and Mrs.  Brooks is its New York State coordinator.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A MAJORITY IN POLL WANT U.S. TO STAY OUT OF SALVADOR WAR

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words


A majority of Americans fear that the United States will become involved in El
Salvador as it was in Vietnam and want the Reagan Administration to stay out of
the guerrilla war in that Central American country, according to the latest New
York Times/CBS News poll.

The poll indicated that 42 percent of the public disapproved of the way that
President Reagan was handling the situation and that 26 percent approved.
Thirty-two percent of those polled had no opinion.

When asked specifically what Washington should do in El Salvador, 63 percent
said, ''Stay out.'' A majority of every subgroup among those polled agreed with
that position, including Republicans and conservatives. Only 16 percent approved
sending economic and military aid, the course favored by the Reagan
Administration, and only 6 percent advocated the use of American troops.

Sixty percent said they were afraid that the United States would ''get involved
in El Salvador the way it did in Vietnam.'' The mood of the majority in the poll
seemed to be summed up by Donna Schmitt, a medical technician in Pittsburgh, who
said: ''I just feel we should stay out altogether. We have enough problems in
our own country. Reagan's sending those advisers over, and to me it's just one
step leading to something else.''

''My husband is a Vietnam veteran,'' added Mrs. Schmitt, 25 years old, ''and
from the terrible things he told me about what happened there, I'd hate to see
us get into anything like that again. The American people are not as easily
psyched up for getting into a war as we used to be, and Vietnam has a lot to do
with that.''

Carl W. Koch Jr., a designer of pipe systems in Collingswood, N.J., said: ''
Vietnam went on year after year after year. I'm afraid we'll get into El
Salvador in the same way. I don't see how anybody can win in a situation like
that - when you get into the jungle, it's every man for himself.''

But others remember Vietnam as a failure of American will, not of American
power. They worry that Washington could commit itself to El Salvador and then
refuse to invest the resources necessary to win the struggle.

''Maybe we'll take it too lightly, like we did in Vietnam,'' said Dennis F.
Leary Jr., who repairs air conditioners in Hanover, Mass.  ''We shouldn't put
troops on the line if we're not ready to back them 100 percent.''

Many Americans Uncertain

The survey results, together with interviews with two dozen poll respondents,
indicated that many Americans were uncertain and uninformed in their views about
El Salvador, a place that many respondents would have trouble locating on a map.

For instance, half the respondents said they believed that Soviet or Cuban
troops were present in El Salvador, helping the insurgents, although there have
been no news reports to that effect. A typical comment came from Harvey A. Wood,
a supplier of construction equipment in Hialeah, Fla., who said: ''I'm no
authority on foreign policy, and I hope Reagan knows what he's talking about.
But who knows?''

Many Americans are not only confused by complex foreign policy questions, but
often hold contradictory views as well. In the last Presidential election, for
example, many respondents applauded Mr.  Reagan's calls for a stronger and more
respected United States, but feared that his tough talk could lead the country
into war.

Many Americans continue to feel ambivalent about the President and his policies.
''The main thing is, I don't want Communism to come into this hemisphere,'' said
David Reichhardt, a high school teacher in Dexter, Mich. ''But I don't think the
people of this country should be responsible, to the extent of having to go in
and fight.''

57% Term Salvador Important

The fear of Communism mentioned by Mr. Reichhardt provided a hard core of
support for Mr. Reagan's policies. Fifty-seven percent of those surveyed agreed
that El Salvador was very important to American interests; 72 percent said they
believed that if pro-Soviet forces took over one Central American country,
others would fall like dominoes. Some respondents said that the real historic
analogy for El Salvador was not Vietnam, but Cuba.

''We're talking about a country that's pretty close to home now, and we have to
do something, take some kind of action,'' said Charles Warner, a West Point
graduate who is a budget analyst in Aiken, S.C.  ''Aiding the Government is
probably the best thing to do, but it may come to the point where we have to
step in. They're getting close to Mexico, they're right on our doorstep, and
somewhere this has to stop.''

The desire to resist Communism and Soviet expansion, however, ran up against the
streak of isolationism that showed itself in people like Cynthia Crone of Payne,
Ohio. ''It seems like we're always getting pulled in by other people's
problems,'' she said. ''We've got enough problems of our own to deal with.''

That feeling is enhanced by economic problems; the poll showed that opposition
to Mr. Reagan's foreign policy was highest among respondents with financial
problems. Nancy Simpkins, a store clerk in Aiken, S.C., who said, ''Our economy
is sad enough without our sending help overseas.''

Rose Marie Jack, an unemployed nurse's aide in Lynn, Mass., said: ''Reagan wants
a war right now. It's the only thing that would help the economy.''

'He's Too Gung-Ho'

Confidence in the President was further undermined by his emphasis on a higher
military budget. ''He's too gung-ho in going in with the military,'' said Jenny
Lee Teufel, an engineer in Brookhaven, Pa.  ''He has a one-track mind about
it.''

After living through Vietnam and the Arab oil embargo, some Americans agreed
with Joan Sinesi of Collingswood, N.J., who said she felt that the country was
simply unable to shape the world in its own image. ''We've extended ourselves
too much,'' said Mrs. Sinesi, 31 years old. ''We can't help everybody and we
have to realize it.''

Only a few respondents had detailed criticism of the President's policies, but
some disagred with the argument that El Salvador was central to American
interests. ''I don't think it's important,'' said Miss Teufel, the engineer. ''I
never heard about El Salvador before this.''

Others, 17 percent in the poll, said they felt that Washington should support
the guerrillas, not the Government. ''We always forget the little man,'' said
Anne Kaufmann, a retired store manager in Miami Beach. ''Why not get on the side
of the revolutionaries and win them over to our side?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: table of poll results of public concern over El Salvador

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE SAID TO OVERRUN CAMBODIAN BASE

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 548 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 20


An important anti-Communist guerrilla base at Sokh San, in Cambodia's Cardamom
Mountains, has been overrun by Vietnamese troops, and thousands of Cambodian
civilians have fled across the nearby border into Thailand, Western diplomats
here said today.

The number of casualties was still unknown.  The Vietnamese attack on the base
area's four isolated villages was reported to have began last Tuesday. By today,
between 3,000 and 7,000 Cambodians had poured into southeastern Thailand in the
vicinity of the town of Trat, it was reported.

An additional 2,000 Cambodian guerrillas loyal to Son Sann, a Prime Minister
under Prince Norodom Sihanouk, have been dispersed, the sources said.

Reports of 'Yellow Rain'

There were reports of itching and nausea after the shelling, which provoked
charges from Mr. Son Sann, now in Paris, that the Vietnamese had filled the
shells with ''yellow rain,'' a purported chemical weapon.

The United States Embassy here has been collecting blood and other samples from
the victims of that attack. Diplomatic sources have also reported that Britain
and at least one other nation have been testing for possible evidence of
chemical warfare by Soviet-supplied troops.

Last Tuesday, Vietnamese forces near Sokh San resumed their assault and
gradually pushed back the guerrillas. Mr. Son Sann's lieutenant in the area,
From Vieth, is reportedly one of his more capable officers.

The significance of the Vietnamese victory was reflected in the fact that Mr.
Son Sann's total guerrilla army has been estimated at between 5,000 and 9,000.
Vietnam has about 200,000 troops in Cambodia. Mr. From Vieth was said to have
promised today that his forces would continue fighting despite the loss of their
mountain stronghold.

Mr. Son Sann refused an invitation early this month to meet in Peking with two
other anti-Vietnamese Cambodian leaders, Prince Sihanouk and Khieu Samphan, a
leader of the Pol Pot group. The Pol Pot group is estimated to number between
17,000 and 30,000.

Thailand Urges Cooperation

Thailand, like several other members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, has called repeatedly for more cooperation among the Cambodian forces
fighting the Vietnamese. The United States Government has urged essentially the
same course.

This season's Vietnamese offensive, at least against the Pol Pot group, began
four months ago and is expected to last until the current dry weather ends -
perhaps at the end of April in the mountains and at the end of May along the
Thai border to the north.

The Vietnamese Army's main thrust along the border has been directed against Pol
Pot positions about 100 miles north of Sokh San. In the north, the Vietnamese
have used tanks, but the terrain around Sokh San is reportedly too rugged for
tanks.

More than 2,000 Vietnamese troops reportedly attacked Sokh San.  Thai Marines in
the area where the Cambodians have fled were said by a marine spokesman to have
demanded that the guerrillas among them give up their arms before crossing the
border. The guerrillas, however, reportedly refused and instead returned to
Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF A U.S. REPORT ON CUBAN AND NICARAGUAN ROLE IN SALVADOR REBELLION

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 23, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4087 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 20


Following is the text of a Government report called ''Cuban and Nicaraguan
Support for the Salvadoran Insurgency,''which was made public today by the State
Department:

I. Introduction

There has been a lot of debate and controversy about Cuban and Nicaraguan
support for guerrillas in Central America, particularly in El Salvador. This
paper summarizes the overall pattern as it now stands.

This paper does not contain the sensitive intelligence that we have provided to
Congressional committees and to a number of distinguished Americans. They have
expressed their views (see separate compendium of statements). We cannot make
this intelligence available publicly.  Were it to be released, the United States
Government would lose access to critical information and might well risk the
lives of some brave people who believe it is important that the Government of
the United States know what is going on. A government that does not keep secrets
does not receive them.

The purpose of this paper is thus not to produce new revelations but to describe
the general pattern of outside support for El Salvador's guerrillas, including
arms supply, training and command and control. Some of this information came
from classified sources, but much of it can be obtained by careful analysis of
public sources. The cumulative weight of this information makes clear that the
guerrilla movement in El Salvador receives vital assistance of many kinds from
an international infrastructure outside El Salvador.

The Main Themes

In what follows, the following themes should be kept in mind: First, that
although much of our most recent information is so sensitive that it cannot be
provided to the general public, it is consistent with patterns of guerrilla
activity and foreign support evident for two years and more. A clandestine
support system, established in 1978 at the time of the Nicaraguan civil war,
continued to operate after the fall of Somoza in July 1979 with a new final
destination - El Salvador. Cuba played a major role in developing this support
system and remains its key link.

Second, that the existence of this support system - initially identified by the
Carter Administration - has been repeatedly and vigorously denied by Nicaraguan
and Cuban spokesmen. Yet a considerable quantity of solid information shows that
those denials are false.

Third, that many elements of the pattern have been repeatedly confirmed by
independent researchers and journalists who have gone into the field to
investigate the actual situation on the ground.  Confirmation has come from as
far away as Lebanon and Vietnam.

Finally, that in assessing the situation in El Salvador today, one should pay
attention to the nature of the guerrilla movement. To this end, we are making
available a brief history of the development and organization of El Salvador's
violent left.

II. The Pattern

Outside backing for the insurgency in El Salvador has taken many forms. Before
the unification of El Salvador's violent left, Cuban support to its elements
involved political and some military training, modest financial aid and serving
as a link between Salvadoran extremists and Communists outside the hemisphere.
During the Nicaraguan civil war, Cuba concentrated on support for the
Sandinistas. After the fall of Somoza, Cuba began intense efforts to help
pro-Cuban guerrillas come to power in El Salvador.

The pattern of outside support is intricate, but has three major components:
external arms supplies, training, and command and control.
External Arms Sup- plies

Within weeks after the fall of Somoza in July 1979, the Sandinistas began to
cooperate with Cuba in support of the Salvadoran extreme left by establishing
training camps and the beginning of arms supply networks. This clandestine
assistance initially involved local black markets and relatively limited
resources. In 1980, after meetings in Havana had unified Salvadoran Marxists
into a single military command structure, the Sandinista leadership agreed to
serve as a conduit for an arms trafficking system of unprecedented proportions,
originating outside the hemisphere. That structure remains in force today.

Arms and ammunition for the Salvadoran insurgents reach Nicaragua by ship and
occasionally by direct flights from Havana to Nicaragua.  Three Nicaraguan
ships, the Monimbo, the Aracely and the Nicarao, frequently transport arms and
ammunition to Nicaragua from Cuba in their cargo, as do Cuban and other vessels.
These military supplies remain stockpiled outside El Salvador until guerrilla
headquarters near Managua arranges for their shipment into El Salvador. The
timing of the resupply operations appears to be coordinated with the planned
level of fighting, since before each surge in the fighting, we have detected
large deliveries.

Here are some concrete illustrations of the arms flow.

A Direct Airlift

The Papalonal Airfield provides a clear case of the direct airlift of weapons
from Nicaragua to guerrillas in El Salvador. Papalonal is a commercially
undeveloped area 23 nautical miles northwest of Managua. The airfield is
accessible only by dirt roads. Information on Papalonal has not been released
heretofore because of the sensitivity of the methods by which it was acquired.
In late July 1980, the airfield was an agricultural dirt airstrip approximately
800 meters long, but by early 1981 the strip had been lengthened by 50 percent
to approximately 1,200 meters. A turnaround had been added to each end. A
dispersal parking area with three hardstands - a feature typical of a military
airfield - had been constructed at the west end of the runway. Three parking
aprons had been cleared, and six hangar/storage buildings, each about 15 meters
wide, had been constructed on the aprons. Hangers were to stockpile arms for the
Salvadoran guerrillas (these hangars resembled those at major Cuban air bases
and our sources confirmed Cuban involvement in the construction). C-47 flights
from the air base, confirmed by photographic evidence, corresponded with
sightings in El Salvador, and several pilots have been identified in Nicaragua
who regularly flew the route into El Salvador. This particular route was closed
down by March 1981, but some air infiltration continues to this day, despite
difficulties in pilot recruitment.
pick up: FIRST ADD LATIN TEXT

Overland Routes

Weapons delivery by overland routes from Nicaragua pass through Honduras.
Several examples of this arms traffic can be identified.  Honduran authorities
have intercepted various shipments of arms en route from Nicaragua and in
concealed caches in Honduras. In early January 1981, for example, Honduran
police caught six individuals unloading weapons from a truck en route from
Nicaragua. The six identified themselves as Salvadorans and as members of the
International Support Commission of the Salvadoran Popular Liiberation Forces
(F.P.L.). They had in their possession a large number of altered and forged
Honduran, Costa Rican and Salvadoran passports and other identity documents.
This one truck contained over 100 M-16/AR-15 automatic rifles, 50 81-millimeter
mortar rounds, approximately 100,000 rounds of 5.56-millimeter ammunition,
machine-gun belts, field packs, and first-aid kits. Over 50 of these M-16/AR-15
rifles were traced to U.S. units assigned to Vietnam in 1968-69, and which were
left in Vietnam when U.S. troops departed.

In April 1981, Honduran authorities intercepted a tractor-trailer truck which
had entered Honduras at the Guasule crossing from Nicaragua. It was apparently
heading for Guatemala. Ammunition and propaganda materials were hidden in the
side walls of the trailer.  The same arms traffickers operated a storehouse in
Tegucigalpa, Honduras, with a false floor and a special basement for storing
weapons.

Caches Seized in Guatemala

Costa Rica also has been a staging area for arms shipments to El Salvador. A
Special Legislative Commission established in June 1980 by the Costa Rican
legislature confirmed that the Cubans had established a clandestine arms-supply
link between Costa Rica and Nicaragua during the Nicaraguan civil war, and that
the link continued to function between Costa Rica and El Salvador once the
Sandinistas had come to power in Nicaragua. After the Nicaraguan civil war was
over, according to the Costa Rican Commission's report issued in May 1981,
''arms trafficking, originating in Costa Rica or through Costa Rica territory,
(began) toward El Salvador, indirectly or using Honduras as a bridge.''

In April and July 1981, Guatemalan security forces captured large caches of
guerrilla weapons at safe houses in Guatemala City. Traces made on the serial
numbers of individual U.S.-manufactured weapons revealed that 17 M-16/AR-15's
had been shipped to American units in Vietnam in the late 60's and early 70's
and left behind. Several of the vehicles captured at the Guatemala City safe
houses bore recent customs markings from Nicaragua, thus suggesting that the
operation was part of the well-established pattern.

Note: When a clandestine shipment of arms is captured or a safe house is found
containing arms and terrorist supplies, it is often impossible to know with
certainty whether the ultimate recipients are Guatemalan, Honduran, Costa Rican
or Salvadoran terrorists, since the armms-supply networks established by Cuba
and Nicaragua are funneling lethal military supplies to terrorists and
guerrillas in all four countries, using the same clandestine smuggling
techniques and routes.

Training

Cuban and Nicaraguan political and military training create the basic framework
for the use of the arms by the guerrillas within El Salvador. Nicaragua and Cuba
coordinate training efforts, with Cuba providing key specialized training.

Since at least mid-1980, Salvadoran guerrillas have been trained in Nicaragua.
The Sandinistas have trained Salvadoran guerrillas in military tactics, weapons,
communications, and explosives at temporary training schools scattered around
the country and on Sandinista military bases. At several military sites in
Nicaragua Salvadorans receive training under guidance from Cuban and other
foreign advisers. For more specialized training, guerrillas transit Nicaragua
for Cuba.The Managua-Havana air shuttle link is in daily operation and the
increase in traffic has reached the point where a ticketing system is now
required. Guerrillas are provided false identity documents to help them transit
third counrties. The Cubans are training guerrillas in sabotage and demolition
efforts and reinfiltrating them through Nicaragua back into El Salvador. This
training in Nicaragua and Cuba has increased the tactical skills of the
guerrillas in El Salvador. Guerrilla operations - such as the attacks on
Ilopango airport in January 1982 and on the El Oro bridge in October 1981 - were
clearly performed by trained saboteurs.

A Salvadoran guerrilla, Santo Salome Morales, reported when he defected in
Honduras in September 1981 that he and 12 others went from El Salvador to
Nicaragua via a point near the Gulf of Fonseca in May 1980. From Managua, they
proceeded to Cuba where they received extensive military training, together with
over 900 Salvadorans.  Morales said he was trained in underwater demolition.

Police Raid Safe House

The link between training and the regional infrastructure behind guerrilla
activity is evident in information obtained following a raid late last year by
the Honduran police on a safe house for the Morazanist Front for the Liberation
of Honduras (F.M.L.H.). This organization was described in an October 1981
interview in the pro-Government Nicaraguan newspaper El Nuevo Diario, by
''Octavio,'' one of its founders, as a political-military organizatiom formed as
part of the ''increasing regionalization of the Central American conflict.'' The
raid took place on Nov. 27, 1981, in Tegucigalpa, and while the Honduran police
were attempting to search the house, a firefight broke out. The police
ultimately captured several members of this group. This cell of the F.M.L.H.
included a Honduran, an Uruguayan, and several Nicaraguans. The captured
terrorists told Honduran authorities that the Nicaraguan Government had provided
them with funds for travel expenses, as well as explosives.

Captured documents and statements by detained guerrillas further indicated that:

- The group was formed in Nicaragua at the instigation of highlevel Sandinista
leaders;

- The group's chief of operations resided in Managua; and

- Members of the group received military training in Nicaragua and Cuba.

Training Programs Continue

The documents included classroom notebooks from a one-year training course held
in Cuba in 1980. Other captured documents revealed that guerrillas at one safe
house were responsible for transporting arms and munitions into Honduras from
Esteli, Nicaragua.

Training programs in Nicaragua are continuing. A Salvadoran terrorist, Jose
Roberto Marroquin Acevedo, arrested in Costa Rica on Jan. 29, 1982, in
connection with an attempted kidnapping of a Salvadoran businessman, told Costa
Rican police that he was affiliated with a Salvadoran guerrilla organization,
which had sent him to Nicaragua, where he and other terrorists were provided
with false identity documents to enter Costa Rica. In the presence of his
defense attorney Marroquin told a Costa Rican court on Feb. 4 that he ''received
military and political training'' during the several months he spent in
Nicaragua.
pick up: SECOND ADD LATIN TEXT

Command and Control

The military forces of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (F.M.L.N.)
guerrilla movement are controlled by the Unified Revolutionary Directorate
(D.R.U.) with three members from each of the guerrilla groups active in El
Salvador.

The D.R.U. was formed in Havana in May 1980 after meetings that began under
Castro's sponsorship in December 1979. Requiring the creation of a unified
military command that included the Moscow-line Salvadoran Communist Party before
any modern armaments were suppplied was, and is, a key to Cuba's
political/military strategy. This pattern, applied previously to the struggle
against Somoza in Nicaragua and since then elsewhere in Central America, draws
on ideologically committed and Cuban-trained military cadres to make up the
guerrilla command and thereby insure Marxist-Leninist control of the insurgency
and of any government emerging subsequently from it.

Center Near Managua

The D.R.U. command headquarters is near Managua, Nicaragua, and is part of an
extremely sophisticated command and control relationship (in fact, this system
is more elaborate than that used by the Sandinistas against Somoza). Planning
and operations are guided from this headquarters in Nicaragua, where Cuban and
Nicaraguan officers are involved in command and control. The guidance flows to
guerrilla units widely spread throughout El Salvador. D.R.U. headquarters
coordinates logistical support for the insurgents to include food, medicines,
clothing, money - and most importantly - weapons and ammunition. Although some
freelancing exists as targets of opportunity appear, the headquarters in
Nicaragua decides on locations to be attacked and coordinates supply deliveries.

Evidence of centralized control comes from the guerrillas themselves. On March
14, 1982, the F.M.L.N. clandestine Radio Venceremos located in El Salvador
broadcast a message to guerrillas in El Salvador urging them ''to maintain their
fighting spirit 24 hours a day to carry out the missions ordered by the F.M.L.N.
general command (emphasis supplied).''

Recent Developments

Three months ago - in mid-December 1981 - Fidel Castro directed, after
consultations in Havana with guerrilla leaders, that external supplies of arms
to F.M.L.N. units should be stepped up to make possible an offensive to disrupt
a peaceful vote in the March 28 constituent assembly elections. Extreme leftist
groups throughout Central America were mobilized to support the effort.

Within the past three months, shipments of arms into El Salvador reached
unprecedented peaks, averaging out to the highest overall volume since the
''final offensive'' last year. During the past year, deliveries of arms to the
Salvadoran insurgents have been closely monitored. The recent Cuban-Nicaraguan
arms flow into El Salvador has emphasized both sea and - once again - overland
routes through Honduras. Early this month, for example, a guerrilla unit in El
Salvador received several thousand sticks of TNT and detonators (only five
sticks of TNT are sufficient to blow up an electrical pylon). Last month, a
Salvadoran guerrilla group picked up a large shipment of arms on the Usulutan
coast after the shipment arrived by sea from Nicaragua.

More Sophisticated Weapons

In addition to vitally needed ammunition, these most recent guerrilla supply
operations have included greater quantities of more sophisticated heavier
weapons. Recent deliveries have included M-60 machine guns, 57 mm recoilless
rifles and M-72 antitank weapons, thus significantly increasing guerrilla
firepower. Individual units also regularly receive tens of thousands of dollars
for routine purchases of nonlethal supplies on commercial markets and payments
(including bribes) to enable the clandestine pipeline to function.

On March 15, 1982, the Costa Rican Judicial Police announced the discovery of a
house in San Jose with a sizeable cache of arms, explosives, uniforms,
passports, documents, false immigration stamps from more than 30 countries and
vehicles with hidden compartments - all connected with an ongoing arms traffic
through Costa Rican territory to Salvadoran guerrillas.

Nine people were arrested: Salvadorans, Nicaraguans, an Argentine, a Chilean and
a Costa Rican. Costa Rican police so far have seized 13 vehicles designed for
arms smuggling. Police confiscated some 150-175 weapons from Mausers to machine
guns, TNT, fragmentation grenades, a grenade launcher, ammunition, and 500
combat uniforms.  One of the captured terrorists told police that the arms and
other goods were to have been delivered to the Salvadoran guerrillas before
March 20, ''for the elections.''
pick up: 3d AND LAST ADD LATIN TEXT
III. Confirmations On the Public Record

Persuasive evidence that the insurgency in El Salvador is part of a broader
regional pattern has been available for some time.
1. On the Nicaraguan Link to El Salvador:

The Nicaraguan link was clear to the Carter Administration. For example, in an
interview with editors of The Washington Post published Jan. 30, 1981, former
Secretary of State Edmund Muskie said that Cuban arms and supplies being used in
El Salvador's bloody civil war were flowing through Nicaragua ''certainly with
the knowledge and to some extent the help of Nicaraguan authorities.''

A guerilla leader told The San Diego Union (March 1, 1981) in El Salvador that
''the Salvadoran guerrillas have a permanent commission in Nicaragua overseeing
the smuggling of weapons from that country to here.'' He also said there have
been Cuban advisers in the province of Morazan, and that Vietnamese advisers
have made several trips to guerrilla camps in El Salvador.
2. On Cuban Activities In Nicaragua And El Salvador:

Fidel Castro publicly denies supplying arms and military equipment to the
Salvadoran guerrillas (for example, in his Sept. 15, 1981, speech opening the
Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference in Havana) and avoids commenting on Cuban
military advisers in Nicaragua.

Yet in a Bonn press conference on June 19, 1981, German Social Democratic leader
Hans-Jurgen Wischnewski reported that when he had personally confronted Castro
with State Department contentions that Cuba had shipped weapons to Salvadoran
guerrillas, Castro had admitted it was true. Castro again confirmed the reports
of transshipment of arms to the Salvadoran guerrillas in private discussions
with several Interparliamentary Union delegations in Havana last September.

Other Press Reports

And The Washington Post reported March 7, 1982, that Sandinista leader Jaime
Wheelock confirmed to The Post that Cuban military advisers were present in his
country, although he claimed that there were ''no more than about a dozen.''

The New York Times reported March 18, 1982, that the guerrillas now concede that
Cuba supplied armaments through Nicaragua for the January 1981 ''final
offensive.''

Top Cuban leaders have confirmed that Salvadoran guerrillas are trained in Cuba.
Vice President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, for example, confirmed it in at least
two interviews (Der Spiegel, Sept. 28, 1981, and El Diario de Caracas, Oct. 29,
1981). The Toronto Globe and Mail reported Feb. 12, 1981, that ''at least 30
Salvadoran guerrillas'' were currently training near Havana. The report was
based on an interview with a Salvadoran guerrilla billeted in a Havana hotel,
which according to a hotel employee had been booked by the Cuban Foreign
Ministry for ''Latin American'' guests.
3. Sandinista and Vietnamese Leaders on Vietnamese Role:

In March 1981, Sandinista Directorate member Humberto Ortega traveled to Hanoi.
In a speech given there March 11, Ortega said, ''We sincerely thank the
Vietnamese people and highly value their support for the heroic Salvadoran
people ... the fierce and bloody struggle in El Salvador requires the support of
all progressive nations and forces throughout the world.''

Vietnamese support for the Salvadoran guerrillas was confirmed by author William
Shawcross when he travelled to Vietnam last year (New York Review of Books,
Sept. 24, 1981):

''Had Vietnam been distributing any of the vast pile of weapons left by the
Americans? Colonel Bui Tin acknowledged, in effect, that it had. In El Salvador?
'It's not fair to say the U.S. can help the junta but we cannot help our
friends. We do our best to support revolutionary movements in the world.' ''
4. Yasir Arafat On the P.L.O. Role In Nicaragua And El Salvador:

P.L.O. chief Arafat confirmed to a group of Palestinian journalists in Beirut on
Jan. 11, 1982, that ''there are Palestinian pilots in Nicaragua, there are
Palestinian revolutionaries with the revolutionaries in El Salvador.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dean Fischer, State Department spokesman

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PETITION DRIVE FOR NUCLEAR ARMS FREEZE IS GAINING SUPPORT ON COAST

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 32, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 779 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 20


Organizers of a petition drive to place a proposal before California voters
favoring a bilateral freeze on nuclear weapons say they expect to collect more
than twice the number of signatures needed to qualify for the November ballot.

''We have tapped into a far more widely perceived, more deeply felt concern
within the body politic in California than even I had expected,'' Harold
Willens, a Los Angeles businessman who heads the petition campaign, said in an
interview.

If the petition qualifies for the November ballot, as it appears it will, voters
will be asked to approve a measure requiring the Governor of California to write
a letter to President Reagan urging him to propose to the Soviet Union that it
join with the United States in an agreement to freeze further development and
deployment of nuclear weapons.

Proponents of the freeze say they have already collected more than the 346,119
signatures of registered voters that are needed to place the question on the
ballot.

More Than 500,000 Signatures

The petition campaign began in December, and by mid-February more than 500,000
signatures had been collected, Mr. Willens said.  Signatures are still being
collected, and he said it appeared that the total could pass 700,000 by April
23, the deadline for submitting the petitions.

The apparent success of the petition drive has not been the only recent sign of
what appears to be growing concern in the nation's most populous state about the
potential threat of nuclear war.

This week a senior official in the administration of Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr.
announced her refusal to comply with requests from Federal Civil Defense
officials to prepare an evacuation plan for California cities that would take
effect if a nuclear war appeared imminent.

Beverlee Myers, speaking at a legislative hearing on nuclear war preparedness,
said it would be ''unethical'' to participate in a plan that created an
''illusion'' that such planning could provide any protection in the event of a
nuclear attack. Members of the Marin County Board of Supervisors, north of San
Francisco, also voted not to participate in preparation of an evacuation plan,
calling it ''senseless.''

Leader of Petition Drive

The petition drive was largely organized by Mr. Willens, a 67-year-old
entrepreneur and real estate investor who organized a committee of business
executives opposed to the Vietnam War more than a decade ago.

Although a few of the people participating in the campaign were also antiwar
activists in the Vietnam era, or have otherwise been identified with pacifist
causes, the leadership appears to have a much broader base than only people who
have participated in previous antiwar movements. College students, who were
prominent in the anti-Vietnam War movement, seem to be playing little or no part
in the current effort.

According to Mr. Willens, committees made up of local business and professional
people, as well as housewives, clergymen and others, have been organized
throughout the state to circulate the petitions.

Among the leaders of the petition campaign, he said, are John Rubel, a retired
aerospace industry excutive and former Assistant Secretary of Defense; Dr.
Herbert York, a former Pentagon research director, United States arms treaty
negotiator and one-time director of the Livermore nuclear weapons laboratory;
Dr. Jonas Salk, the medical researcher, and a number of California businessmen,
including Brooks Walker, chief executive officer of United States Leasing
Corporation, and Gordon Sherman, a retired president of Midas Muffler Company.

Sees Wide Support

Mr. Willens said that ''to me the most dramatic thing about what has happened''
was that support for the petition drive had not come ''just from people in what
we think of as the historical peace movement.''

He said that two key factors were attracting people to the campaign:
apprehension about the military policies of President Reagan and some of his
aides, whom he described as regarding ''thermonuclear weapons as no different
than bows and arrows,'' and increased attention to the risk of nuclear war by
major news publications and television networks in the last two years.

''You have people from all kinds of backgrounds standing up and saying they are
no longer willing to commit the sin of silence,'' Mr. Willens said. ''I think we
are seeing the beginning of a sociopolitical eruption.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS WEIGHS CURB ON ARMS RACE

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 32, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 20


Growing public concern about the nuclear arms race between the United States and
the Soviet Union has stimulated renewed Congressional interest in arms control.

Representative Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee, plans to introduce an
arms control proposal on Monday that reflects the heightened Congressional
interest.

The proposal, drafted by Mr. Gore and arms control specialists at the
Congressional Research Service, urges the Reagan Administration to place a
priority on reducing weapons systems that contribute the most to strategic
instability, especially land-based, long-range missiles with multiple warheads.

Mr. Gore, a 33-year-old Vietnam veteran serving his third term in Congress,
calls for a moratorium of four to five years on selected weapons systems. In
this period, both the United States and the Soviet Union would be barred from
increasing the threat to the other's land-based missile systems by adding new
warheads to existing missiles, increasing the number of missile launchers or
improving their accuracy.

Prolonged Readjustment Sought

In the moratorium, both nations would be permitted to develop and test, but not
deploy, two new systems, such as the American D-5 missile for nuclear submarines
and the land-based MX missile.

Later, Mr. Gore hopes that the United States and the Soviet Union would
negotiate a prolonged readjustment and reduction of stategic forces that would
ultimately abolish long-range missiles with multiple warheads.

Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, called the Gore proposal a
''very interesting concept'' because it tried to ''counter the vulnerability of
our land-based missile system through arms control rather than the deployment of
an enormously costly and destabilizing MX missile and antiballistic missile
defense system.''

Mr. Gore said Moscow would be interested in his concept because ''the Russians
know that once we deploy the D-5 and MX missiles, their land-based system, which
accounts for a larger share of their strategic systems than ours does, will be
vulnerable.''

Clarifies Earlier Initiative

The Congressman described his proposal as a ''modification of the freeze
initiative that clarifies the Kennedy-Hatfield's rather vague recommendation
that arms control efforts focus on destabilizing weapons systems.''

He was referring to a resolution introduced by Senators Edward M.  Kennedy,
Democrat of Massachusetts, and Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, that
calls on the United States and the Soviet Union to seek a ''complete halt to the
nuclear arms race'' by first negotiating a freeze in the current number of
nuclear weapons and then a reduction in forces.

His initiative, Mr. Gore added, was not ''inconsistent with the deep reductions
being advocated by the Reagan Administration.'' One Administration official
familiar with the Gore proposal noted that, while his effort to address problems
posed by the buildup of destabilizing weapons was commendable, in earlier
negotiations the Soviet Union had resisted limitations on its large, land-based
missiles equipped with multiple warheads.

Hart Focuses on Prevention

Senator Gary Hart, a Colorado Democrat, has introduced a resolution in the
Senate that, although less detailed, attempts to establish ''a comprehensive
agenda'' for the next round of negotiations on limiting strategic arms.

Senator Hart said his proposal urged the United States and the Soviet Union to
initiate talks that would go ''significantly beyond the questions of force
levels and redirect our attention to the more fundamental problem of prevention
of war.''

He said the negotiations would focus not only on reducing the number of
strategic warheads and delivery systems, but also on the vulnerability of each
side's nuclear retaliatory forces.

The Senator urged both nations to conclude a new accord clarifying their 1971
and 1973 agreements aimed at preventing the use of nuclear weapons by accident
or miscalculation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Westmoreland Urges

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 48, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 94 words


Wartime

Censorship

DURANGO, Colo., March 20 (UPI) - The armed forces cannot win wars without public
support and thus should control the news media in wartime, Gen. William C.
Westmoreland says.

The retired Army general, who was the commander of United States forces in the
Vietnam War, said Wednesday at Fort Lewis College that the news media,
especially television, created an atmosphere of public discontent in the war and
that the erosion of public support crippled the military's ability to win.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Edgar Durbin Jr.  Weds Miss Tait

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 59, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 179 words


Mariana Barker Tait, a picture editor, was married yesterday in Summit, N.J., to
Dr. Edgar Durbin Jr., a military systems analyst with the Institute of Defense
Analysis in Alexandria, Va. Judge John H. Bissell of the New Jersey Superior
Court performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Watson Fergus Tait.

The bride studied at Smith College and was graduated from Birkbeck College of
the University of London. Her father, who is retired, was chairman of the board
and chief executive officer of the Public Service Electric and Gas Company in
Newark.

The bridegroom was graduated from Harvard and Wadham College, Oxford University,
and after service as a second lieutenant with the Army in Vietnam he received a
Master of Arts and a Ph.D. in physics from Rice University and a master's degree
in public policy from the Kennedy School of Government of Harvard University.

He is a son of the late Dr. Edgar Durbin of Denver, and the late Anne Durbin
Lefevre.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLIC OPINION, TOO, IS RUNNING AGAINST THE WHITE HOUSE

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1112 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


''Politics is like a love affair, and you can overplay your hand - we did it
with Carter,'' observed John C. White, who as Democratic national chairman kept
trying to mend the romance between President Carter and the American electorate.
He, and others, failed.

Now the Reagan Administration seems to have lost control of the political agenda
it dominated throughout 1981, and things are beginning to look familiar. Indeed,
some analysts see the Reagan Administration's difficulties as those of the
Carter Administration writ large.''We overloaded the Congress and we overloaded
the people, and we told them things would happen, and they didn't,'' Mr. White
recalled. ''They'll forgive you a time or two. But eventually they quit
listening.''

Now, however, the problems are not with Congress over water projects or details
of natural gas pricing, but with the public over war fears and taxes and
unemployment. Not only is the economy in general a source of public dismay, even
among Republicans. The more specific issues of the day that dominate the news
are running against Mr. Reagan, from El Salvador to defense spending to the
income tax cuts. Solid pluralities of the American public disagree with
President Reagan's firm, apparently unyielding positions on each of those
issues, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. And the opposition is
spread so broadly that four out of five Americans reject his position on at
least one of those issues.

Robert M. Teeter, a leading Republican polltaker, does not think Mr. Reagan is
as far gone politically as does Mr. White. He thinks the American public is
still quite prepared to support Mr. Reagan for his general goals even while
disagreeing on an issue here or there.  The Times/CBS News Poll supports that
view, for those who disagreed with Mr. Reagan on only one of those issues
-taxes, arms, or El Salvador - approved of his handling of the Presidency by a
48 to 34 percent margin, or more strongly than the 43-42 edge given him by the
public as a whole.

But, Mr. Teeter warned, keeping attention on issues where the public goes along
only reluctantly is risky: ''You can only get away with one or two of them at a
time, and there had better be some things where they really like what you're
doing.'' The continuing, though declining, belief that Mr. Reagan's economic
program will eventually succeed is the major hopeful card left in the
President's hand. The Times poll showed that 54 percent of the public thought it
would, down from 60 percent two months ago. Twenty-seven percent said it would
not.

Mr. Reagan's own polls bring similar messages, and his responses seem testy
lately, as when he criticized alleged television reports of layoffs in ''South
Succotash,'' and asked reporters to ''trust us'' about foreign policy. The last
request spurred the nation's most widely heard purveyor of political commentary,
Johnny Carson, to observe that if the nation had always trusted the White House
when asked to, ''Nixon would still be President.''
Irritable Republicans

Nor is Mr. Reagan the only irritable Republican. A key Republican aide on
Capitol Hill, reflecting on the poll's showing of Mr.  Reagan's slipping
approval rating, asked the obvious question: ''Does it mean we'll lose the
Senate?'' Considering the circumstances of particular races, he decided that Mr.
Reagan's failings would not cost his party the Senate, but he still described
the lawmakers as ''baffled by the seeming intransigence of the President,
personally.'' He noted that even with election fears aside, ''We do not have a
timeless clock over here.'' Unless Mr. Reagan moved on the budget, he said, the
votes could not be found to raise the national debt limit, and if that happened,
the confusion and disarray attending government functions would be staggering.

Few politicians or students of politics, still awed by Mr. Reagan's past
successes, are willing to be as blunt as Mr. White, who now advises corporations
on politics. ''Right now,'' he said, ''I think he's got about one more month.''

Richard M. Scammon, the elections analyst, said that if Mr. Reagan thinks El
Salvador is as important as he says it is, he could abandon the 1983 tax cut to
reduce the budget deficit and enhance his general support. There is a potential
there. While three-fifths of the public fear ''another Vietnam,'' the poll
showed, three fifths also regard El Salvador and other Central American
countries as very important ''to the defense interests of the United States.''

Peter D. Hart, a leading Democratic polltaker, said Mr. Reagan is still in a
position to take advantage of a willingness to sacrifice among the American
people, shown in the Times/CBS News Poll. He cited poll's finding that 53
percent of the public would give up its scheduled July 1 tax cut to help reduce
the budget, and that a plurality of 49 percent would reduce proposed arms
spending to trim the deficit. Moreover, he noted the public hope about the
economy, and said ''Ronald Reagan is the beneficiary of the public's patience.''

But, Mr. Hart continued, ''Republican candidates may be the victims of the
public's ire, over economic conditions.'' Seven out of ten Americans, the poll
showed, consider unemployment or some other economic issue as the nation's most
important problem. He, too, emphasized the importance of setting the political
agenda, as the Administration did last year by keeping attention focused on its
tax and budget cuts.

''The discipline the White House brought to the political dialogue in 1981 is
vanished,'' Mr. Hart said. ''Then, the Administration was able to set
priorities. Now the debate is all over the lot.'' With issues from voting rights
to James Watt, the secretary of the Interior, supplementing unemployment, war,
and taxes, the outlook seemed encouraging for his Democratic clients.

The Democrats have already had one significant success. The shift to
Republicanism that encouraged Mr. Reagan's party to believe in a political
realignment is washing away. While the 52 to 36 percent lead (including
independents who acknowledge a leaning) which the Democrats have recorded in
this year's Times/CBS News Polls is not quite back to the 53 to 34 margin of
1980, it is much more cheering to them than the 49 to 39 edge they held in 1981.
Party identfication is still the surest indicator of voting behavior.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: public approval graph

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHICH COMES FIRST, ARMS CONTROL OR SECURITY?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 3242 words


Debate on limiting nuclear weapons intensified last week in Washington, Europe
and presumably in Moscow, where Leonid I.  Brezhnev announced a freeze on
medium-range missiles. Eugene V.  Rostow, director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency, discussed the issues earlier this month with Paul Warnke,
his predecessor in the Carter Administration, before the Association of the Bar
of the City of New York. Here are excerpts from their remarks and replies to
audience questions.

MR. Rostow. We've tended to think of arms control and disarmament negotiations
as if they were a kind of magic that could produce peace if only we were
intelligent or persuasive enough and could bring the Soviet Union to see the
logic of our position. It hasn't happened that way; the system of world public
order has been disintegrating.  The reason for the eclipse of arms control
efforts in recent years is not the arms race but the process of Soviet
expansion. The arms race is the symptom, not the cause.

The problem is that we shared a premise which experience has revealed to be
mistaken, that the Soviet Union approached the problem of nuclear weapons as we
did. We made the SALT I agreements and SALT II, which was never ratified. And we
discovered the 1970's were the worst period of the cold war; the Soviet Union
leaped ahead in its nuclear arsenal and programs of expansion. They regarded
nuclear weapons as the final sanction for a program of expansion, and a
counterdeterrent that would paralyze the American deterrent.

The conclusion is that you can only eliminate the specter of nuclear war by
eliminating conventional war as well. There is no way of preventing a small war
from becoming a big war, no way of drawing an impermeable line between nuclear
and conventional war.

The economic recovery, the cultural and spiritual renaissance of Western Europe,
Japan, the United States has depended since 1945 on the willingness of the
United States to use nuclear weapons, if necessary, against conventional attacks
against vital interests. That threat has lost its credibility because we have
allowed the Soviet Union to march ahead.

The real risk is not so much nuclear war as nuclear blackmail - what we're
witnessing in Europe. The Soviets have built up an enormous force of
intermediate range missiles which are causing panic and terror, and the
potentiality of a crisis directed against Europe, which would be paralyzed by
the threat of intermediate range weapons, when the United States nuclear
umbrella would lack credibility because we've allowed the numbers to become so
adverse.

The modernization program the President has ordered is to restore our
credibility. We want reductions that will give each side equality in deterrence
and to use the negotiations as a catalyst for moving the Soviet Union toward
acceptance that there's no safety in expansion.
Comparison of Warheads

Mr. Warnke. When we talk about nuclear arms, the basic difficulty is that we
still think of them as something of military utility.  They aren't. Gene says we
can use nuclear weapons to protect our interests against conventional attack. I
regard that as very risky.  What are nuclear weapons good for anyway? Will they
give us greater freedom to use our conventional force to enforce the rule of
law? Can we win a nuclear war by tinkering with our strategic arsenal? Will this
advance our national security? My answer is an emphatic no. The most they can do
is prevent the Soviet Union from using their nuclear weapons - the most
important objective.

We have roughly 10,000 strategic nuclear warheads (plus) four base systems in
Europe that can destroy Soviet targets. The Soviets have 7,000. We're way ahead;
it doesn't make a damn bit of difference. In megatonnage, the Soviets are way
ahead; it doesn't make a damn bit of difference. The fact that they might have a
two-megaton warhead compared to our modest ones of something like 400,000 tons
of TNT, only makes one difference: How big is the hole going to be where the
high school used to be? What we need are forces that are the most survivable and
represent the least threat to the survivability of their forces. That sounds
sort of crazy; why worry about the survivability of Soviet forces? Because
nuclear weapons are not like conventional weapons. Back in the good old days -
maybe the good new days, since we're apparently going to bring battleships out
of mothballs - we had 25 battleships and the other side had 20, a useful
advantage. You could afford to use up 24 of your battleships to sink his 20;
you'd end up with one battleship and be the battleship king.  Now if we use our
10,000 warheads and they use their 7,000, nobody will be king. We could say, 'By
God we beat them, we're now ahead of the Soviet Union. Of course we're slightly
behind the Fiji Islands.'

In my negotiations, I had the feeling that the Soviets were more serious than we
were - not because of any philanthropic impulses, not because they're nice guys,
but because they recognize that their political system is infinitely more
fragile than ours. If Moscow disappeared, there'd be dancing in the streets in
the Ukraine, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania. I think they will continue to feel they
have to use military force to shore up their uneasy empire, but I believe they
are very serious about nuclear arms control. My experience has been that they're
mean, they're tough, but they're not crazy, and they recognize that there is no
chance they could win a nuclear war. The only way they will start one is if
they're backed into a corner, if they have the feeling that they have to use
them or lose them, because we put them in a situation in which they fear that we
may strike first. The same is true of us, and they are doing things that are
just as destabilizing as anything we're doing. They did it first, with their
massive ICBM's, the SS-18's that carry as many as 10 warheads, that presents a
threat to the land-based portion of our deterrent. That's a move in the wrong
direction. It doesn't help if we move in the wrong direction, too.

Looking at the program announced by the Administration on Oct. 2, I'd give it
fairly high marks. With regard to MX, they recognized there is no present way to
guarantee the survivability of a landbased ICBM, so they proposed a substantial
cutback in the Carter program. It is the beginning of the end of MX, and good
riddance.  With respect to strategic bombers, it's strictly a question of
dollars and cents; nothing is inconsistent with strategic stability.  If you
build the B-1, equip it with air-launch cruise missiles. That increases the
survivability of our force and does not represent a threat to the other side's
deterrent.

The idea of sea-launch cruise missiles on our general-purpose submarines is a
poor idea. It degrades their mission - it is no longer an effective defense for
the fleet. And you ought to consider how you're going to feel when the other
side does that to you. If we go ahead with sea-launch cruise, we can guarantee
that the Soviets (also) will. We'd have to consider every Soviet fishing vessel
off the New England coast as a potential strategic nuclear delivery vehicle. You
wouldn't know whether it was full of codfish or cruise missiles. But
submarine-launched ballistic missiles are a plus. They increase the
survivability of our force; they have less accuracy, less counterforce potential
than land-based ICBM's.

Some Administration officials have referred to SALT II as fatally flawed, but
Gene Rostow pointed out last fall that there is nothing we have planned that is
prohibited by SALT II. There's only one major difference from the situation that
would exist if we had ratified it - the Soviets by Dec. 31, 1981 would have had
to eliminate approximately 10 percent of their strategic nuclear delivery
vehicles. We've spared them the inconvenience.

(As for) the intermediate range nuclear force talks in Geneva, these are the
weapons in the Soviet Union that can strike Western Europe, but not the United
States. Any nuclear attack on the Western Europeans would be an attack on the
United States, to which we would respond with nuclear weapons. These talks are
terribly important politically. Perhaps I'm old-fashioned, but I still regard
the Atlantic Alliance as one of the cornerstones of national security, one of
our key advantages. The greatest danger with respect to these talks is the
opportunities the Soviet Union is given to interject divisiveness in our
alliance. It's terribly important that we reach an agreement on intermediate
nuclear forces.

Mr. Rostow. Nuclear arms agreements would not achieve their purpose of nuclear
stalemate unless a very severe and effective limitation was placed upon
conventional force. War is not a mathematical game like bridge or chess. We're
dealing with psychosocial forces and emotions. There are wars that could sweep
people past the nuclear barrier. To say that nuclear arms should be viewed as a
catalyst for reaching wider political agreements is not to say that such
political agreements are a prerequisite to nuclear arms agreements.  The
(Soviet) ICBM's are destabilizing, very rapid, dangerous, accurate, and there
are no real defenses against them as yet. The President must never be put into a
position where he has to choose between using nuclear weapons and giving up a
vital United States interest. Our nuclear arsenal has to be addressed to the
Soviet arsenal, capable of negating it. It's not enough to have a lot of
warheads in bombers or submarines that are not very accurate. If the Soviet
Union can take out a large part of our force with one-quarter of its arsenal,
keeping the rest in reserve, then there could be no counterstrike and they'd be
useless. That's the nightmare. We thought the Soviets would settle down if they
achieved equality and recognition as a great power. We discovered that once
they'd achieved parity, they went right on at the same rate.

Are the Soviets serious about negotiations? They are deadly serious about
achieving their strategic goals. It's a very serious problem but not hopeless at
all. The Soviet Union does have immense difficulties; it does want to move
heaven and earth to prevent us from modernizing our forces; it does want to
split us from our allies. In Geneva, it's recently been revealed from the Soviet
side of the press, the objective of their proposals is to eliminate American
intermediate range nuclear weapons from Europe altogether.  The Soviet Union in
European Russia would have a force balancing the British and French force, while
the agreement would have no restrictions whatever on weapons of that character
in Siberia.

It's bold and clear beyond words and they've begun to explain it, politically,
to the Europeans. Yes, they want nuclear weapons agreements, but on their terms
- the isolation of the United States on this continent, the neutralization of
Europe, Japan and China and an enormous shift in the world balance of power.

Mr. Warnke. If he means our threat to use nuclear weapons is going to prevent
Soviet use of conventional military force, I regard that as totally unachievable
and dangerous. It is totally implausible that we would use nuclear weapons
against the Soviet Union if they used conventional force. Our allies ought to
recognize it. The idea that we're going to acquire such nuclear superiority that
we will overawe the other side and they won't use conventional military force
makes no sense. We use conventional force; they do. It won't provoke a nuclear
exchange unless the nuclear balance gets to be that unstable.

Question. Shouldn't we be shifting emphasis to alternative possibilities of
collective security?

Mr. Warnke. We ought to be working toward some concept of collective security,
of eliminating war. Meanwhile, let's put ourselves in a position where diplomacy
can work. Let's not create a situation in which inevitable tensions may end up
with one or the other side feeling that they have to strike first with nuclear
weapons.
Nuclear Superiority

Q. How do we get an agreement that will concede to us nuclear superiority?

Mr. Rostow. I've never used the phrase 'nuclear superiority.' I've talked of
credible second-strike capability. On Nov. 18, the President outlined our plan
for the intermediate range nuclear force talks in Geneva. He proposed unequal
reductions to achieve equal results, that the Soviet Union dismantle its entire
force of SS-20's, SS-4's and 5's and any others to prevent evasion of that
agreement.  In exchange we would promise not to deploy the Pershings and
groundbased cruise missiles. The most interesting and surprising and pleasing
thing about that proposal is that it has been so well received in the West and
has been taken seriously, necessarily therefore, by the Soviet Union. There's no
way of expecting the Soviet Union to accept those proposals within the
parameters of the nuclear equation as such. (But) if you look at the problem in
the larger political and military setting - the breakup of the system of world
public order since the collapse in Vietnam 10 years ago, then you see - and
especially in the drama in Poland - very powerful forces that should induce the
Soviet Union to want a period of stability in their relationship with the West.

Mr. Warnke. There is no way of restoring that kind of nuclear superiority. Gene
says we must maintain a second strike retaliatory capability so we can threaten
to use it first. You can't do that. If the Soviets ever were to attack with
conventional forces, if the Western Europeans had anything to say about it, we
would never be able to use nuclear weapons. I strongly support the zero option.
We can come very close to it because the Soviets are concerned about the
prospect of Pershing 2's and ground-launched cruise missiles.  They tried their
best to get them included in SALT II. So I would hang tough on that one, Gene,
don't be lily-livered.

Mr. Rostow. We'll hang tough, don't worry. The President and the two Secretaries
fully agree with this proposal, which rests on the principle of unequal
reductions to achieve equal results. You can expect our proposals in the Start
negotiations to reflect the same philosophy, namely, that the ICBM's, the most
destabilizing weapon, will get very special attention.

Q. How do you respond to proposals for a freeze?

Mr. Rostow. They play entirely into the hands of the Soviet Union, which has
just finished a long series of development of new weapons.  The proposal to have
a freeze now, and then start with negotiations, removes the only conceivable
incentive within the nuclear equation for negotiations. The Soviet Union refused
to negotiate about intermediate range weapons until a decision was made to
deploy American weapons in Europe. If we have a freeze, the negotiations would
become endless and without possible result.

Mr. Warnke. If we could get an immediate freeze, it would be much to our
advantage because we're ahead. Our lead has been shrinking, but a freeze now
would be very good. But you can't get a freeze right now. We're headed the wrong
way. Both sides are developing weapons that threaten the other side's
retaliatory capability. Weapons are becoming more vulnerable and dangerous. We
have something like 75 percent of our strategic warheads in the sea-based and
air-based parts of our nuclear triad. The Soviets are much more vulnerable.

Mr. Rostow. There's no reason to say that, in terms of deterrents, the United
States is ahead. I'm talking about a form of classical Chinese warfare, which
we've been living, in which nuclear weapons are not fired but their political
effect is taken into account: The President confronts a demand from the Soviet
Union that we take our fleet out of the Mediterranean, and then he counts. In
that context, with 75 percent of the Soviet intercontinental force in ICBM's of
great accuracy and power, and then an additional force of several hundred
SS-20's of enormous power, is the threat to use the sea-based weapon as
retaliation or even the B-52's credible?

Q. Does Mr. Warnke question the credibility of our pledge to use nuclear arms
first if NATO is attacked?

Mr. Warnke. The idea that if the Soviets were to invade Western Europe with
massive conventional force, we might strike Moscow or even Minsk, Pinsk or
Vladivostok, is inherently implausible. It just would not happen. The Europeans
have to know that; I'm sure the Soviets do. Whether we would use tactical
battlefield weapons is a different question. If you've 6,000 or 7,000 there, the
chances are that some of them would be employed. That's a very severe problem
for Western Europe. The definition of a tactical battlefield nuclear weapon is
one that blows up in Germany. Once the Germans recognized that, they had
somewhat less enthusiasm for this particular aspect of NATO doctrine. It's
always been ambiguous as to at what point we would engage the strategic nuclear
force. There isn't any point in continuing the charade. It deflects any efforts
to build up Europe's conventional defense. There's no reason why we could not
have a conventional defense of Western Europe. The West has more people and more
money than the Soviet Union.

Mr. Rostow. I must protest. Every President has repeated the United States
commitment - an attack on one is an attack on all. That means, if we regard an
attack on Norway or Turkey as an attack on the United States, the full American
arsenal is available. That is a credible threat. I deny flatly that a
conventional defense of Europe can be contemplated. We're arrayed against the
Soviet Union, which is fully equipped with battlefield tactical nuclear weapons,
chemical weapons. We cannot go out there with conventional forces and expect
that the Soviet Union will follow.

Mr. Warnke. There is the risk that if both sides acquire a first nuclear strike
capability, we're playing High Noon with nuclear missiles - who's going to draw
first? That has nothing to do with our resistance to Soviet aggression. We ought
to resist Soviet aggression politically, economically, if necessary with
military force. But that's very different than saying that we're going to blow
up the Kremlin and destroy the Soviet Union in response to any type of
aggression on their part. I'm trying to make the distinction between strategic
nuclear weapons and the use of conventional military force. I'm against both,
but there is at least the opportunity for further deterrent steps when you're
dealing with conventional force.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Eugene Rostow photo of Paul Warnke

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SMALLER IS BETTER AND PRIVATE BEST FOR FARMING

BYLINE: By ANN CRITTENDEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words


An international relief worker visiting Vietnam last spring noticed a cartoon in
a Hanoi newspaper, illustrating the attitudes of farmers ''before'' and
''after'' the Government reforms that gave farmers more incentives to produce.
In the first drawing, a peasant with a cigarette dangling from his mouth is
lolling behind a buffalo plowing the fields. In the second it is night, and the
peasant is racing behind the buffalo with a lantern.

The point implicit in the cartoons and the truth that Vietnam may be reluctantly
grasping is that large-scale, factory-style agriculture, whether communist or
capitalist in organization, is simply not as efficient as tilling the land by
and for the benefit of the individual farmer.

This rule - that farms operated by the owner and his family, and at most one
additional worker, are the most productive units in agriculture - is supported
by countless studies in every part of the world, although the size of the most
efficient unit will vary depending on the amount of land the farmer-owner can
till with the equipment at his disposal. Thus, in the American Corn Belt,
maximum efficiencies may be achieved on a farm of 639 acres, tilled by several
hundred thousand dollars worth of machinery. In Bangladesh, the most efficient
farms are 5 acres or less, about the amount one rice farmer can hand-cultivate.

Once the rule is violated on a large scale, disaster strikes - as has been
illustrated by the failure of grandiose commercial farming schemes in Iran and
the Sudan, or ambitious efforts at collectivization in Ghana and Tanzania. The
reason for the phenomenon is pure Reaganomics: incentive. As former Agriculture
Secretary Orville L. Freeman said recently, ''The incentive that results when
the producer benefits directly from his efforts cannot be duplicated by large
holdings whether they are privately held, communal, cooperative, or
state-owned.''

Marxists find this reasoning particularly hard to swallow because they fear that
a vigorous kulak class could undermine their socialist goals. They have tried to
install huge factory-style state farms in the countryside, where wage-earning
proletarians climb down from their tractors at the end of their shifts, even if
planting is late or a storm is brewing. The results are in: The Soviet Union is
being fed by the United States and the Soviet peasantry are probably the poorest
white people in the world in relation to their education.

In much of the third world and in the United States, there is also the tendency
to assume that bigger is better. Yet most large-scale corporate farming
operations in this country and elsewhere have failed and Agriculture Department
studies show that even in the United States, most meaningful economies of scale
can be achieved by family-sized farming operations.

Cross-Cultural Paradoxes

For example, a study by the agriculture department last year found that in the
Corn Belt, while the most efficient farms were about 640 acres, 90 percent of
efficiencies could be achieved on farms of about 300 acres. On wheat farms in
the Northern Plains, maximum efficiencies were achieved on farms of 1,476 acres,
and 90 percent of efficiences on farms of only 232 acres. The same results held
in the five other major United States agricultural areas.

Instead of encouraging family farms, however, United States Government policy
has encouraged big operations. Large farms receive the lion's share of farm
program benefits, which are proportionate to acreage or production. Even the
progressive tax structure favors large farms, because a dollar of deductible
costs will shelter more income at the margin for larger operators who pay higher
tax rates.

Partly as a result of these policies, American ''farm assets and income have
become increasingly concentrated, and the trend appears to be accelerating,''
two economists with the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City concluded. In 1978,
they found, the largest 7 percent of farms received more than 36 percent of net
farm income, held 30 percent of all farm assets and received more than 25
percent of all Government farm payments.

Moreover, fully 40 percent of all farmland in the United States is now farmed by
someone other than the owner, as farmers who own part of and rent the rest of
the land they work have become the most prominent category of farm operators.
This pattern, combined with increasing farm concentration, has aroused some
concern. A study done during the last months of the Carter Administration
deplored the ''considerable potential for increased separation of land ownership
and farming - hence increased tenancy.''

Ironically, as the United States moves away from the owner-operated farm, some
Communist states of Asia are taking steps to restore private incentives to
agriculture. Vietnam, after several years of mismanagement, last year introduced
a system whereby farmers contract with their cooperative to produce a given
amount of rice, and keep whatever they produce above that.

In China about 8 percent of the arable land is already held in private plots and
is producing roughly 20 percent of the country's farm output. Earlier this year,
the Government decreed that up to 15 percent of land could go into family
holdings. On these plots farmers can grow what they want and consume it, feed it
to livestock or sell it to the state, which has also raised procurement prices
substantially in the past three years.

On some communes also, the Chinese have introduced the ''household
responsibility system,'' similar to the incentive schemes more recently
introduced in Vietnam. ''In China, with their pragmatism, food production could
really soar,'' said Richard Critchfield, author of a recent book on village
cultures around the world.

But the greatest potential, as he sees it, lies in the vast, warm and fertile
land of India. Sixty percent of the Indian population is landless, and 15
percent of high-caste landowners hold 75 percent of the land - a fact that more
than any other explains the perennial hunger in India, Mr. Critchfield and
others maintain. If the caste system could be broken, and that land could be
distributed to small farmers, he argues, India could become the biggest food
producer in the world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Maine farm children

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Washington;
REAGAN AND THE PRESS

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 20


President Reagan is sore at the television and newspaper reporters these days,
and no wonder. They keep reporting what he says, which is often more harmful to
his cause than the things his opponents say against him.

''Is it news,'' he asked the other day in Oklahoma City, ''that some fellow out
in South Succotash someplace who has just been laid off should be interviewed
nationwide?''

You bet it is. Somebody at The Washington Post had the good judgment to check
the postal records and found that there actually was a place called Succotash in
Rhode Island, where the unemployment rate had jumped two points in the last
year, and that the overall unemployment rate in Rhode Island was almost 10
percent.

This is one of the problems of any President. Policies that may look good from
Washington, D.C. for the nation as a whole may be intolerable in Washington,
Pa., or Washington, Ind., or Succotash, R.I., which happens to be in Washington
County.

Not for the first time, President Reagan was embarrassed by concentrating on
economic theories and statistics and evading their consequences on people; but
quickly, as usual, he realized that he was in a jam, and in his amiable way, he
praised the reporters and recalled that he had once been ''a reporter, columnist
and commentator myself,'' and had then switched to politics. Soon he may wonder
why.

Mr. Reagan is very good at getting out of tight corners, having had so much
experience. Any day now, he will probably be proclaiming that Succotash is his
favorite vegetable. But in fairness, he is raising some important questions
about the reporting of public affairs in this country that the media should not
ignore.

* Is the media - that offensive word - being fair? Is it concentrating too much
on what goes wrong at the local level and ignoring the general interest of the
nation?

* Is it focusing on policies - as Mr. Reagan thinks it should - rather than on
personalities, and giving politicians more praise than they deserve and more
blame than they can bear?

* In short, is the media paying enough attention to the fundamental questions of
nuclear arms control, economic stability and the hunger and torment of the
majority of the human race - which the President now has to deal with - or
merely grumbling about the failure of governments to deal with these complicated
questions in a changing and revolutionary world?

It's not easy for reporters and edi-tors to be lectured by Ronald Reagan for
their emphasis on personality and superficiality since he has built a successful
political career on both, with the help of the media. It's particularly
difficult for reporters and editors to accept his advice to ''trust us'' in
implementing an economic and foreign policy, which is questioned not only by the
media, but by many of his own supporters in the Congress and his allies, who
wish him well.

Even so, the newspapers and the radio and television networks cannot complain -
though they do - when they are asked to consider whether there is a conflict
between their traditional ways of reporting the news and the Government's
responsibilities of trying to maintain peace at home and abroad.

I believe that the journalistic tradition of skepticism and even defiance toward
political power is valid today. After all, the pamphleteers were ahead of the
politicians in the fight for the independence of this country, and this
tradition still dominates the press, radio and television today.

Most of the dominant figures in American television journalism now - for
example, Dan Rather, Roger Mudd, John Chancellor, Harry Reasoner and Bill
Moyers, to mention just a few following Walter Cronkite and Eric Sevareid - came
out of the little towns of America, and learned their craft in the county
courthouses and police courts of America.

They were taught what we call ''police-blotter reporting.'' That is to say, they
learned to report what was on the police-court blotter - not a picture of the
community as a whole, not the usual but the unusual, not what was right but what
was wrong. They have, every one of them, questioned this philosophy in their
later years, but the tradition endures, especially on television where the
picture of fire and violence in the night dominates the evening news.

This is not to say that Mr. Reagan is right in asking the media to ''trust us,''
or as Lyndon Johnson used to say: ''I'm the only President you have, so why
don't you get on the team?'' If we had followed that, President Kennedy's
disaster at the Bay of Pigs, Mr.  Johnson's deceptions in Vietnam and Richard
Nixon's crimes at Watergate would have been ignored.

It is only to say that Acton's principle that ''power corrupts'' applies not
only to the power of government, but also to the power of the press, and that
one day the media, now concentrating on ''investigative reporting'' - a
redundant phrase - should apply the principle not only to Mr. Reagan but to
itself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA THE OBJECTIONABLE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL MANDELBAUM; Michael Mandelbaum is the author of ''The Nuclear
Question: The United States and Nuclear Weapons 1946-1976'' and ''The Nuclear
Revolution: International Politics Before and After Hiroshima.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 913 words


TOWARDS A NEW COLD WAR Essays on the Current Crisis and How We Got There.  By
Noam Chomsky.  499 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. Cloth, $20.50. Paper, $8.95.

IN his introduction to ''Towards a New Cold War,'' Noam Chomsky, Institute
Professor at M.I.T. and author of several other volumes on American foreign
policy, says that two themes will inform the collection of essays written for a
variety of occasions between 1974 and 1981. The first theme is that of American
foreign policy as the expression of the country's dominant economic interests.
The second is that of the mass media and the nation's intellectuals as the
creators of the political climate in which this policy is carried out.

The themes are present, but they fail to unify the book because the author makes
scarcely any attempt to support the propositions that underlie them.

A considerable literature now exists that seeks to connect American foreign
policy with American economic interests, particularly in the period since World
War II. It includes works by such historians as William Appleman Williams, Fred
Block and Gabriel and Joyce Kolko. To this literature ''Towards a New Cold War''
contributes nothing.

The United States' most important foreign economic relations are with other
advanced industrial societies. The central political conflict, to which American
military efforts are largely devoted, is with the Soviet Union. The essays that
comprise this volume, however, deal mainly with Southeast Asia and the Middle
East.  Specifically, they concern the American war in Indochina and the state of
Israel.

Professor Chomsky barely alludes to any economic basis for American involvement
in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. As for the Middle East, the American economic
interest in that region is plain enough, and may be summarized in one word: oil.
Israel, however, has no oil.  Professor Chomsky does not approve of Israel in
its present social and political form, or of its foreign policy. Neither,
however, do those countries in the Middle East whose friendship seems most
useful for keeping oil flowing to the West. The author takes note of this but
insists that, appearances to the contrary notwithstanding, American support for
Israel has reinforced this country's access to the petroleum reserves of the
Persian Gulf and has served other American strategic interests as well. He does
not discuss these other interests at any length.

He does suggest that Israel acts as a proxy for the United States in arming
African and Latin American countries. He writes that ''Israel is alleged to have
supplied 98 percent of Somoza's arms towards the end of his bloody rule (in
Nicaragua).'' The statement is a curious one, if only because while ''Towards a
New Cold War'' has on the order of 900 notes at the back of the book, covering
more than 100 pages of small print, this particular assertion carries no
citation.

The propagation of ideas that encourage support for established policies in
Western societies is also a subject that has received some attention in recent
years, much of it inspired by the work of the Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci.
To this subject, as well, the present volume adds little.

Professor Chomsky takes to task the American media, by which he means
principally the country's most influential newspapers, for considering the
American war in Indochina at least partly a blunder rather than the unmitigated
crime that he believes it to have been.  He is equally critical of the press's
treatment of Israel, which is widely portrayed in the United States as a
beleaguered democracy rather than as a state that practices discrimination at
home and aggression abroad (which is how Professor Chomsky sees it). Israel's
foreign policies, including the occupation of territory captured in 1967, are
often interpreted as arising from the threat posed by Israel's Arab neighbors.
Professor Chomsky disagrees. He contends that the West Bank of the Jordan River
ought to be organized as an independent Palestinian state, whose government
would be formed by the Palestine Liberation Organization. Answering the charge
that this organization has never recognized Israel's right to exist, Professor
Chomsky writes: ''It seems fair to me to say that by 1975 the PLO had given as
clear an indication of its willingness to accept a two-state solution as one
might reasonably have expected under prevailing conditions.'' Just what those
conditions are he does not say.

The last chapter of ''Towards a New Cold War'' is about the tiny Pacific
territory of East Timor, a colony of Portugal until the Portuguese revolution of
1974, when it declared its independence. It was then attacked by the army of
neighboring Indonesia, and many Timorese have since died. The story, as
Professor Chomsky tells it, is an alarming one, reflecting no credit on the
executive branch of the American Government under several Presidents.

If the book lacks unifying themes, it does have a consistent tone - one of
anger. The purpose of the essays, especially those on Indochina, seems not so
much to persuade the reader that Professor Chomsky's views are correct as to
express outrage that others disagree with them. Those who wish to see those
views set out at length should consult the author's two-volume work ''The
Political Economy of Human Rights,'' written with Edward S. Herman. Those who
share Professor Chomsky's anger, or who wish to witness it, will be interested
in ''Towards a New Cold War.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: futuristic drawing of man on a nuclear bull

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW ROLE FOR AN OLD VETERAN

BYLINE: By GENE RONDINARO

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 1, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 895 words


BAYONNE IN 1959, the World War II aircraft carrier Enterprise weighed anchor
here on her final journey. She was bound for Kearny, a few miles up the
Hackensack River. At a shipyard there, workmen with torches and pneumatic
hammers dismantled the legendary vessel, which had taken part in virtually every
sea and air battle in the Pacific.

It was perhaps the memory of the Enterprise - and of other World War II vessels
that were scrapped at New Jersey shipyards - that inspired James R. Ean, a
wartime Navy pilot, and others to try to preserve the Intrepid in honor of the
men who served aboard her.

And preserved the carrier will be,for she is being converted into a museum at
the Bethlehem Steel Corporation here.  ''I lost many friends while serving on
ships like this,'' said Mr.  Ean, president of the Intrepid Museum Foundation,
as he led a tour of the 20,000-ton ship.

Besides service in World War II, the carrier became a primary rescue vessel for
returning astronauts of the Mercury and Gemini space flights in the early and
mid-1960's. Later in the decade, she served three tours of duty off Vietnam.

Unlike other ships of her era, the 900-foot-long carrier, launched Dec. 3, 1943,
will depart here in late May for her final destination: Pier 86 at West 46th
Street, Manhattan. There she will serve as an air, sea and space museum.

''The Intrepid, which served her country both in time of peace as well as in
time of war, is uniquely qualified to honor those men who pioneered in air, sea
and space,'' Mr. Ean said.

During World War II, the carrier was nearly sunk three times by Japanese bomber
and torpedo attacks. On one of those occasions, shortly after the Battle of
Leyte Gulf in November 1944, two kamikaze planes, each loaded with bombs,
crashed into the ship, killing more than 100 crewmen and causing heavy damage.

Those losses were avenged, however, as United States naval records credit the
Intrepid with the destruction of 80 enemy ships and more than 600 aircraft. Air
groups from the carrier helped sink the Yamato and Misashi, the two
super-battleships of the Japanese fleet.

After extensive negotiations, the Navy donated the carrier to the foundation in
1980 for use as a museum. She was towed from the mothball fleet in Philadelphia
last month and will assume her new role on July 4.

Although in need of extensive rehabilitation after years of neglect and
vandalisim in Philadelphia, executives at Bethlehem Steel say that the Intrepid
will be ready in time for her voyage to 42d Street in late May.

''The people at Bethlehem Steel really went out of their way to help us,'' Mr.
Ean said. ''Perhaps some of the workers can still recall some of the ships that
passed through here on their way to being scrapped. Many, I am sure, are happy
to be preserving a ship rather than seeing another one demolished.''

The battleship New Jersey, built a year before the Intrepid, served with her in
World War II and in Vietnam, and also is being refurbished. Unlike the Intrepid,
however, the New Jersey is being fitted with cruise missiles and will again join
the active fleet.

''I look forward to the day when both the New Jersey and the Intrepid are docked
in the Hudson,'' said Mr. Ean, referring to efforts by state residents to
acquire the battleship from the Navy and to moor her permanently as a museum at
Liberty State Park in Jersey City.

''Our foundation hopes to be able to advise and financially support New Jersey
groups interested in acquiring the battleship from the Navy, once she is again
officially deactivated.''

As a museum, the Intrepid will include the flight deck and control tower, as
well as her main hangar deck. The hangar deck will be divided into four
historical halls marking the history of naval and space aeronautics from the
turn of the century to the present.

Each hall will offer slide presentations and artifacts of various periods in
American naval history. Many of the World War II carrierbased planes, later jet
aircraft and prototypes of the Mercury and Gemini space capsules, if not the
actual capsules themselves, will be on display on the flight deck and in the
hangar.

Rehabilitation of the top two decks will cost about $22 million.  Funds are
being raised partly by a $14.2 million bond issue floated by the foundation and
by grants from the Federal Government and City of New York. Future construction
and rehabilitation work on the lower eight decks to house two maritime and
aviation schools will cost an additional $22 million.

Although the flight deck will point across the Hudson toward New Jersey, state
residents nearly got a much closer look at the vessel when foundation officials
considered an offer several years ago from North Bergen to berth the Intrepid
there.

''We gave the offer a lot of serious thought, but the site could not
realistically compare with the vast population density and tourist potential of
the Manhattan waterfront,'' Mr. Ean said. ''I guess the Intrepid and the City of
New York are very much alike. Both were almost sunk three times.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of aircraft carrier Intrepid

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LADY BIRD JOHNSON: A TIME FOR FAMILY AND HERSELF

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 21


Lady Bird Johnson dislikes the term ''widow.'' ''It comes from a Sanskrit word
meaning empty,'' she said, ''and I never use it, nor do I think of myself as
being alone because I have a lot of family.'' There was a pause before she
added, with a small smile, ''However, there comes a time when you are alone,
because they all belong to each other.''

It has been nine years since the death of her husband, Lyndon B.  Johnson, and
14 years since her departure from Washington and the White House. Home for Mrs.
Johnson now is the L.B.J. Ranch, 65 miles from Austin, Tex., and an apartment -
''above the store, so to speak'' - atop the L.B.J. Broadcasting Building in
Austin. But there is a well-beaten path from the ranch to Washington and New
York.  Friends and relatives visit her, and she visits them.

Son-in-Law Now Governor

She was in Washington recently for a meeting of the Friends of the L.B.J.
Library and a quick visit with her grandchildren, her daughter Lynda and
son-in-law Charles S. Robb, the new Governor of Virginia.  She came to the door
of the Robbs' home in McLean, Va., nibbling on an apple. She had just returned
from an overnight visit to New York, where she had done some shopping and
attended a dinner at the home of her friend Mollie Parnis.

At the age of 69, Mrs. Johnson has a complexion that is fresh and clear, eyes
alight with anticipation and dark hair lightly touched with a frosting of white.

She says the political world - a daily part of her life for many years -was not
what she would have chosen on her own. ''But I was incredibly lucky that I was
able to share that life with Lyndon,'' she said. ''It far exceeded any girlhood
dreams that I had. And let me tell you one thing: I came to have a lot of
respect for the people who are engaged in politics.''

She once ruefully observed that a politician ''should be born a foundling and
remain a bachelor.'' So what are her thoughts about her daughter Lynda's
embarking on that path? ''I think it's a hard life,'' she replied, ''and Lynda
will just have to realize that you have to give a lot and postpone personal
indulgences to another day -which is sort of a chapter in my life that I'm
living right now.''

Not Active in Party Politics

When her husband died, she told friends that she did not want to become another
Eleanor Roosevelt. She has not become active in party politics or chosen to
become a political force on her own because, she said, ''I wanted to do those
things that I had to leave on the shelf for so long.''

''My own personal love is travel,'' she continued, ''and I wanted to spend hours
with my children and grandchildren - my daughter Luci and her four children live
in Austin - and I always and forever will be hooked on conservation or
beautification of whatever you want to call it.''

And now there is time for reading. ''I love to stay home two or three nights a
week and read,'' she said. ''I recently went back to an old book, John
Marquand's 'So Little Time' - it's a treasure.''

But Mrs. Johnson has not exactly retired. She was out on the Virginia campaign
trail on behalf of her son-in-law; there have been trips to the Middle East,
East Africa and China; and she is actively involved in the administration of the
family radio station as well as the L.B.J. Library and the L.B.J. School of
Public Affairs. She has been working her way through an oral history for the
library and is up to the year 1952. ''It fills in the gaps, the footnotes to
history that you don't find in the official papers,'' she said.

Promotes Highway Plantings

Mrs. Johnson is also a member of the National Park Service Advisory Council; she
has worked on development of a riverfront park on the lower Colorado in Austin
and has encouraged the planting of wildflowers on highway rights of way in
Texas. ''What with the plow and the cow, the land has shrunk, and the rights of
way are the last citadel,'' she said. ''They are potential gardens.''

She says the fact that she is not involved in politics does not mean she has no
interest in public issues. ''I'm not as well informed as I should be, but I am a
fairly good listener and reader, and I still have marvelous opportunities to be
an educated citizen,'' she said. ''That is one of the things we try to do at the
Johnson library and school - deal with the problems of today and expand
horizons. We just had a fascinating two days' symposium on nuclear negotiations
with people like McGeorge Bundy and Paul Warnke.''

Born Claudia Alta Taylor and married at the age of 22, she lived for 38 years as
the wife of a consummate politician. ''There was no doubt about it, he was a
strong man - a driving engine,'' she said.  ''But he also was a very tender,
needful man, and we were better together than we were apart. I didn't have any
more important business than to make him comfortable, and he felt the same way
about me - although our tastes weren't always the same by a long shot.''

'I Was Running Breathlessly'

If there were second chances in life, what would she do differently?

She mused: ''I did try, but looking back I think I should have tried to take
more advantage of the opportunities -to stretch myself more, to learn more, to
give more. At the time I thought I was running breathlessly.''

The turbulent Johnson years in the White House, beginning with the tragedy of
the assassination of President Kennedy and ending with the tragedy of Vietnam,
were a time of learning for her as she rafted down rivers on beautification
trips and campaigned by train through a racially torn South.

''You get a cram course in the United States of America,'' she said, ''the
history, the geography, the people that make it up and what they do for a
living, the different racial and cultural strains in its history. It enlarges
you, makes you a more understanding person. It was yeasty, hopeful, charging
forward against the troubles of the time.''

No Thought of Remarriage

Does the public require too much of the wife of the President? Do the First
Ladies bear a special responsibility? ''It is a marvelous oppportunity,'' she
said, ''But actually, you know, they are just elected by one man. So I think
their life is entitled to be their own.''

As for remarriage, she throws her head back and laughs at the thought.  ''No, I
haven't given any thought to marriage,'' she said, ''although I must say, within
one month a favorite friend at home got married; Muriel Humphrey up and got
married; and another woman with whom I worked in the Park Service got married.
And they were all my age. I looked around and said to myself - this is going out
of style, this business of being ...'' She paused and said the word she shuns,
''a widow.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Lady Bird Johnson

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. OFFERS REPORT TO SHOW SOVIET USE OF CHEMICAL WAR;
Excerpts from report, page 6.

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1292 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 22


The United States submitted a 32-page report today detailing its evidence for
its accusation that y the Soviet Union and its allies in Southeast Asia have
used toxins and chemical warfare agents in Laos, Cambodia and Afghanistan.

In the report submitted to Congress and the United Nations, the Government said
that since 1975 more than 10,000 people have been killed in nearly 400 chemical
warfare attacks in the three countries.

Deputy Secretary of State Walter J. Stoessel Jr., speaking at a news briefing,
asserted: ''The Soviet Union and its allies are flagrantly and repeatedly
violating international laws and agreements. If the world fails to halt this
activity, it will have little chance to prevent its repetition in other lands
against other peoples.''

Intelligence Report Declassified

Reagan Administration officials said they hoped that the report, which is a
declassified version of an intelligence document recently prepared for President
Reagan, would overcome public doubts about previous charges by the White House
concerning the use of chemicals by the Soviets in Southeast Asia and
Afghanistan.

A group of United Nations experts said last December that its efforts to
investigate the charges were inconclusive. Some members of Congress have pressed
the Administration to make more of its intelligence information public to dispel
doubts.

The Soviet Union, through its official news agency Tass, called the charges
''dirty lies'' and said, ''The world has not forgotten that tens of thousands of
chemical agents were dropped over Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia in the years of
U.S. aggression in Indochina.''

Paper Based on Interviews

The report made public today, titled ''Chemical Warfare in Southeast Asia and
Afghanistan,'' was based on interviews with purported survivors of chemical
attacks, doctors who said that they had treated victims of such attacks, and
defectors who told American officials that they took part in chemical warfare
operations, according to officials.

It also draws on analyses of physical samples taken from sites where attacks
were believed to have occurred and intelligence information collected through
aerial reconnaissance and other technical means, they said.

However, one senior Administration official acknowledged, ''We still don't have
the kind of hard, direct evidence that would remove all doubts.''

Soviet Involvement Asserted

The report directly links the Soviet Union to chemical attacks in Indochina. It
states: ''The conclusion is inescapable that the toxins and other chemical
warfare agents were developed in the Soviet Union,'' and ''provided to the Lao
and Vietnamese either directly or through the transfer of know-how.'' Mr.
Stoessel added that the reported chemical agents had been ''fabricated into
weapons with Soviet assistance.''

As evidence of Soviet involvement, the document cites ''reports which specify
that Soviet technicians supervise the shipment, storage, filling and loading
onto aircraft of the chemical munitions.''

The paper describes a shipment of wooden crates to the port of Ho Chi Minh City,
formerly Saigon, in Vietnam in July 1981 that Vietnamese security forces
puurportedly said contained canisters of toxic chemicals.

According to the document, security personnel sealed off the area around the
ship when a soldier unloading the crates tried to pry open a canister. The
soldiers were told, ''that the canister contained deadly toxic substances from
the U.S.S.R,'' the report said.

In addition, the paper states, two Vietnamese corporals from the 337th and 347th
army divisions said that Soviet-supplied chemical weapons were stored in caves
near Lang Son in February 1979.

Nerve Gases Among Chemicals

The chemical agents used, according to the American document, include both nerve
gases, irritants, incapacitants and lethal mycotoxins. The primary toxins
identified in the report are known as trichothecenes, a class of biologically
active fungal substances that can cause acute respiratory and gastrointestinal
diseases.

Evidence of chemical attacks in Indochina, according to report, came from a
variety of sources. In Laos, most of the reports were provided by refugees who
had fled to Thailand from Laos. Citing more than 200 interviews conducted by
American Embassy officials in Thailand, the report contends that Soviet aircraft
and captured American planes were used to disseminate toxic chemicals in sprays,
rockets and bombs.

The reports, according to the Government paper, described 261 attacks in Loas in
which at least 6,504 deaths were attributed to exposure to chemical agents. The
document said the refugees described being enveloped in a ''red gas'' or a
''yellow cloud.'' The symptoms reported by the victims included vomiting,
dizziness, bleeding gums, convulsions, lung collapse and skin blisters, all
typical reactions to chemical or toxic poisoning, the report states.

The report asserts that tests conducted by Army's Chemical Systems Laboratory on
soil and other materials from Laos and Cambodia showed an unusually high level
of toxins. ''The appearance of these particular trichothecene toxins in these
high levels in environments generally inhospitable to their formation cannot
reasonably be attributed to natural contamination,'' the report concludes.

Account by Laotian Pilot

A main source of evidence cited in the Government report came from a Laotian
pilot who the document said defected in 1979 and gave the Government an account
of his involvement in chemical warfare. The pilot, according to the report, said
that he flew aircraft equipped to dispense chemical agents on villagers in
northern Laos.

The pilot said he was often warned to fly at higher-than-normal altitudes when
firing rockets to avoid endangering his crew. He said the rockets exploded in
the air, rather than on impact, and produced clouds of red smoke.

The report describes a similar pattern of chemical warfare use in Cambodia,
asserting that at least 124 attacks there from 1978 to 1981 killed 981 persons.
American officials said today that figures in the report were compiled by
reviewing refugee accounts and comparing them with other evidence. The officials
said that the actual totals for attacks and deaths were probably significantly
higher.

In the case of Afghanistan, the report asserts that Soviet forces have used a
variety of lethal and nonlethal chemical agents against Mujahedeen resistance
forces since Soviet military forces moved into the country in late 1979.

Specific Agents Not Known

The report acknowledges that it was not possible to verify the use of specific
chemical agents but says that in correlation with other evidence, including
symptoms reported by those who said they experienced the attacks, it is apparent
that the Soviets used nerve gas and other incapacitants.

The report cited 47 chemical warfare attacks in Afghanistan since 1979, which it
said had killed 3,042 persons.  The report speculates that chemicals have been
used in Indochina and Afghanistan because the problems faced by attacking forces
in those countries ''make the use of chemical weapons a militarily effective way
of breaking the will and resistance of stubborn antigovernment forces operating
from relatively inaccessible, protected sanctuaries.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Walter J. Stoessel Jr. (page A15)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM STATE DEPARTMENT REPORT ON CHEMICAL WARFARE;
STUDY ASSERTS LETHAL TOXINS WERE USED IN 3 ASIAN COUNTRIES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 8580 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Mar. 22


Following are excerpts from ''Chemical Warfare in Southeast Asia and
Afghanistan,'' a State Department report to Congress:

This study presents the evidence available to the U.S. Government on chemical
warfare activities in Laos, Kampuchea and Afghanistan through January 1982 and
examines the Soviet involvement in those activities. It is based on a massive
amount of information from a variety of sources, which has been carefully
compiled and analyzed over the years. The paper is accompanied by annexes and
tables that provide details of the medical evidence and sample analyses, a
technical description of trichothecene toxins, and other supporting data.

Introduction

Despite a continued flow of reports, dating back over seven years, of chemical
warfare in Southeast Asia and more recently Afghanistan and despite the
still-mounting physical evidence of the use of trichothecene toxins as warfare
agents, doubts as to the conclusive nature of the available evidence have
persisted. These doubts have arisen for several reasons. For one, the evidence
of the use of lethal chemical weapons has become available over a peiod of
several years and from a variety of sources. Few governments, journalists or
interested members of the public have been exposed to all of this evidence, nor
has it been available in any one place. A second difficulty has been the
inevitable need for the U.S. Government to protect some of the relevant
information, often gathered at personal risk to individuals who secured it, or
obtained through the use of highly sensitive methods.

This report represents an effort of the U.S. Government to correct the first
deficiency and to ameliorate the second to the extent possible. In preparation
of this report, all of the information available to the U.S. Government on
chemical weapons use in Laos, Kampuchea and Afghanistan was assembled in one
place. This information was again reviewed, analyzed, cross-indexed and
organized in a coherent fashion. Based upon this comprehensive analysis, a set
of conclusions were drawn, conclusions which have since been reviewed and agreed
on without qualification by every relevant agency of the U.S. Government.

The Kinds of Evidence

The evidence upon which this report is based is of several kinds, including:

- Testimony of those who saw, experienced and suffered from chemical weapons
attacks.

- Testimony of doctors, refugee workers, journalists and others who had the
opportunity to question large numbers of those with firsthand experience of
chemical warfare.

- Testimony of those who engaged in chemical warfare or were in a position to
observe those who did.

- Scientific evidence, based upon the analysis of physical samples taken from
sites where attacks had been conducted.

- Documentary evidence from open sources.

- Intelligence derived from ''national technical means.'' These sources provide
compelling evidence that tens of thousands of unsophisticated and defenseless
peoples have for a period of years been subjected to a campaign of chemical
attacks. Taken together, this evidence has led the U.S. Government to conclude
that Lao and Vietnamese forces, operating under Soviet supervision, have, since
1975, employed lethal chemical and toxin weapons in Laos; that Vietnamese forces
have, since 1978, used lethal chemical and toxin agents in Kampuchea, and that
Soviet forces have used a variety of lethal chemical warfare agents, including
nerve gases, in Afghanistan since the Soviet invasion of that country in 1979.

Key Judgments

Laos

The U.S. Government has concluded from all the evidence that selected Lao and
Vietnamese forces, under direct Soviet supervision, have employed lethal
trichothecene toxins and other combinations of chemical agents against Hmong
resisting government control and their villages since at least 1976.
Trichothecene toxins have been positively identified, but medical symptoms
indicate that irritants, incapacitants and nerve agents also have been employed.
Thousands have been killed or severely injured. Thousands also have been driven
from their homeland by the use of these agents.

Kampuchea

Vietnamese forces have used lethal trichothecene toxins on Democratic Kampuchean
(D.K.) troops and Khmer villages since at least 1978. Medical evidence indicates
that irritants, incapacitants and nerve agents also have been used.

Afghanistan

Soviet forces in Afghanistan have used a variety of lethal and nonlethal
chemical agents on Mujahedeen resistance forces and Afghan villages since the
Soviet invasion in December 1979. In addition, there is some evidence that
Afghan Government forces may have used Soviet-supplied chemical weapons against
the Mujahedeen even before the Soviet invasion. Although it has not been
possible to verify through sample analysis the specific agents used by the
Soviets, a number of Afghan military defectors have named the agents brought
into the country by the Soviets and have described where and when they were
employed. This information has been correlated with other evidence, including
the reported symptoms, leading to the conclusion that nerve agents, phosgene
oxime and various incapacitants and irritants have been used. Other agents and
toxic smokes also are in the country. Some reported symptoms are consistent with
those produced by lethal or sublethal doses of trichothecene toxins, but this
evidence is not conclusive.

The Soviet Connection

The conclusion is inescapable that the toxins and other chemical warfare agents
were developed in the Soviet Union, provided to the Lao and Vietnamese either
directly or through the transfer of knowhow, and weaponized with Soviet
assistance in Laos, Vietnam and Kampuchea. Soviet military forces are known to
store agents in bulk and move them to the field for munitions fill as needed.
This practice also is followed in Southeast Asia and Afghanistan, as evidenced
by many reports which specify that Soviet technicians supervise the shipment,
storage, filling and loading onto aircraft of the chemical munitions. The
dissemination techniques reported and observed evidently have been drawn from
years of Soviet chemical warfare testing and experimentation. There is no
evidence to support any alternative explanation, such as the hypothesis that the
Vietnamese produce and employ toxin weapons completely on their own.

Methodology

The judgments of this study were arrived at through a rigorous analytical
process.

- Every relevant piece of information on reported chemical warfare incidents was
reviewed, recorded, and tabulated. Numbers of attacks and deaths were screened
for possible duplication. Extensive data on the Soviet chemical and biological
warfare program also were reviewed.

- All the test data on physical evidence available to the U.S.  Government -
including environmental samples and background contols - were reviewed.

- A scientific report on toxins, which concluded that trichothecenes probably
were among the agents used in Southeast Asia, was prepared.

- The medical evidence was analyzed, drawing on all available information from
Southeast Asia and Afghanistan and incorporating the findings of a Department of
Defense medical team, which concluded that at least three types of agents were
used in Laos.

- Extensive consultations were held with Government and non-Government
scientists and medical authorities, many of whom were asked to review the
evidence. Experts from other countries also were consulted.
pick up FIRST ADD CHEMICAL TEXT

After the data were organized to permit comparative analysis, the study focused
on three separate questions.

- Have lethal and other casualty-producing agents been used in Southeast Asia
and Afghanistan?

- What are these agents, and how and by whom are they employed?

- Where do these agents originate, and how do they find their way to the field?
Although the evidence differs for each country, the analytical approach was the
same. Testimony of eyewitnesses - date, place, and type of attack - was matched
against information from defectors, journalists, international organizations,
and sensitive information that often pinpointed the time and place of chemical
attacks. In addition, information on military operations in the areas where
chemical attacks had been reported was examined to establish whether air or
artillery strikes took place or where there was fighting in the areas where
chemical agents reportedly were used. In all three countries, instances were
identified in which eyewitness accounts could be correlated directly with
information from other sources on military operations in progress.

Discussion of Findings

As soon as it was determined that chemical agents had been used, an effort was
made to identify the specific agents. To do this it was necessary to collect and
analyze at least one of the following: environmental samples contaminated with
agents; the munitions used to deliver agents, or biological specimens from
victims of an attack. A study by medical-toxicological experts of symptoms
exhibited by individuals exposed to toxic agents provides a good indication of
the general class of chemical agent used. Thus, the range of clinical
manifestations from chemical agents, as reported by a U.S. Army investigative
team in Thailand, resulted in the determination that nerve agents, irritants
such as Cs, and highly toxic hemorrhagic chemicals or mixture of chemicals were
used in Laos.

Other medical-toxicological personnel who reviewed the evidence and conducted
their own investigation reached the same conclusion. They further indicated that
toxins such as the trichothecenes were a probable cause of the lethal
hemorrhaging effect seen in Kampuchea and Laos. In many cases, symptoms reported
by the Democratic Kampuchean forces in Kampuchea and the Mujahedeen in
Afghanistan were similar to those reported by the Hmong in Laos. Moreover,
symptoms reported from Afghanistan and Kampuchea indicated that a highly potent,
rapid-acting, incapacitant ''knockout'' chemical also was being used. Mujahedeen
victims and witnesses to chemical attacks reported other unusual symptoms,
including a blackening of the skin, severe skin irritation along with multiple
small blisters and severe itching, severe eye irritation and difficulty in
breathing - all of which suggests that phosgene oxime or a similar substance was
used.

Problems of Sample-Collecting

Collecting samples possibly contaminated with a toxic agent during or after a
chemical assault is difficult under any circumstances, but particularly when the
assault is against ill-prepared people without masks or other protective
equipment. Obtaining contaminated samples that will yield positive traces of
specific chemical agents depends on many factors. These include the persistency
of the chemical, the ambient temperature, rainfall, wind conditions, the medium
on which the chemical was deposited and the time, care and packaging of the
sample from collection to laboratory analysis.

Many traditional or known chemical warfare agents are nonpersistent and
disappear from the environment within a few minutes to several hours after being
dispersed. Such agents include the nerve agents sarin and tabun; the blood
agents hydrogen cyanide and cyanogen chloride; the choking agents phosgene and
diphosgene,; and the irritant phosgene oxime. Other standard chemical warfare
agents such as the nerve agents VX and thickened soman and the blistering agents
sulfur mustard, nitrogen mustard and lewisite may persist for several days to
weeks depending on weather conditions.

The Need for Speed

The trichothecene toxins have good persistency but may be diluted by adverse
weather conditions to below detectable concentrations. To maximize the chances
of detection, sample collections need to be made as rapidly as possible after a
chemical assault; as with many agents, this means minutes to hours. Under the
circumstances of Southeast Asia and Afghanistan, such rapid collection has
simply not been possible. Although many samples were collected, few held any
realistic prospect of yielding positive results. It is fortunate that
trichothecenes are sufficiently persistent and in some cases were not diluted by
adverse weather conditions. Thus we were able to detect them several months
after the attack.

Samples have been collected from Southeast Asia since mid-1979 and from
Afghanistan since May 1980. To date, about 50 individual samples of greatly
varying types and usefulness for analytical purposes have been collected and
analyzed for the presence of known chemical warefare agents, none of which has
been detected. Based on recommendations by medical and toxicological experts and
findings of investigators from the U.S. Army's Chemical Systems Laboratory,
several of the samples have been analyzed for the trichothecene group of
mycotoxins. Four samples, two from Kampuchea and two from Laos, were found to
contain high levels of trichothecene toxins. In addition, preliminary results of
the anslysis of blood samples drawn from victims of an attack indicate the
presence of a trichothecene metabolite of T-2, namely HT-2.

A review of all reports indicates the use of many different chemical agents,
means of delivery and types of chemical attacks.  The use of trichothecene
toxins has been identified through symptoms and sample analysis. In some cases,
however, the symptoms suggest other agents, such as nerve gas, which have not
been identified through sample analysis. Significant differences as well as
similarities have surfaced in the reports from the three countries.  The
evidence from each country, therefore, is described separately, with attention
drawn to similarities where appropriate.

Laos

Reports of chemical attacks against Hmong villages and guerrilla strongholds in
Laos date from the summer of 1975 to the present. Most of the reports were
provided by Hmong refugees who were interviewed in Thailand and the United
States. More than 200 interviews were carried out variously by U.S. Embassy
officials in Thailand, a Department of Defense team of medical-toxicological
experts, U.S.  physicians, Thai officials, journalists and representatives of
international aid and relief organizations. According to the interviews, Soviet
AN-2 and captured U.S. L-19 and T-28/41 aircraft usually were employed to
disseminate toxic chemical agents by sprays, rockets and bombs. In some cases,
Soviet helicopters and jet aircraft were said to have been used.

The reports describe 261 separate attacks in which at least 6,504 deaths were
cited as having resulted directly from exposure to chemical agents. The actual
number of deaths is almost certainly much higher, since the above figure does
not take account of deaths in attacks for which no specific casualty figures
were reported. The greatest concentration of reported chemical agent use
occurred in the area where the three provinces of Vientiane, Xiengkhouang and
Louang Prabang adjoin. This triborder region accouted for 77 percent of the
reported attacks and 83 percent of the chemical-associated deaths.  Most of the
reported attacks took place in 1978 and 1979. Since 1979, the incidence of
chemical attacks appears to have been lower, but reported death rates among
unprotected and untreated victims were higher. Only seven chemical attacks were
reported in the fall of 1981, for example, yet 1,034 deaths were associated with
those incidents.

The medical symptoms reportedly produced by the chemical agents are varied.
According to knowledgeable physicians, the symptoms clearly point to at least
three types of chemical agents: incapacitant or riot-control agents, a nerve
agent and an agent causing massive hemorrhaging. The last-named was positively
identified as trichothecene toxins. This was announced publicly by Secretary
Haig in September 1981.

In a number of the refugee reports, eyewitnesses described attacks as consisting
of ''red gas'' or a ''yellow cloud.'' Red gas was considerd the more lethal. A
former Lao Army captain stated that the ''red gas'' caused the Hmong to die
within 12 hours. An employee of an international organization interviewed
victims of a September 15, 1979, attack in which nonlethal rounds preceded an
attack by five or six ''red gas'' bombs that covered a 500-meter area. Persons
within 30 to 100 meters of the circle died in 10 minutes after severe
convulsions. Others had headaches, chest pains and vomiting but did not die.

Every qualified interrogator who systematically intervewed the Hmong refugees
concluded that they had been subjected to chemical attacks. A U.S. Government
medical team returned from Thailand in 1979 convinced that several unidentified
chemical warfare agents had produced the symptoms described by the refugees.
This evidence was expanded by testimony from a variety of sources, including
that of a Lao pilot who flew chemical warfare missions before defecting in 1979.
His detailed description of the Lao, Vietnamese and Soviet program to use
chemical agents to defeat the Hmong resistance helped dispel any lingering
suspicions that the refugees had fabricated or embellished the stories. The Lao
pilot described the chemical rocket he had fired as having a more loosely
fitting warhead than a conventional rocket. (His account appears in Annex A.)

Kampuchea

Since October 1978, radio broadcasts, press releases and official protests to
the United Nations by the Democratic Kampuchea leadership have accused the
Vietnamese and the Hanoi-backed People's Republic of Kampuchea regime of using
Soviet-made lethal chemical agents and weapons against D.K. guerrilla forces and
civilians. D.K. allegations for a time were the only source of information
concerning chemical warfare attacks in Kampuchea. In November 1979, however, the
guerrilla forces of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front reported that
the Vietnamese had attacked them with tear gas which, from their description,
resembled the riot-control agent Cs.  Subsequently, Thai officials, Democratic
Kampuchea informants and refugees, Vietnamese Army defectors, U.S. and Thai
medical personnel, officials of international aid and relief organizations and
Canadian and West European officials also have implicated the Vietnamese in the
offensive use of lethal and incapacitating chemical agents in Kampuchea.

There are reports of 124 separate attacks in Kampuchea from 1978 to the fall of
1981 in which lethal chemicals caused the deaths of 981 persons (see Table 2).
The mortality figure represents a minimum because some reports state only that
there were deaths and do not provide a number. The earliest reports cite attacks
in Ratanakiri Province, in the northeastern corner of the country (see map).
Reports from 1979 to the present show the use of lethal chemicals primarily in
the provinces bordering Thailand. The greatest use of chemical agents apparently
has been in Battambang Province, with 51 reported incidents; Pursat Province has
experienced the next highest frequency, with 25 reported incidents. These
numbers are consistent with the overall high level of military activity reported
in the border provinces.

A review of information from all sources provides direct and specific support
for 28 of 124 reported attacks. There is in addition some evidence that in all
reported instances some form of attack took place. This evidence includes
reports of troop movements, supply transfers, operational plans, postoperation
reporting and air activity. It indicates that miliary activity took place at the
time and place of every incident reported to involve lethal chemical agents. In
some cases, it provides strong circumstantial evidence that the action involved
chemical sustances - for example, the movement of chemicals and personal
protection equipment into the area.

There is no doubt that in late 1978 and 1979 the Vietnamese, and what later
became the People's Republic of Kampuchea forces, made at least limited use of
riot-control chemicals and possible incapacitating agents against both Communist
and non-Communist guerrilla forces in Kampuchea. The chemicals used probably
included toxic smokes, riot control agents such as Cs and an unidentified
incapacitating agent that caused vertigo and nausea and ultimately rendered
victims unconscious with no other signs or symptoms.

In March 1979 during Vietnamese operations against Khmer Rouge forces in the
Phnom Melai area, a Vietnamese Army private who later defected observed the
following activities related to chemical warfare:

- During the fighting, all regiment (740th) troops were issued gas masks.
However, the Second battalion, a ''border defense unit,'' was not issued masks.
This unit was in the Phnom Melai area and was virtually surrounded by Khmer
Rouge forces.

- At another point in the battle, the regiment's troops were ordered to don
masks. The Vietnamese Army private reported that he saw two Soviets (Caucasians)
fire a DH-10 (a hand-held weapon identified by the private's comrades). He was
about 50 meters from the firing point. The weapon at impact, which he was able
to observe from his position, gave off clouds of white, gray and green gas or
smoke. His signal unit subsequently passed a message reporting that there were
300 dead, including the unprotected Khmer Rouge and Vietnamese of the border
defense forces' Second Battalion. The corpses reportedly had traces of white and
green powder on their faces and clothes. Their faces were contorted, with eyes
wide open.  No blood was seen. (A Hmong reistance leader described an incident
in 1981 in which two Soviet soldiers fired a hand-held weapon that dispersed a
similar lethal agent.)

Starting in February 1980, reports revealed that the Vietnamese were using
60-millimeter mortars, 120-millimeter shells, 107-millimeter rockets, M-79
grenade launchers filled with chemical agents as well as munitions delivered by
T-28 aircraft. According to the D.K., the chemicals used were green and yellow
and powderlike in appearance. In some instances the gas was described as yellow
or white. The symptoms described were tightening of the chest, disorientation,
vomiting, bleeding from the hose and gums, discloration of the body and
''stiffening'' of the teeth. In July 1980, the D.K. described artillery attacks
that produced a black smoke causing itchy skin, weakness, skin lesions and in
some cases decaying skin and blisters. In December 1980, the Vietnamese were
once again firing chemical artillery shells, and it was believed that poison
chemicals were being brought into Thailand's border region.  By March 1981, the
Democratic Kampuchea forces had reported numerous attacks directed againt them
with lethal chemical agents and the poisoning of food and water.

U.S. analysis of contaminated vegetation samples collected within hours of a
March 1981 attack showed high levels of three trichothecene toxins in a
combination that would not be expected to be found in a natural outbreak in this
environment. At the levels found on the vegetation, the three trichothecenes
would produce vomiting, skin irritations and itching, and bleeding symptoms.
Water samples taken from the area of the same attack also contained
trichothecene toxins. Control samples from nearby areas confirmed that these
toxins were not indigenous to the locale.

There also is ample evidence of military activity at the place and time of the
acquisition of the samples. Vietnamese Army defectors described plans for
multiregimental sweep operations to be conducted along the border in
northwestern Battambang Province before the end of the dry season in May. Actual
fighting, however, continued to be characterized by guerrilla tactics on both
sides, including, according to a Vietnamese Army defector, ''staging ambushes,
laying minefields, and use of deception.'' Indeed, Democratic Kampuchean
resistance forces were ordered to avoid large-scale operations and to limit
combat operations to scattered sapper attacks. Such information is consistent
with other reports of Vietnamese Army forces spreading toxic chemicals in
streams, along roadsides and around villages and firing toxic gas shells against
enemy positions. The Phnom Melai sector, where Phnom Mak Hoeun is located, was
described as an ''anthill of D.K. activity,'' and actions reported during March
were ''sporadic firefights'' around Phnom Mak Hoeun involving the Vietnamese
Army's 2d Battalion, 2d Border Security Regiment.

The Soviet Connection In Southeast Asia

Much of the Soviet interest in Southeast Asia is dictated by their rivalry with
China and their close alliance with the Vietnamese.  Regional Communist forces
have been strengthened to contain Chinese influence and deter military
incurions. The area of northern Laos between Vientiane and the Chinese border -
where the Hmong hill tribes have stubbornly resisted and harassed Vietnamese
forces - is strategically significant to the Vietnamese because it adjoins a
hostile China. In the last few years the Vietnamese have expanded their military
construction and strengthened their forces in Laos, which now number 50,000.

Initially there was a tendency to interpret the Soviet role as strictly
advisory. Now, however, there is considerable evidence to suggest that the
Soviets are far more involved in the Lao and Vietnamese chemical warfare program
than was assumed earlier. An estimated 500 Soviet military advisers provide
maintenance assistance and technical support, actually running the Lao Air
Force, and give advanced training to Lao personnel in conventional as well as
chemical warfare.

The Soviets have had advisers and technicans working in Vietnam and Laos for
many years and in Kampuchea since 1979. However, it was not until early 1979
that evidence surfaced on the Soviets' direct involvement in chemical warfare
activities. For example, the Lao Army chemical section in Xiangkhoang prepared
Soviet-manufactured chemical items for inspection by a Soviet military team on
Feb. 7, 1979. A seven-man team of Soviet chemical artillery experts, accompanied
by Lao chemical officers, inspected chemical supplies and artillery rounds at
the Xeno storage facility in Savannakhet on June 1, 1979. One report stated that
the Soviets would be inspecting the same chemical explosives used to suppress
the Hmong in the Phou Bia area.

In addition to this information, Hmong accounts have described Soviet advisers
and technicians participating in the preparation of the chemical weapons for the
attacks on the Hmong villages. Hmong eyewitnesses claim to have seen ''Caucasian
pilots'' in aircraft, and one Hmong report states that a downed Soviet aircraft
was discovered in the jungle along with a dead Soviet pilot. In November 1981, a
Hmong resistance leader described how Soviet soldiers fighting with the Lao Army
fired hand-held weapons that dispersed a lethal agent over a 300-meter area.
Several Lao defectors have reported seeing Soviet advisers present when aircraft
were loaded with chemical-agent rockets.

In July 1981, a Soviet shipment of wooden crates filled with canisters described
by the Vietnamese as ''deadly toxic chemicals'' was unloaded at the port of Ho
Chi Minh City. This incident further corroborates the judgment that the Soviets
have been shipping chemical warfare materiel to Vietnam for some time. During
the unloading, Vietnamese soldiers were caught pilfering the wooden crates
containing the canisters. The soldiers dropped one of the wooden cases and
intentionally broke it open; they wanted to determine if its contents were
edible or valuable for pilferage. When a soldier broke the nylon seal and
attempted to pry open a canister, special security personnel isolated the area
and told the soldiers that the canisters contained deadly toxic substances from
the U.S.S.R. The wooden crates, each weighing 100 kilograms, were loaded on
military trucks and taken under special guard to the Long Binh storage depot.

This incident is only one in a series involving Soviet chemical warfare materiel
dating back several years.

Afghanistan

Attacks with chemical weapons against the Mujahedeen guerrillas in Afghanistan
were reported as early as six months before the Soviet invasion on Dec. 27,
1979. The information specifies that Soviet-made aircraft were used to drop
chemical bombs, with no clear identification of Soviet or Afghan pilots or of
the specific agents used. On Nov. 16, 1979, chemical bombs reportedly were
dropped along with conventional air munitions on targets in Farah, Herat and
Badghis Provinces by Soviet-supplied Afghan IL-28 bombers based at Shindand. A
number of Afghan military defectors have stated that the Soviets provided the
Afghan military with chemical warfare training as well as supplies of lethal and
incapacitating agents.

For the period from the summer of 1979 to the summer of 1981, the U.S.
Government received reports of 47 separate chemical attacks with a claimed death
toll of more than 3,000 (see Table 3). Of the 47 reports, 36 came from Afghan
Army deserters, Mujahedeen reistance fighters, journalists, U.S. physicians and
others. For 24 of the reported attacks, there is additional independent evidence
supporting allegations of chemical attacks. In seven instances, further
individual reporting exists. Evidence for 20 of the reported incidents comes
from information on Soviet or Afghan Army combat operations in progress in areas
and at times approximating those of a reported chemical attack.

The reports indicated that fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters usually were
employed to disseminate chemical warfare agents by rockets, bombs, and sprays.
Chemical-filled landmines were also reportedly used by the Soviets. The chemical
clouds were usually gray or blue-black, yellow or a combination of the colors.

Symptoms reported by victims and witnesses of attacks indicate that nonlethal
incapacitating chemicals and lethal chemicals, including nerve agents, phosgene
or phosgene oxime, possibly trichothecene toxins and mustard were used. Medical
examinations of some of the victims include reports of paralysis, other
neurological effects, blisters, bleeding and sometimes death. While none of the
agents being used in Afghanistan has been positively identified through sample
analysis, there is no doubt that the agents being used are far more toxic than
riot-control agents such as CN and CS or even adamsite.

Action of Chemical Agent

Several descriptions of the physiological action of a chemical agent or of the
condition of the corpses of victims were particularly unusual. In one, victims
were rapidly rendered unconscious for two to six hours and had few aftereffects.
In another, the bodies were characterized by abnormal bloating and blackened
skin with a dark reddish tinge, and the flesh appeared decayed very soon after
death.  In a third incident, three dead Mujahedeen guerrillas were found with
hands on rifles and lying in a firing position, indicating that the attacker had
used an extremely rapid-acting lethal chemical that is not detectable by normal
senses and that causes no outward physiological responses before death.

Shortly after the Soviet invasion, many reports were received that both Soviet
and Afghan forces were using various types of chemical agents. Ten separate
chemical attacks, resulting in many deaths, were reported in the first three
months of 1980. These reports came from northeastern Afghanistan and provide the
highest percentage of reported deaths. During the mid-January to February 1980
period, helicopter attacks were reported in northeastern Afghanistan in which a
grayish blue smoke resulted in symptoms similar to those described by the Hmong
refugees from Laos (e.g., heavy tearing or watering of eyes; extensive
blistering and discoloration of the skin, later resulting in large sheetlike
peeling; swelling in the areas affected by the blister, and finally numbness,
paralysis and death). Medical reports from examinations in Pakistan of refugees
from a large attack in the upper Kunar Valley in February 1980 described red
skin and blisters containing flud described as ''dirty water.'' Refugees
estimated that about 2,000 people were affected after contact with a dirty
yellow cloud.

By spring and summer of 1980, chemical attacks were reported in all areas of
concentrated resistance activity. Many reports from different sources strongly
support the case that irritants were used to drive the insurgents into the open
to expose them to attack with conventional weapons and incapacitants to render
them tractable for disarming and capture. On several occasions in April 1980,
for example, Soviet helicopter pilots dropped ''gas bombs'' on insurgents,
evidently to drive them from caves.

Account to Dutch Journalist

A Dutch journalist, Bernd de Bruin, published an eyewitness account of two
chemical attacks occuring in the Jalalabad area on June 15 and June 21, 1980
(Niewsnet, Aug. 2, 1980). He filmed an MI-24 helicopter dropping canisters that
produced a dirty yellow cloud. A victim with blackened skin, discolored by
extensive subcutaneous hemorrhaging, was photographed in the village five hours
after the attack. The journalist evidently was exposed because he developed
blisters on his hands and a swollen and itchy face. He also was exposed in the
second attack, and it took about 10 days for him to recover from skin lesions,
nausea, diarrhea and stomach cramps.

An Afghan insurgent provided an eyewitness account of a July 6, 1980, attack on
a village 10 kilometers east of Darae Jelga in Vardak Province. He reported that
a Soviet MI-24 helicopter gunship dropped a bomb that, upon explosion, released
a lethal chemical. A separate report confirmed that Soviet bombing attacks on
villages in Vardak as well as Lowgar and Parvan Provinces were taking place
during this period. In August 1980, information surfaced on a Soviet attack with
chemical bombs on the village of Sya Wusan, 30 kilometers southeast of Herat,
leaving 300 dead. It was during this time that the Soviet chemical battalion at
Shindand set up an operational decontamination station.

Reports of chemical weapons use in 1981 essentially parallel 1980 reporting with
respect to frequency and location of attack. Soviet helicopter units
participated in chemical attacks from April 20 to April 29, 1981, in areas east
an west of Kabul and in the Kunar Valley, according to eyewitness accounts.
These attacks were intended to drive personnel from sanctuaries, such as caves,
in order to engage them with conventional fire. The munitions were described as
Soviet 250-kilogram R.B.K. cluster bombs. The Soviets have such a munition,
which can be filled with chemical agents. Other reports described similar
operations by helicopters north of Kandahar on April 24 and April 26, 1981.

A former Afghan MI-8 helicopter pilot said Soviet forces had used chemical
weapons in Badakhshan, Qonduz and Konarha. Chemicals in canisters that contained
toxic gas, tear gas and antirespiratory gas, which has an incapacitating effect
by causing choking and difficulty in breathing, were manually pushed from the
cargo compartment of helicopters. The pilot said that there also was a specific
gas that is absorbed by the body and leaves the skin so soft that a finger can
be punched through it. In one case, there was a wind shift, and Soviet and
Afghan forces were seriously affected. Other sources also have described an
incident where Soviet and Afghan forces were victims of their own gas
attack.CHEMICAL TEXT

Annex A

A Lao Pilot's Account

One of the most complete descriptions of chemical warfare activities in the
1976-78 period came from a Lao pilot who was directly involved in chemical
warfare. The pilot, a former Lao People's Liberation Army (L.P.L.A.) officer who
defected in 1979, reported that he flew captured L-19 and T-41 aircraft equipped
to dispense toxic chemical agents on Hmong villagers in the Phou Bia area of
northern Laos. He said that the L.P.L.A., in cooperation with the Vietnamese
Army, had conducted chemical warfare operations in Laos since April or early May
1976. At that time, two Lao H-34 helicopters were flown between Long Tieng and
the Phonsavan airfield, both in Xiangkhoang Province, on a series of flights to
transport rockets to Phonsavan for storage.

Between June and August 1976, the L.P.L.A. launched attacks in the area of
Bouamlong - in Xiangkhoang Province - a stronghold for remnants of the forces of
former Hmong Gen. Vang Pao.

In late 1976, during preparation for air strikes on Kasy (Louang Prabang
Province) and in new areas of Phou Bia, the pilot said he began carrying two or
three Vietnamese Army staff officers, sometimes accompanied by a Lao staff
officer, in T-41 aircraft for reconnaissance over the target areas. When these
air strikes were launched, the defector pilot initially flew his L-19 aircraft
on missions with another pilot and a Lao staff officer. After two or three
weeks, however, Vietnamese staff officers, who spoke excellent Lao, began
alternating with the Lao officers. Before each mission, the Vietnamese or Lao
staff officer would go over target areas outlined on situation maps - which then
were taken along - and would point out the targets to be attacked. The defector
pilot noted that at no time did the Vietnamese staff officer communicate with
Lao officers on the ground, as did the Lao staff officers.

The pilot related that before flying L-19 air strike missions with a full load
of rockets he was often warned by a Lao commander to fly at above-normal
altitudes when firing rockets - to preclude hazard to the occupants of the
aircraft. For this reason the pilot surmised that the ''smoke'' rockets fired at
the Hmong were unusual. He was able to observe that the ''smoke'' rockets
detonated in the air and that some produced white smoke, with a mixture of blue,
while others produced red smoke, with a mixture of yellow.

Before a mission involving ''smoke rockets,'' the commander warned the pilots to
keep the operation secret. The Lao defector said that, during the nearly two
years in which he flew rocket missions, he learned from the Lao staff officers
accompanying him that there were two types of rockets. The first, mostly
''smoke'' rockets, were to be fired at targets far away from Lao and Vietnamese
troops to avoid exposing them to the poison smoke. The second was of the
ordinary explosive type, considered a ''close support'' rockets that could be
fired near Lao troop positions. Initially, the L-19 aircraft carried eight
rockets - five ''close support'' and three ''smoke'' rockets.  Later, only four
rockets, mainly of the ''smoke'' type, were carried.

In October 1978, the Lao Army stopped using L-19 aircraft on combat missions and
began using Soviet MIG-21's for chemical attacks on the Phou Bia areas.

Several Hmong reports corroborate the testimony of the Lao pilot.  A village
chief, for example, described attacks covering all seven days of the week of
June 5, 1976, in the Bouamlong area. He described L-19 aircraft firing rockets
that produced red and green smoke: 10 villagers were killed by gas and 30 by
shrapnel. Most of the Hmong reports documented by a U.S. Foreign Service officer
in June 1979 and a Department of Defense medical team in October 1979 were
consistent with the pilot's testimony.

A review of information back to 1975 shows L-19 and T-28 aircraft were operating
from airfields in northern Laos - including the one at Phonsavan, where AN-2's
were seen in 1978. Failure to observe chemical decontamination equipment at the
airfields does not rule out the presence or handling of chemical munitions. The
Soviets supervise the chemical warfare activities in Laos; it is assumed that
chemical munitions are handled in about the same manner as in the U.S.S.R.
According to former Soviet chemical warfare personnel, no protective clothing or
special decontamination equipment is required for loading chemical bombs onto
aircraft and helicopters at chemical munitions test ranges.

The Lao pilot's description of the rockets used on the L-19 was corroborated by
other sources. A Hmong refugee, a former commander of a 500-man resistance
force, reported that in 1977 he found a rocket canister and a separated warhead
that he believed were the kinds used by the Vietnamese and Lao. The canister had
authentic U.S. markings identifying it as a U.S.-manufactured 2.75-inch rocket
and, reportedly, three lines of Russian writing which he could not translate.
Another Hmong resistance force officer, reportedly trained as a liaison officer
and ordinance expert before the Communist takeover of Laos, stated that he, too,
believed that the rocket canister was of U.S. manufacture and that the Soviet
technicians in Laos had modified the upper stage to contain a poisonous (i.e.,
lethal) chemical.

Annex B

Findings of U.S. Government Investigative Teams; Use of Chemical Agents Against
the Hmong in Laos

State Department Team

In May 1979, State Department officials visited Thailand to interview Hmong
refugees and investigate allegations of the use of chemical agents against Hmong
tribesmen in Laos. From the signs/symptoms described and observed, it is
suggested that at least two and possibly three different chemical agents may
have been used, such as:

- A nerve agent (five or six individuals reported symptoms that could be
attributed to a nerve agents).

- An irritant or riot-control agents (one-third of the interviews).

- More than half of the interviews indicated such a variety of signs and
symptoms that it is difficult to attribute them to a single known agent.

It is possible that in some cases two or more agents were combined.

- Reported signs and symptoms suggesting a nerve agent include sweating,
tearing, excessive salivation, difficulty in breathing, shortness of breath,
nausea and vomiting, dizziness, weakness, convulsions and death occurring
shortly after exposure.

- Reported signs and symptoms suggesting a riot-control or irritant agent
include marked irritation or burning of the eyes, with tearing and pain;
irritation and burning of the nose and throat; coughing; burning and tightness
in the chest; headache, and nausea and vomiting in a few cases.

- Reported signs and symptoms not related to any known single agent include a
mixture of the above as well as profuse bleeding from mucous membranes of the
nose, lungs and gastro-intestinal tract, with rapid death of the affected
individuals in some instances.
pick up: SIXTH ADD CHEMICAL TEXT

Estimates from the Hmong interviewed indicate that approximately 700-1,000
persons may have died as a result of the use of chemical agents and that many
times this number became ill. It was reported that on many occasions entire
villages were devastated by these agents, leaving no survivors.

In the episodes described, most of the animals exposed to the chemical agents
were killed. Generally, all chickens, dogs and pigs died and, to a lesser
extent, the cattle and buffalo. On several occasions it was reported that where
these agents settled on tree and plant leaves, many small holes appeared in the
leaves within two or three days. Rarely did agent exposure result in the
defoliation or death of the plants.

Department of Defense Team

From Sept. 28 to Oct. 12, 1979, a team from the U.S. Army Surgeon General's
Office was in Thailand to conduct a similar series of interviews. The team
visited the following Hmong refugee camps of northern Thailand: the detention
center at Nong Kai, the large Hmong camp at Ban Vinai and two smaller camps at
Nam Yao and Mae Charim. As the great majority of refugees as well as the Hmong
leadership are at Ban Vinai, most interviews were obtained there.

The team was prepared to obtain blood and skin samples (for cholinesterase
activity and study of pathological changes, respectively) from those exposed to
chemical agents. For such samples to yield meaningful results they must be taken
within six to eight weeks of exposure. Since the last reported exposure was in
May 1979, no blood or skin samples were collected.

The chemical attacks reportedy occurred between June 1976 and May 1979. The
absence of reports of attacks after May 1979 may be because few refugees crossed
the Mekong River after that time - as a result of heavy rains and flooding from
June to September 1979. Most of the early reports were of the use of rockets
releasing the agent; beginning in the fall of 1978, the majority of the attacks
were carried out by aircraft spraying a yellowish substance which ''fell like
rain.'' The attack sites, concentrated around the Hmong stronghold in the
mountainous Phou Bia area.

The team was given a plastic vial containing pieces of bark, stained by a yellow
substance, which several Hmong refugees claimed was residue from an aircraft
spray attack in April 1979. Preliminary chemical analysis of the sample
indicates that no standard chemical agent (i.e., an agent listed in TH 8-285,
U.S. Army, May 1974) was present.

Conclusions

The conclusions of these teams, based upon interviews obtained from Hmong
refugees, are as follows:

- Chemical agents have been used against the Hmong.

- The reported effects of these agents suggest the use of a nerve agent, a
riot-control agent and an unidentified combination or compound.
pick up: 7th DD CHEMICAL TEXT

Annex D

Analysis and Review of Trichothecene Toxins
Sample Analyses For Trichothecenes

The Trichothecene Hypothesis

Since 1975, the U.S. Government has received remarkably consistent reports
detailing chemical attacks in Southeast Asia. Some of these reports described
the use of lethal agents which produced symptoms that could not be correlated
with those produced by known or traditionally recognized chemical warfare agents
or combinations of them. It is readily apparent that the symptoms most
frequently described in Laos and Kampuchea correspond most closely with those
produced by a group of mycotoxins -the trichothecenes. A review of the
scientific literature revealed not only that these compounds had physical and
chemical properties indicating potential as chemical agents but also that they
were the subject of intensive investigation by Soviet scientists at institutes
previously linked with chemical and biological warfare research. In the fall of
1980, the trichothecenes were added to the list of agents suspected to have been
used in Southeast Asia and Afghanistan. Other candidates under consideration
included phosgene oxime, arsines, cyanogen chloride, nerve agents, riot-control
agents and combinations of these agents.

Many samples from chemical attacks in Laos and Kampuchea were examined at the
U.S. Army's Chemical Systems Laboratory (C.S.L.) for the presence of traditional
chemical warfare agents and were reported to be negative. In March 1981, C.S.L.
reported the presence of an unusual compound (C15H24) in the vapor analyses from
several clothing and tissue samples taken from the victim of a chemical attack.
The compound was closely related in structure to the simple trichothecenes.

On Sept. 20, 1981, the U.S. Army Medical Intelligence and Information Agency
received nine control samples from U.S. Army personnel in Bangkok for the
purpose of conducting laboratory analyses for background levels of trichothecene
toxins. No trichothecenes were detected in any of these samples, indicating that
nivalenol, deoxynivalenol, T-2 and diacetoxyscirpenol are not prevalent in the
geographical area from which the alleged chemical warfare-exposed sample was
collected.

The U.S. Army Medical Intelligence and Information Agency received from the
Chemical Systems Laboratory three additional suspected chemical warfare samples
for analysis for trichothecenes. The first sample consisted of 10 milliliters of
water taken from the same chemical site in Kampuchea as the leaf and stem sample
previously examined. The second sample came from the site of a ''yellow rain''
attack occurring on March 13, 1981, in the village of Muong Cha (TF 9797) in the
Phou Bia region of Laos.

The water sample contained 66 parts per milliliter of deoxynivalenol nd a trace
amount of diacetoxyscirpenol. A trace quantity of the second sample was screened
as strong positive for trichothecenes. Further anlysis of that confirmed the
presence of high levels of T-2 toxin (150 p.p.m.) and diacetoxyscirpenol
(25p.p.m.).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: maps photo of Dr. Sharon Watson

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PRIEST FIGHTS ON BEHALF OF HALF-AMERICAN CHILDREN

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 841 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 22


They are called the ''dust of life'' children, half-American, half-Asian boys
and girls born of American servicemen.

''These are our children,'' said the Rev. Alfred Keane, a Roman Catholic priest
who has worked with half-American children in Korea for 24 years. ''They endure
scorn and ridicule because they look American, and our legislators here in
Washington have now chosen to ignore their pain.''

What has stirred the anger of Father Keane and others is a new immigration bill,
sponsored by Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, and Representative
Romano L. Mazzoli, Democrat of Kentucky, that places sharp restrictions on the
entry of these children into the United States.

''The bill totally misses the point that these are American children,'' said
Representative Stewart B. McKinney, a Connecticut Republican who has sponsored
his own measure. It would allow substantial numbers of children of American
servicemen to receive priority status in seeking permanent immigrant visas.

Immigration Limited to 2,000

The Simpson-Mazzoli bill, which has been widely praised for the way it seeks to
limit large-scale illegal immigration, deals only briefly with half-American, or
Amerasian, children.

It says that, over the next five years, a total of 2,000 young people a year,
from the age of 14 through 21, may be admitted to the United States for
adoption. They must prove that they were fathered by a serviceman in Korea,
Vietnam, Cambodia or Laos, that they are subject to significant discrimination
and that they are orphans.

Under the current Immigration and Naturalization Act, Amerasian children are
given ''nonpreferential'' status, making it nearly impossible for them to be
admitted to the United States. In recent years, only a handful of such children
have entered the country.

Aides to Mr. Mazzoli and Mr. Simpson indicated that there was some disagreement
about how to deal with the Amer-a@sian issue. Senator Simpson wanted nothing in
the bill about it, they said, while Mr.  Mazzoli sought to address the problem
in a limited way.

The aides also said there were concerns about opening the floodgates to the
children. Estimates vary, but there may be as many as 80,000 Amerasian children
in Korea and Southeast Asia, including 25,000 in Vietnam.

Reasonable Age Limit Seen

Although Father Keane and Mr. McKinney say that the measure leaves an increasing
number of Amerasians over 21 with scant hope of emigrating to the United States,
Congressional aides who helped write the bill said that 21 seemed to be a
reasonable age limit.

Critics of the Simpson-Mazzoli bill also said it was unlikely that large numbers
of teen-agers would be adopted by American parents, as the bill stipulates. But
Congressional aides said experience indicated that adoption would be a
relatively minor problem.

''Frankly, we felt that the McKinney bill was too broad and too open-ended,'' an
aide to Mr. Mazzoli said.  The bill sponsored by Mr. McKinney, which has 165
co-sponsors in the House, would give the abandoned children a visa preference as
the offspring of American citizens. Moreover, Mr. McKinney says the bill would
not place the children on the welfare rolls because it requires that a sponsor
be legally and financially responsible for five years.

A similar measure has been sponsored in the Senate by Senator Jeremiah A.
Denton, an Alabama Republican and former Navy pilot who spent more than seven
years as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam.

Father Keane, a Boston-born Maryknoll priest who now spends most of his time on
Capitol Hill seeking support for the McKinney and Denton measures, said that
Amerasian children were shunned, ignored, not allowed education benefits and
treated as nonpersons in such countries as Korea.

''These are our own flesh and blood,'' he said. ''I don't think you can hear the
stories and see the pictures and not become involved.'' Father Keane noted that
France, after withdrawing its troops from Indochina in 1954, opened its doors to
virtually any child of French and Indochinese parents born during the war, and
financially supported up to the age of 18 those who remained with their mothers.

Many Amerasian children had fathers who had long relationships with the mothers,
the priest said, and they often carried pictures of their fathers.

''Asking these children to actually prove that they're objects of
discrimination, as the immigration bill says, is ridiculous,'' he said. ''You
think a country like Vietnam will let them out if they have to prove
discrimination?''

Mr. McKinney said he would seek to amend the immigration bill and use every
parliamentary possibility to give Amerasian children priority as immigrants and
allow them to enter in far higher numbers than allowed by the Simpson-Mazzoli
bill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NOT ALL INTERVENTIONS ARE DOOMED TO FAILURE

BYLINE: By Norman Podhoretz

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 842 words


The time has come to talk about Vietnam again.  On April 30, 1975, the day the
last helicopter scurried off the roof of the United States Embassy in Saigon as
the city fell to an invading North Vietnamese Army, the debate that had been
raging for so long over the war was consigned to the forensic equivalent of an
unmarked grave. Vietnam became a symbol whose meaning was assumed to be
self-evident: It denoted both a humiliating American defeat and an even more
humiliating moral disgrace. As such, it haunts all our thinking about the
American role in the world as well as all our actions; and it will continue to
warp our judgment until it is exhumed and examined in the light of the
consequences that followed upon the American defeat.

For this much at least is certain: Vietnam was an American defeat.  We poured
blood and treasure into that distant place in order to save South Vietnam from
Communism, just as we had previously saved South Korea from the same fate. In
Korea, we succeeded; in Vietnam, we failed. What accounts for the difference is
that in the case of Korea, the local conditions, both political and military,
were far more favorable to success than they were in Vietnam.

So too were conditions within the United States. At the time of Korea, the most
influential sectors of American public opinion supported President Harry S.
Truman's decision to intervene. This was also true of President John F.
Kennedy's decision to intervene in Vietnam, but as the war dragged on
inconclusively and escalated, more and more people who had originally supported
the intervention found more and more reasons to oppose it.

Indeed, one of the most notable features of the opposition that developed to the
American military involvement in Vietnam is that certain early apologists for
intervention ran to the head of the movement for an American withdrawal as soon
as the tide of opinion within the journalistic and intellectual communities
shifted to an antiwar position.

Another factor was the way the war was conducted. Neither John F.  Kennedy, who
committed us militarily to Vietnam, nor Lyndon B.  Johnson, who escalated our
involvement, nor Richard M. Nixon, who negotiated our withdrawal, was willing or
able to take strong enough measures early enough to make victory possible. Mr.
Kennedy tried to save South Vietnam from Communism on the military cheap (by
sending in only a small number of troops). Mr. Johnson tried to do it on the
political cheap (by refusing to whip up a ''war fever''). Mr. Nixon tried to do
it on the strategic cheap (by relying on the Russians and the Chinese to
restrain the North Vietnamese after the Paris peace agreement had been signed).

There is no knowing whether a different pace of intervention, or a different
military strategy, or a different mode of American political leadership would
have led to a better result. My own view is that saving South Vietnam from
Communism was beyond the reasonable capabilities of the United States, and that
the only way we could have avoided defeat was by letting that cup pass from our
lips.

This does not, however, mean - as we are daily urged to believe - that every
such intervention is doomed to failure. As the example of Korea proves, success
or failure depends entirely on the particular conditions of the given case. Each
one has to be judged on its own strategic and political merits, and a disaster
can as easily follow from failing to act (which is what the world learned from
the experience of the 1930's) as from intervening.

Nor does the judgment that succeeding in Vietnam was beyond our reasonable
capabilities mean that we were morally wrong in wishing to save South Vietnam
from Communism. For consider what has happened to South Vietnam and the other
Indochinese ''dominoes,'' Laos and Cambodia, since we were driven out.

During the war we were frequently told that nothing could be more terrible for
the people of Indochina than the war itself. As the late political commentator
Richard H. Rovere wrote in 1967: ''People who used to say that there are things
worse than war now say that there are things worse than Communism and that the
war in Vietnam is one of them.'' Some years later, shortly before the Communists
took over, a typical newspaper headline proclaimed: ''Indochina Without
Americans: For Most a Better Life.''

It seems doubtful that the people of Indochina today - those who are still
alive, that is, or who were not driven out in the ghoulish exodus of the ''boat
people'' - would say that this prediction has been vindicated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Norman Podhoretz is editor of Commentary magazine. This article, the first of
two, is adapted from his forthcoming book, ''Why We Were in Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
SUBWAYS FOR SALVADOR

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 894 words


My friend Trafalgar called the other day with a solution to the Salvador crisis.
It was last Thursday morning and he was beside himself with the discovery.

''Take a look at today's front page,'' he stammered, in the manic voice of a man
who believes he has just nailed down the Nobel Peace Prize. ''The story on the
right-hand side says Reagan is appealing to Congress for $128 million in
emergency aid for Salvador, and on the left-hand side the Japanese are giving
the M.T.A. a $126 million lowinterest loan to buy their subway cars. What
symmetry! There it is!''

''Just calm down, Trafalgar,'' I said. ''There what is?'' ''The perfect answer
to the President's grief in Central America - that's what,'' he shouted. ''It's
like finding the Golden Fleece on the downtown IRT.''

He was plainly out of control so there was nothing for it but to let him babble
on.  ''Look, don't you understand? Reagan is getting beat up in Congress and the
press for involving us in Salvador. Everybody's yelling, 'No more Vietnams' -
and this is a terrific way out. Let the Japanese do it.''

''Let them do what? Give the Salvadorans some low-interest loans?'' ''You don't
grasp the beauty of this,'' said Trafalgar, impatient with my slowness of
intellect. ''The Japanese will send them subway cars.''

I tried to humor him. ''Trafalgar, old man, what in blazes would a tiny
undeveloped country with a population of five million poor people do with subway
cars? They don't even have a subway tunnel.''

''That's just it,'' Trafalgar chortled. ''Think of the jobs it would create.
Tens of thousands of Salvadorans hired to dig those tunnels. Land reform above,
W.P.A. sandhogs earning mortgage money below. It's inspired.

''And that's not the half of it. The Japanese would send in military advisers
for us - disguised as engineers and sandhog foremen. They owe us this for
letting them lose the war. This way, we wouldn't have to use those old dodges
like fake refugee officials and marine bands to cover our clandestine
activities. And if we needed more advisers, we could send down the Guardian
Angels. It's about time Curtis Sliwa got to go someplace where he'd be
appreciated.  Green Berets, No! Red Berets, Si!''

Trafalgar was hurtling along unstoppably on his ''A'' train, but I still had
questions.  ''What'll the Salvadorans do with the subway lines when they get the
whole thing built?'' ''Are you hung over or something?'' Trafalgar asked, trying
to be tolerant of my failure of vision.  ''It's clear as a bell what they'll do
with them -they'll ride them to the polling places to make democracy work. Right
now all they've got are buses and they get burned or blown up at every rebel
checkpoint.

''There's more - the subway cars are graffiti-resistant, so those
Marxist-Leninist slogans won't stick to them. And they're airconditioned to boot
- no more sweating in the tropics on the way to vote. The Salvadorans'll love us
- it's capitalism with a human face.''

''O.K., O.K.,'' said I, my skepticism diminishing. ''But do you think Mayor Koch
is going to go for giving up our Japanese cars to Salvador?''

''Of course he will. He'll even take credit for it - but who cares when the free
world is at stake? You see, Koch needs a foreign-policy plank in his campaign
for governor. He's got to have something a little catchier than calling the
United Nations 'a cesspool.' ''

He went on: ''Koch won't just adopt it, he'll revel in it. There's something I
should tell you - I already checked it out with his campaign managers, and
they're making the TV spots right now. It'll be called the Koch Reverse-Domino
Policy - and the jingle goes: 'If it's good enough for El Salvador, Honduras
can't be more than an express stop away.' ''

''Well, my dear fellow,'' I said, a believer at last. ''I've got to admit you've
covered all the angles.'' ''I knew you'd see the light at the end of my
tunnel,'' said Trafalgar, who is famous for his seminal wit. ''And remember, if
it doesn't work, we can blame the Japanese. It's about time they shouldered
their fair share of democracy's burden.''

''You're right, it's got everything a foreign policy could want.  And to think
it all came from a couple of headlines on page one.'' ''Yes,'' he mused, ''that
ought to convince Reagan he's being paranoid when he says the press is picking
on him.'' ''How right you are,'' said I. ''All he has to do is read the
headlines these days and he'll see he's been wrong about us. You know,
Trafalgar, he's such a forgiving fellow that I wouldn't be surprised if the
first thing he does after reading this is reach for the phone and personally
congratulate both of us for bailing him out of his Central American quagmire.''

''That would be nice,'' said Trafalgar, who has time to read all the headlines
and call old friends because he's unemployed, ''but I'd settle for one of those
sandhog jobs.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: BISHOP'S 'JEDEDIAH KOHLER'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1250 words


WITH John Bishop's new play, ''The Great Grandson of Jedediah Kohler,'' the
Circle Repertory Company is stepping out - in more ways than one - and you can
feel the troupe's liberating spirit of adventure. Not only is ''Jedediah
Kohler'' being performed away from the Circle Rep's snug Sheridan Square home
base - it's to be found instead at the larger Entermedia Theater on Second
Avenue - but it also proves a striking esthetic departure from the kind of
naturalism that has been the company's often distinguished stock in trade.
Indeed, Mr. Bishop all but mocks the conventions of a work like ''Snow Orchid,''
which the Circle Rep opened only 10 days ago back home. And everyone on stage
seems to be laughing with him.

''Jedediah Kohler'' is playing in repertory with a revival of ''Richard II,''
yet to open to the press. In the end - or in the middle - Mr. Bishop's comedy
does not pay off, but you have to admire its hard-edged sassiness, its
willingness to take chances and its several dozen funny lines.

It is not every play that manages to encompass such diverse phenomena as the
Wild West, ''Sweet Charity,'' the Vietnam War, the Madison Avenue ad game, the
Super Bowl and Florida condominiums. It is not every Circle Rep production that
features more than two dozen characters, popping in and out of a two-level
abstract set (by Karl Eigsti) like the cast of a Harold Prince extravaganza.

The play is about both Jedediah Kohler (Michael Ayr) and his great-grandfather
(Edward Seamon). The original Jedediah was a legendary frontier marshal who
faced his adversaries in the ''gunfight at the Oak Street Corral'' and whose
exploits live on in Hollywood westerns variously starring Burt Lancaster, Henry
Fonda and Charles Bronson.

The contemporary Jedediah is a producer at Creative Ideas Inc., an outfit
dedicated to marketing a new Detroit product that is both automobile and yacht.
He has a placid wife (Trish Hawkins), family and suburban home to go with his
empty job -and is intensely alienated. ''My great grandfather was an American
myth,'' says Mr.  Ayr in frustration, ''and I promote a car that terrifies
ducks.''

Mr. Bishop's story is about how the present-day Jedediah, too, seizes his chance
to become a hero - even if the gunfight takes place in a Las Vegas parking lot -
and it is not a terribly interesting one. The protagonist upturns his life in
such predictable ways as jettisoning his family and taking up with radical
environmentalists who are out to sabotage the very car he is promoting.

Mr. Bishop's hero-on-the-make is not too exciting, either. A whitecollar
malcontent in the Jack Lemmon tradition (of both ''The Apartment'' and ''The
China Syndrome''), Jedediah is flatly written and too blandly earnest in Mr.
Ayr's competent but sparkless performance.

But the play's inventive theatrical machinery and satirical flourishes amuse
even if its story, mythic themes and hero do not.  Among other digressions, we
hear an auto company brag of its low 71.9 percent recall record and of a musical
comedy about the Dreyfus case.

The play's narrator is a tuxedo-wearing, finger-snapping showbiz emcee named
Death (Jake Dengel), who early on promises to provide Jedediah's ''psychological
background'' - and then cuts off a hilariously banal childhood flashback in
midsentence because ''this part always bores me in a play.'' Against Death's
protests, we also meet the zanily extraneous character of Jedediah's brother
(Jimmy Ray Weeks), a body-building, vegetarian Vietnam vet who tends to tell
rambling war stories with ''Zen punchlines.''

Some of Mr. Bishop's gags are overdone - especially a running bit about a
corporate executive prone to mixed metaphors (''Here's mud in your hatch''). The
interweaving of Jedediah's story with his greatgrandfather's 19th-century saga
is pedantic and ultimately fruitless, with both plots contributing to the
evening's overlength.  There is altogether too much talk, even in jest, about
heroism, death, moral choice and the ever-receding American frontier.

The spirited and cinematically minded staging, by John Bard Manulis and Marshall
W. Mason, starts off with a literal bang: gunfights, dancing girls and slide
shows spill all over Mr. Eigsti's skeletal construct. But like the play, the
direction bottoms out as the evening progresses. By Act II, even Dennis
Parichy's accomplished lighting seems to fall a beat or two behind the
increasingly frantic (and noisy) scene changes.

In the large cast, the best work comes from Mr. Seamon, Miss Hawkins, Mr. Weeks,
William Hurt (in two small parts) and especially from Katherine Cortez as a
tough yet circumspect chorus girl who takes up with Mr. Ayr. As Death, a
character that often resembles Ray Walston's devil in ''Damn Yankees,'' Mr.
Dengel has the right moves, if not always the highest level of inspiration. In
other roles, the Circle Rep's acting resources are stretched noticeably thin,
but, hit or miss, this company is stretching, exuberantly.

On Becoming a Hero
THE GREAT GRANDSON OF JEDEDIAH KOH- LER, by John Bishop; directed by John Bard
Manulis and Marshall W. Mason; sets by Karl Eigsti; costumes by Laura Crow;
lights by Dennis Parichy; music and songs by Jonathan Holtzman; sound by Chuck
London Media, Stewart Werner; production stage manager, Fred Rein- glas; fight
director, Peter Nels. Presented by the Circle Repertory, Mr. Mason, artistic
director, and Richard Frankel, acting managing director. At the Entermedia
Theater, 189 Second Avenue.  Death .....................................Jake
Dengel Jed Kohler ................................Michael Ayr Leon
.......................................Ken Kliban Shorty Radabaugh
..........................Gary Berner Father
..................................Edward Seamon Mother and Nancy
........................Trish Hawkins Bobbi
................................Katherine Cortez Bob Graham and Ronald Hoerner
...........Jonathan Bolt Jedediah Kohler and Cop .................Edward Seamon
Blake Kohler ...............................Ken Kliban Ike McKee and Henry
Jarvis ...............William Hurt Doc McCullough
............................Gary Berner Johnny Two-Deuce
.......................Lou Liberatore Frank Graham
................................Tim Morse Brother
..............................Jimmie Ray Weeks Jack Beck
...............................Jack Davidson Joe Goldman
.............................Roger Chapman Wally Silver
........................Charles T. Harper Prescott Man and Coach Frankie Torski
Jack Davidson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Michael Ayr

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 24, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IVY EDITORS UNITE ON SALVADOR

BYLINE: By WILLIAM G. BLAIR

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 430 words


A joint declaration calling for the end of United States military aid to El
Salvador was published yesterday by all but one of the student newspapers at the
eight Ivy League colleges.

The exception was Dartmouth, for reasons that were both substantive and
procedural, according to student editors who participated in drafting the
statement last weekend at Columbia.

It was the first time since 1969, during the Vietnam War, that the student
editors of the Ivy League newspapers joined in a statement opposing United
States involvement in another country. Besides Dartmouth and Columbia, the
league's other colleges and universities are Brown, Cornell, Harvard,
Pennsylvania, Princeton and Yale.

The El Salvador declaration was believed to be the first to have been made
jointly on that issue by the campus newspapers of any conference or grouping of
colleges in this country.

In Washington, Representative Theodore Weiss, Democrat of Manhattan, read the
declaration into the Congressional Record.  Declaring that ''the United States
should withdraw its support from a Government which kills and tortures,'' the
statement said that ''current American policies will only prop up a right-wing
military that has prevented the Salvadoran people from determining their own
future.''

The declaration called on Americans ''to participate in grassroots
demonstrations'' against United States policy in El Salvador. It urged support
of a proposed joint Congressional resolution calling for an internationally
supervised cease-fire and a negotiated settlement. It also supported a bill in
the House of Representatives that would nullify the Reagan Administration's
certification that progress has been made in honoring human rights in El
Salvador.

It was a question of the ''evenhandedness'' of the declaration that bothered the
Dartmouth student editors, according to several of those who helped draft the
statement.

Speaking of three of the four members of the editorial board of the Dartmouth
newspaper, Jonathan Walcoff, the managing editor, said that ''we all had
reservations'' about the declaration. Mr. Walcoff also said that he and his
colleagues could not reach a decision on ''such an important issue'' without
having the opinion of Philip Gerson, the newspaper's editor in chief. But, he
said, they could not locate Mr. Gerson, who has been in England on a foreign
study program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 24, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SPARKS FLY AT HARVARD ETHICS DEBATE

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1252 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., March 23


Roy M. Cohn, William M. Kunstler and James D. St. Clair, three lawyers whose
famous associates and clients left their imprints on the nation in the 1950's,
60's and 70's, met Monday night to debate legal ethics at Harvard Law School.
And after an evening in which good humor and professional camaraderie held old
antagonisms at bay only intermittently, Mr. Cohn, counsel to Senator Joseph R.
McCarthy and an unregenerate McCarthyite still, appeared the audience's
sentimental favorite.

The three lawyers and Bruce A. Murphy, author of a new study on Louis D.
Brandeis and Felix Frankfurter, spoke to a standing-room crowd of law students
on ''Ethical Considerations in the Practice of Law.'' The evening's topics
included such hardy perennials as the tactical use of the news media, how to
select cases and a lawyer's conflicting obligations to his client and to
society.

The Decades Are Debated, Too

Predictably, since Mr. Kunstler represented Angela Davis, H. Rap Brown and other
Vietnam era-dissidents, and Mr. St. Clair represented President Nixon shortly
before his resignation, the debate spilled over to take in McCarthyism, Vietnam
and Watergate.

Less foreseeable, however, was the Harvard audience's reaction, particularly to
Mr. Kunstler and Mr. Cohn. The debate marked their first joint appearance in
seven years; the last time they met, Mr.  Kunstler labeled Mr. Cohn a
''murderer'' and Mr. Cohn left the platform. The generally sympathetic reaction
accorded Mr. Cohn apparently reflected how things, or students, had changed.

''I learned a great deal tonight, not so much about the participants as about
the students themselves,'' Prof. Alan M.  Dershowitz, the moderator of the
panel, said after the discussion.  ''We have a student body very different from
what it was in the 60's and 70's.''

The discussion took place in the large lecture room of Langdell Hall, the same
premises in which Professor Kingsfield of the movie ''Paper Chase'' and his
real-life Harvard counterparts torment students with Socratic questioning and
implausible hypothetical scenarios.

This was the approach taken by Professor Dershowitz, and while the lawyers
frequently and vehemently took issue with one another, the ethical differences
between them were sometimes more rhetorical than real.

The contrast was starkest on the question of what to do when, for example, a
client tells his lawyer he committed a murder for which a second, innocent
person is about to be executed. To Mr. Kunstler, the course was clear. ''I've
said all my life that the only one you represent is not the system or the judge
or the prosecutor or society at large but the individual client,'' he said. Mr.
St. Clair and Mr.  Cohn disagreed.

The three were less successful in articulating a consistent philosophy on how
they selected their cases and clients. Mr.  Kunstler said he represented the
politically left-of-center and the ''apolitical but oppressed.'' That
definition, he said, could encompass the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. or
Raymond Patriarca, the reputed leader of organized crime in New England, but not
Anatoly B. Shcharansky or any other Soviet dissident.

Earlier, he chastised Mr. St. Clair for representing President Nixon. ''I think
that to be a lawyer for hire, a hired gun, is not what I want to do with my
life,'' he said.

Mr. St. Clair, now a senior partner at the Boston firm of Hale & Dorr, defended
his decision to represent Mr. Nixon. ''I find Mr.  Kunstler's claim that it's
all right for him to represent Mr.  Patriarca but that President Nixon is off
limits to be a curious double standard,'' he said. Mr. St. Clair added, however,
that he would refuse to represent any organized-crime figure, and promptly
acknowledged he was guilty of a same double standard, too.

Mr. Cohn was not so gracious. ''I cannot see the morality of saying that Richard
Nixon is not entitled to have Mr. St. Clair as his lawyer, whereas murderers and
bomb-throwers or people who want to destroy the country are entitled to have
whomever they want as their lawyers,'' he said. Unlike Mr. St. Clair, Mr. Cohn
said he had no qualms about representing someone in organized crime. ''Most
people there usually have the intelligence not to tape their own offices,'' he
said.

Mr. Kunstler and Mr. Cohn differed as well on the ethical implications of
Professor Murphy's book, ''The Brandeis/Frankfurter Connection,'' which
documents the ways in which Justice Brandeis employed Mr. Frankfurter, then a
Harvard law professor, to further his populist political beliefs.

Cohn Charge Called 'Indecent'

Mr. Cohn accused the two men of ''trafficking in money, trafficking in opinions,
trafficking in influence.'' He then called Frankfurter a ''$50,000 political
pimp,'' a charge that Mr. Kunstler called ''harsh'' and ''indecent.''

''It might fit other people much better,'' he added.  Mr. Cohn and Mr. Kunstler,
who attended Columbia Law School together, have not been on speaking terms since
1975.  In print or to third parties, Mr. Cohn has called Mr. Kunstler ''a hard,
almost mesmerized tool of the Communist and revolutionary movement,'' while Mr.
Kunstler has referred to Mr. Cohn as ''the personification of everything I find
vile in our society: the cheapness, the tawdriness, the arrogance.''

Seeking to keep their fragile forum together, the organizers of the discussion
treated the two like heavyweight contenders before a title bout, keeping them as
far apart as possible. On stage they refused to address each other at all, with
Mr. Cohn frequently rolling his eyes when Mr. Kunstler made a point. This
semblance of decorum vanished, however, after a student raised the issue of Mr.
Cohn's role in the McCarthy years, and Mr. Cohn gave what Mr. Kunstler evidently
thought was an evasive answer.

''Tell them about all the people around the country you've pilloried without due
process of law!'' he exclaimed. ''Tell them how you perverted an entire decade
in this country and led to more hardship and more heartache for more people than
one cares to remember!''

When the speakers for the evening were introduced, Mr. Kunstler, long a staple
on the college lecture circuit, was greeted by cheers, Mr. Cohn by scattered
applause and hisses. But as the program progressed, the chemistry appeared to
change.

The audience seemed increasingly impressed by what it saw as Mr.  Cohn's
tenacity, his unapologetic attitude toward the past and his combativeness.
Ultimately, his effectiveness as an advocate, a highly prized commodity at
Harvard Law School, seemed of greater moment to them than his political beliefs.

By the same token, Mr. Kunstler's insistence that the American legal system was
the fundamentally corrupt ''control mechanism of the state'' found few adherents
in the Harvard Law classes of 1982, 1983 and 1984, whose members are learning
the subtleties of that system.

''For some reason I came out of here respecting Cohn more, even though I find
his politics reprehensible,'' said Seth Mones, a second-year student who echoed
the sentiments of many in the hall.  ''Cohn came across as a lawyer, and
Kunstler as a revolutionary.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of lawyers at Harvard law school

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 24, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRUTALITY AND MORALITY

BYLINE: By Norman Podhoretz

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 878 words


During the Vietnam War, we were often told that the war itself, being fought to
save South Vietnam from Communism, was worse for the people of Indochina than
the likely consequences of the Communist victory that would inevitably follow
upon an American defeat. Was this true?

That the war in Vietnam was marked by great brutality goes without saying.
Indeed, if we measure by the tonnage of ordnance used, by the usual descriptions
of the destruction wrought, and by the reports of civilian casualties, we might
easily imagine that it was the most brutal war ever fought. And yet the
proportion of civilians among the overall casualties in Vietnam was roughly the
same as it was in World War II (45 percent) and much lower than in Korea (70
percent).

Moreover, the responsibility for many of these civilian casualties rested with
the Communists. Not only did they themselves kill many innocent noncombatants,
but their regular tactics included disguising themselves as civilians, using
villagers of all ages and both sexes to plant mines and booby traps, and
converting rural hamlets into fortified strongholds -all in direct violation of
the laws of war.  Finally, despite accusations that the United States was
committing ''genocide,'' the populations of both South Vietnam and North Vietnam
increased during the war.

What about particular atrocities? The massacre at My Lai was by any definition
an atrocity. But here again, despite the endlessly repeated charge that it was
typical of the way we fought the war, not a single other such incident has been
discovered; and even fervent opponents of American policy like Daniel Ellsberg
and Telford Taylor agree that it was exceptional.

As for the bombing of North Vietnam, even the Christmas raids of 1972, almost
universally denounced as having caused ''the most terrible destruction in the
history of man,'' resulted, by North Vietnam's own account, in a maximum of
1,600 deaths over a period of 11 days (as compared, for example, with the 83,793
killed in the two-day bombing of Tokyo in March 1945).

Apart from the issue of American battlefield tactics, there was the question
raised by many in the antiwar movement of whether anything could be worse than
the reality of what was happening during the war itself. Those who asked this
question with regard to Cambodia were soon answered by the Communist Khmer Rouge
who turned their own country into what has rightly become known as the
''Auschwitz of Asia,'' and who in murdering at least one-third of their own
people invented a new crime in the annals of human atrocity: the crime of
auto-genocide.

Nothing so terrible happened in South Vietnam after the Communists of the North
took over. What did happen, however, was terrible enough to make moral nonsense
of the idea that the American effort to save the people of that country from
Communism was in itself immoral, let alone criminal.

To be sure, the ''bloodbath'' that had been feared by supporters of the war did
not occur. But there were thousands of executions, and hundreds of thousands of
people were herded into what Doan Van Toai, once a Vietcong sympathizer, calls
the Vietnamese Gulag. Tens or perhaps hundreds of thousands more were either
driven or fled from ''the most inhuman and oppressive regime they have ever
known,'' as Nguyen Cong Hoan, a former Vietcong agent, describes it. The same
judgment is made by Truong Nhu Tang, formerly minister of justice in the
Provisional Revolutionary Government (the political arm of the Vietcong):
''Never has any previous regime brought such masses of people to such
desperation.''

The simple facts bear this judgment out. Under the authoritarian Government of
President Nguyen Van Thieu, there were nevertheless many political parties
operating freely in South Vietnam; today, under the totalitarian regime of the
Communists, there is only the Communist Party, according to Mr. Tang, perhaps
the most Stalinist in the world. Under Mr. Thieu there were 27 daily newspapers,
3 television stations, and more than 20 radio stations. All were closed down by
the Communists and replaced by five official Government outlets. All the other
freedoms that existed, either in full or large measure, under the Thieu regime
were also eliminated, including freedom of movement and freedom of religion.

No wonder, as Mr. Tang tells us, that even many who once supported the Vietcong
now swear that if they had another chance they would ''pull them out of their
hiding holes and denounce them to the authorities.''

The United States went to war to save South Vietnam and the other Indochinese
''dominoes'' from these horrors. This effort may well have been quixotic, and it
certainly failed. But that anyone can still regard it as a moral disgrace is
itself a moral disgrace.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Norman Podhoretz is editor of Commentary magazine. This article, the second of
two, is adapted from his forthcoming book, ''Why We Were in Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 24, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 866 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
YEARS OF UPHEAVAL. By Henry A. Kis- singer. 1,283 pages. Illustrated. Little,
Brown. $24.95.

IN the first volume of his memoirs, ''White House Years, '' it took former
Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger some 1,500 pages to cover the first four
years of the Nixon Administration (1969-73), which he served as Assistant to the
President for National Security Affairs.

Now, in Volume II, ''Years of Upheaval,'' Mr. Kissinger has crammed into 1,200
more pages his recollections of Richard M. Nixon's aborted second term as
President. During these years, Watergate and the 1973 Middle East war were the
main events. But Mr. Kissinger, in his roles as national security adviser and
Secretary of State, was also preoccupied with the Vietnam cease-fire, the war in
Cambodia, disputes with various allies, the energy crisis and a bitter domestic
dispute over United States-Soviet relations. (A third volume will cover the
years with the Ford Administration, one assumes.)

In the hands of the usual memoirist, this would all be much too much. President
Nixon's second term, for all its theater, could be expected to grow tedious
after 600 pages, especially where a great deal of detail is devoted to shuttle
diplomacy and endless negotiations with a dozen other world powers.

But this is not remotely the case with ''Years of Upheaval.'' Here is towering
drama and amusing detail. Here are trivia that make the tragedy of the Nixon
years seem all the more imposing. Here is breathtaking spectacle that makes the
trivia seem all the more funny and intimate.

Here in all his moods is what Hegel might have called a worldhistorical figure -
solemn, awestruck, outraged, self-righteous, self-deprecating, ironic,
infallible, humble, unerring, wrong, weary and indefatigable. Here is a master
of affectionate denigration of others and self-critical self-aggrandizement.
Here is a commentator who makes strategic-arms-limitation talks seem lucid and
the oil crisis comprehensible. Even when one wants to skim, one ends up reading
carefully.

Watergate is the theme, if not the obsession, of ''Years of Upheaval.''
Watergate happened, for one thing -for reasons that struck Mr. Kissinger as
trivial to begin with but representative of the dark, ineradicable side of Mr.
Nixon's nature. Watergate eventually ruined just about everything Mr. Kissinger
believes the Nixon Administration might have accomplished - the preservation of
South Vietnam, further progress toward peace in the Middle East, better
relations with Europe and Japan, detente, SALT II, stronger American defense, a
solution to the industrial nations' energy problems.

It was Watergate that brought about even Henry Kissinger - or the Henry
Kissinger who sometimes to his own regret, and often to President Nixon's,
became the most visible figure in the Administration. As he explains at great
and sorrowful length: once the President was crippled by Watergate, he needed a
strong figure to conduct his foreign policy. ''In the end,'' Mr. Kissinger
writes, ''Nixon had no choice but to fall in with the notion of my central role,
however wounding to him - and however unfair.''

I will leave it to wiser heads than mine to judge how effectively Mr. Kissinger
makes the case for his conduct of foreign affairs during these critical years -
whether he justifies the prestige and energy he spent on shuttle diplomacy,
whether he is too defensive in justifying the bombing of Cambodia and in
protesting the lack of United States involvement in the fall of President
Salvador Allende Gossens of Chile, or whether he goes too far in his praise of
Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam and Mohammad Riza Pahlevi, Shah of Iran.

Liberals wiil, as usual, be repelled by his machtpolitik. Marxists will be
appalled at his claims for America's idealism in its conduct of foreign policy.
Conservatives will scoff at his case for detente.  Noam Chomsky will be outraged
at his portrait of North Vietnam as an imperialistic power. But then if Mr.
Kissinger is paranoid on the subject of Hanoi, so too, apparently, is China.

Even so innocent an observer as I had to be mildly amused when North Vietnam's
Le Duc Tho, upon being apprised by Mr. Kissinger that America's Congress might
not be entirely cooperative in permitting President Nixon to give financial aid
to Hanoi, said that this might well be the first occasion in Vietnam's history
that a President had had trouble getting Congress to accede to his desires.

But any fair observer must concede that ''Years of Upheaval,'' along with
''White House Years,'' is brilliantly argued, skillfully paced, sensitively
proportioned, consistently charming, altogether masterly and by far the most
consequential memoir to come out of the Nixon Administration. Certainly it's the
best book of its sort I've read since Dean Acheson's ''Present at the
Creation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BREZHVEV PRESSES OVERTURES TO THE CHINESE LEADERS

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 24


Leonid I. Brezhnev issued a new appeal to Peking today to revive the search for
ways to end the Chinese-Soviet feud.  The Soviet leader's comments in Tashkent,
about 250 miles from the Chinese border, were the latest and most direct in a
series of overtures that diplomats said were designed to take advantage of the
United States-Chinese rift over the proposed sale of American jet fighters to
Taiwan.

The specific proposals made by Mr. Brezhnev broke little new ground. But the
tone in which they were couched was more conciliatory than the invective of most
Soviet references to China in the two decades since the two nations drifted
apart over ideology, territory and other issues.

Western diplomats said Mr. Brezhnev's speech was Moscow's most positive signal
to the Chinese in several years, and certainly since the downturn in
Soviet-Chinese relations following the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.

Claim to Taiwan Is Backed

Mr. Brezhnev said the Soviet Union recognized Peking's claim to Taiwan, and
rejected the ''two Chinas'' concept over which Peking has increasingly fallen
out with Washington.

The Soviet leader denied that the Russians posed a threat to China or that they
claimed any Chinese territory.  He said the Soviet Union was ready to resume
talks on disputed border segments, adding a proposal to discuss ''possible
measures to strengthen mutual trust in the area of the Soviet-Chinese
frontier.'' There was no elaboration, but the offer seemed to imply a mutual
reduction in military buildup.

''We remember well the time when the Soviet Union and People's China were united
by bonds of friendship and comradely cooperation,'' Mr. Brezhnev continued. ''We
have never considered normal the state of hostility and estrangement between our
countries.

''We are prepared to come to terms, without preconditions, on measures
acceptable to both sides to improve Soviet-Chinese relations on the basis of
mutual respect for each other's interests, noninterference in each other's
affairs and mutual benefit, certainly not to the detriment of third countries.

''This refers to economic, scientific, cultural as well as political relations,
to whatever extent each side is prepared to take concrete steps in any of these
spheres.''

Brezhnev Disavows Meddling

Mr. Brezhnev took pains to assure the Chinese that criticism of their foreign
policy did not imply meddling in their internal affairs.

''We have never denied and do not deny now the existence of a socialist system
in China,'' he said, ''even though Peking's association with the policy of the
imperialists around the world contradicts, of course, the interests of
socialism.''

Mr. Brezhnev made no such distinction a year ago at a Soviet party congress in
discussing Chinese relations. At that time, he said that China's social and
economic development demonstrated ''what a distortion of the principles and
essence of socialism in domestic and foreign policy can lead to.''

Today's speech by Mr. Brezhnev followed a call by Prime Minister Nikolai A.
Tikhonov last month for the resumption of a dialogue with China ''on the basis
of equality and in the spirit of mutual understanding.''

U.S.-Chinese Strains Noted

Before Mr. Tikhonov's remarks, an article in the Government newspaper Izvestia
had pointed to the strains between Washington and Peking, saying that ''as long
as Americans are scaring themselves stiff with the 'Soviet threat,' they will
always be haunted by the nightmare of normalization in Soviet-Chinese
relations.''

Part of the present efforts at rapprochement was a visit here last week of three
Chinese economic experts. Their purpose, Chinese sources said, was to study
Soviet management methods, and they were received by Aleksandr V. Bachurin, a
deputy chairman of the State Planning Committee. The visit was the first of the
sort since the Chinese-Soviet break in the early 1960's.

In subsequent years, Moscow made several approaches to restore ties, but all
overtures foundered. Border negotiations that began after frontier clashes in
1969 have been dormant since 1978, and some preliminary discussions on
normalization were abandoned after the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.

The souring of American-Chinese ties, however, revived speculation that China
might be ready to play its ''Russia card,'' and Mr.  Brezhnev's remarks
suggested that the Soviet Union was prepared to play along.

Soviet Objectives Appear Limited

Diplomats believe that Soviet ambitions are limited, and Mr.  Brezhnev seemed to
support this view when he underlined the possibility of modest agreements.

The Russians are unlikely to believe that they can quickly remove the
accumulated resentments and restore the alliance they had with China in the
1950's. A 30-year friendship treaty lapsed last year.  Tensions over
Afghanistan, India, Vietnam and the 4,500-mile Soviet-Chinese border are
unlikely to dissipate soon. And China's trade with the United States, totaling
$5.5 billion last year, far exceeds Chinese-Soviet trade, which was $400 million
in 1980.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

JANE FONDA: SHE MAKES IDEAS PAY AT BOX OFFICE

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1475 words


HOLLYWOOD JANE FONDA sits in a provisional office in a drab bungalow on the 20th
Century-Fox lot, hugging a gold-covered script. ''This script'' she says, ''is
my baby of six years.''

The bungalow is the temporary home of IPC. Since 1977, IPC - alone or in
combination with other independent film companies - has produced five movies:
''Coming Home,'' ''The China Syndrome,'' ''9 to 5,'' ''Rollover'' and ''On
Golden Pond.'' ''Rollover'' was a critical and box-office dud. The various kinds
of successes the other four movies have had is extraordinary.

''Coming Home'' and ''On Golden Pond'' were nominated for Academy Awards as best
picture. The leading actors in ''Coming Home,'' ''The China Syndrome,'' and ''On
Golden Pond'' were also nominated, and Jon Voight and Jane Fonda won for their
performances as a paralyzed Vietnam veteran and the army captain's wife who is
radicalized through loving him in ''Coming Home.'' ''9 to 5'' has sold $125
million worth of tickets. ''On Golden Pond'' is well on its way to doing the
same, and ''The China Syndrome'' also did more than nicely at the box office.

A Two-Person Concern

Yet IPC is essentially just two people, a few borrowed offices and secretaries,
and a sense of social relevance. Its movies are financed by the major studios.
The office furniture is left over from ''9 to 5.''

Like most independent companies, IPC is an idea, not an edifice.  Almost all of
IPC's projects make some sociological or political point, and the script that
Miss Fonda is holding on her lap is no exception. From a novel, ''The
Dollmaker'' by Harriette Arnow, the script by Susan Cooper and Hume Cronyn tells
the story of a hillbilly from Appalachia with six children who follows her
husband to an urban slum when he gets a job in a factory during World War II. As
Miss Fonda describes the heart of the novel, ''She keeps her soul alive by
woodcarving.'' It is a story best told on television, she feels, and the day
after she won her Oscar for ''Coming Home,'' she took the novel to ABC and made
a deal. She will star in ''The Dollmaker'' and it will be, she says, her first
''challenge'' as an actress since ''Coming Home.''

IPC was formed in the winter of 1972 when, in Miss Fonda's words: ''Nixon was
President and I couldn't get a job. I can't say I was blacklisted, but I was
graylisted. I was disillusioned by the exploitive quality of the few offers I
was getting and by the cowardice of people who didn't disagree with my stand
against the Vietnam War but who didn't dare give me a job. I was seriously
toying with leaving the business. Instead, I decided to make one last stab. I
had interviewed the wives and girlfriends of Vietnam soldiers and I wanted to
make a movie about those women. I knew I couldn't do it alone. I can't do
anything by myself. I'm not a good businesswoman and I'm not good at
strategies.''

She Finds a Partner

The man she chose to do it with her is Bruce Gilbert, who dropped out of the
University of California at Berkeley in 1969, his senior year, because, he says,
''After the campus was teargassed by helicopter and people were shot, I found it
untenable to go back to classes as though nothing had happened.'' They had met
when Mr.  Gilbert, a psychology major, was the nursery-school teacher of Miss
Fonda's 4-year-old daughter, and they continued the association in an antiwar
organization, the Indochina Peace Campaign.

Mr. Gilbert - whose mustache, beard, and hair that comes to a curly peak make
him look a bit like a shaggy dog - is the pragmatic half of the partnership.
According to Miss Fonda, IPC stands for ''Indochina Peace Campaign'' and is ''a
healthy reminder of the idealism that brought us together.'' According to Mr.
Gilbert, ''At the last minute, when we incorporated in 1974, the lawyer said,
'You've got to come up with a name for your company' and I just took the
initials.  They don't stand for the peace campaign at all.''

It was also Mr. Gilbert who - under the influence of a large dose of old Preston
Sturges movies - changed Miss Fonda's idea for a serious movie about secretaries
into a farce, ''9 to 5.'' ''Jane wanted to do a straight drama about the
oppressive quality of office work. I saw the office as a natural setting for a
screwball comedy ensemble.''

The Difference Between Them

Miss Fonda describes their relationship as ''like a marriage.'' Mr. Gilbert
describes it with: ''We complement each other. I like the development process,
getting involved in a power-plant operator's or a nuclear physicist's world.
Jane likes making the movie. Jane's strength is in characterization and mine is
structure. Jane is blunt. She hits at things head on. With my background in
psychology, I tend to be more oblique.''

''If you want to send a message,'' the film pioneer Sam Goldwyn once said,
''Send it by Western Union.'' Many Hollywood movies - from John Ford's ''The
Grapes of Wrath'' starring Henry Fonda in 1940 to Dennis Hopper and Peter
Fonda's ''Easy Rider'' in 1969 - have cast burning eyes on social issues. But in
recent years Hollywood has found it more profitable to focus on far-out comedy,
outer space, and intimate dramas of inner space.

However, IPC has made social relevance pay off at the box office.  IPC's movies
have concerned the plight and anger of Vietnam War veterans, the possibility of
a devastating accident at a ''safe'' nuclear power plant, the victimization and
sexual harassment of secretaries by their bosses, and the possibility of a
worldwide financial collapse caused by the withdrawal of Arab petrodollars from
United States banks. Only ''On Golden Pond'' - a sentimental play bought as a
valentine from Miss Fonda to her father and as her first chance to act with him
in a movie - stands apart.

How They Get Ideas

In an attempt to get the material to make what they consider ''relevant''
movies, IPC has recently created something Mr. Gilbert calls ''a magazine
project.'' He says: ''Journalists come to us with an idea for something that
exists in the real world that could be a magazine article or feature story, and
we option the movie rights before the article is written. Our money lets them
dig deeper into a subject, and we get an article plus background information.''
The first four of the articles are almost ready for publication. They include a
Rolling Stone article on ''Hackers,'' a new subculture of young, top-scale
computer programmers; and a study of the Atlanta child murders that will
probably be published in Playboy.

Like most independent producers, Mr. Gilbert, who just turned 35, is constantly
scrambling to make some studio or other pay the bills.  Because United Artists
''gets first crack'' at any stories from the magazine project, it supplies IPC
with some office space in New York and Los Angeles. Fox is also supplying space
because IPC is currently making a television series out of ''9 to 5.'' (The
series has its premiere tonight at 9 P.M. on ABC-TV.)

''We try to stay lean and mean,'' says Mr. Gilbert, who was shrewd enough to
season himself before starting to run the gift company that was placed in his
lap. Coming into the movie business without experience or antecedents, he
trained himself by working more than a year as jack of all trades for a small
company before IPC tried to make its first movie. ''We don't want an overhead
that causes cashflow problems and forces us to churn out stuff we don't believe
in. People think that having Jane in a picture is enough to get it made. But it
isn't. You need a director and, in most cases, a co-star.''

Her Future Projects

IPC's next movie, ''Jack the Bear,'' is a ''Kramer vs.  Kramer''story about a
man who is raising his two sons; it will be the first IPC movie not to star Miss
Fonda. After that, Miss Fonda would like to tackle ''the issue of environmental
cancer''; the ''transition in Africa from white supremacy to black supremacy'';
and a movie with a ''passionate marriage,'' possibly based on a
drugrehabilitation center, Delancey Street.

Both are confident that they can continue to make socially relevant movies that
do well at the box office. ''If you have a good story that's not polemical, with
strong characters and a beginning, a middle and an end, you can pose questions
instead of giving answers,'' says Mr. Gilbert. ''You can let audiences come to
their own conclusions, and they will respond.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jane Fonda

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM STATEMENTS ON CUBA AND CARIBBEAN BY ENDERS AND STOESSEL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2291 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 25


Following are excerpts from statements by Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs, before the House Appropriations
subcommittee, on Administration policy toward Cuba, and by Walter J. Stoessel,
Deputy Secretary of State, before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, on the
Administration's Caribbean aid program:

Special to the New York Times

WASHINGTON, March 25 - Following are excerpts from statements by Thomas O.
Enders, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, before the
House Appropriations subcommittee on Administration policy toward Cuba, and by
Walter J. Stoessel, Deputy Secretary of State, before the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, on the Administration's Caribbean aid program:

By Mr. Enders

Perhaps I should begin with Cuban society itself.  There is nothing quite like
it. Improvements in social and health services over the last 20 years are far
less impressive than might have been expected. The economy, organized in the
familiar Soviet command model, has registered a general failure. Despite growing
Soviet assistance in sales of oil at low prices and purchases of sugar at high
prices - the whole Soviet aid effort is now equivalent to one quarter of Cuba's
G.N.P. - per capita income in Cuba has been stagnant and steadily falling
relative to much of Latin America.

Yet Cuba projects power in the world. The Soviet Union subsidizes Cuba with over
$3 billion in economic aid per year. In addition, Cuba's armed forces -
augmented by 66,000 tons of Soviet military deliveries in 1981 alone - are
stronger than any in the Western Hemisphere other than the United States. It
maintains 40,000 soldiers in Africa, dominating two countries, and doing for the
Soviet Union what the Gurkha mercenaries did for 19th-century England. In
Central America Cuba is attempting to unite the left in search of the violent
overthrow of established government, and maintains no less than 1,800 to 2,000
military and security personnel in Nicaragua.

In other words, a would-be foreign policy giant is allied to an economic pygmy,
whose peoples have had to sacrifice all hope for a rising standard of living in
order to gain advantages in foreign affairs.

Most countries cannot overcommit to state interests in this manner, because the
people force them to address their concerns. But Cubans lack the means to hold
their Government accountable.

Reliable News About Cuba

The proposal we discuss today -R.B.C. Inc. - is intended to supply what the
Cuban public is missing: reliable news about Cuban life, features, sports and
entertainment alternatives to the distorted, censored news that is being offered
by a Government that rules not for the people but for itself.

No, this is not a project to tell the Cuban people about the United States. VOA,
whose charter is international news and American features and culture, already
does that. It can be heard in Spanish.  So also can Florida radio stations
broadcasting in Spanish to Cuban-Americans. These stations can tell Cubans much
about us. But they are not an adequate source of information about what is going
on in Cuba itself.

Nor is it a project to incite Cubans to revolt against their own society. There
is provocation enough in the redistributed poverty, in the depressing austerity,
in the unemployment and under-employment of educated Cubans, in the
regimentation and in Castro's speeches that only further sacrifice lies ahead.
But it would be immoral, irresponsible to set a people against a Government that
monopolizes the means of coercion.

This radio is a proposal to give Cubans the means they now lack to know what
kind of a society has been imposed on them, to furnish them a source of news and
entertainment that is not manipulated by the state, to let them find out what is
really happening in their country, to inform them why so many have gone off to
foreign military duty not always to return, and to learn what the state really
does with the wealth of the Cuban people.

Special Sensitivity to Needs

The radio - like Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty before it - is intended
gradually to earn its audience through its special sensitivity to needs the
state ignores. It will speak to young people of the sports and music they love.
It will speak to adults of the great Cuban and Hispanic-American heritage they
admire, which so often the state denigrates. And it will give news on the truth
of which the listeners can rely.

Our proposal is thus to begin a sustained effort, over many years, to help the
Cubans know more about their country, and thus to hold their Government
accountable in ways it is not now.

People say, wouldn't it be better to negotiate with the Cubans; or it isn't like
us to engage in propaganda; or Cuban countermeasures will hurt us too much.

We have tried to talk with Cuba in the past and it would be wrong to rule out
trying to again. But the record is daunting.  In 1977 we started talking
seriously to the Cubans, saying we wanted to create conditions in which the
legacy of the past - the embargo and the political tension - could be overcome.
We suggested a gradual withdrawal of the more than 20,000 Cuban troops from
Angola.  After all, the civil war was over. While we talked, Cuba went into
Ethiopia.

Previous Talks Recalled

Conversations continued. In mid-1978, Cuba launched upon a new aggressive
strategy in Central America, uniting the left parties of first Nicaragua, then
El Salvador, then Guatemala, committing them to the destruction of their
established government.

Talks went on. In 1980, Castro turned the desire of many of his countrymen to
flee Cuba into a hostile act against the U.S. - the Mariel boatlift.

It is not wrong to talk to adversaries. Often it is only prudent.  But what
counts is not the medium, but the message. Talks cannot be a complete Cuban
policy, any more than diplomatic exchanges are a complete Soviet or Polish
policy. Diplomacy enables us to talk to the Government. We must also talk to the
people.

Others ask, should we be associated with ''propaganda?'' No, we should not. We
will not succeed in attracting an audience in Cuba if we offer them propaganda.
If there are false reports, the listeners will soon realize the reports are
false. If false reports continue, they will turn off. Only by respecting its
audience can a project like this succeed.

Mr. Chairman, R.B.C. Inc. is designed to respond to a basic human need -the need
to have access to information on events and policies that affect the lives of
those individuals. Freedom of information is what we are talking about here, a
fundamental freedom recognized by every responsible individual and government in
the world. This right, this freedom, has been consistently denied to the Cuban
people since Castro came to power in 1959. Radio Marti will help fill this
longstanding information gap.

Those of us who have lived in a Communist state will know just how much Radio
Marti can affect the lives of Cubans. For those of us who have not, it is an
opportunity to offer the Cuban people hope and the means to make informed
judgments on the actions of their own Government. For a people bottled up in a
system of oppression which they did not seek and cannot remove, that can be
precious.

By Mr. Stoessel

Our goals can be summarized as follows: We seek a region at peace with itself,
free from outside threats, able to devote its energy to economic progress and
the development of democratic political institutions. Security, democracy, and
economic development are clearly linked.

The nations of the Caribbean basin are in serious trouble. Because their peoples
are our neighbors we cannot turn our back on their plight. It is our
neighborhood and there is no way we can simply pick up and move out. The
troubles there inevitably become our troubles.

When times are hard for us they are usually even harder for our smaller and
poorer neighbors. When economic conditions are bad - and they are bad now -
thousands of people migrate from the Caribbean to the United States and other
countries.

We know the human tragedy of refugee movements. A few months ago several
Haitians lost their lives trying to reach Florida. Two years ago more than
120,000 Cubans risked their lives to come to the United States. We also know the
enormous social and economic burdens these waves of refugees bring to the
communities that receive them.

Vital to U.S. Security

The Caribbean is also vital to our security. In the debate over the Panama Canal
treaties, the one question on which there was universal agreement was that the
canal had to be kept open. Yet the canal itself is but one short 50-mile span in
thousands of miles of Caribbean sea lanes. Nearly half of our crude oil imports
- in fact, nearly half of all our exports and imports -pass through these vital
sea lanes.

Today the peace and security of the Caribbean basin are deeply threatened by a
web of political violence, economic collapse and Cuban support for subversion.
In the Caribbean, the smallest islands are as exposed politically as they have
long been to the sudden violence of tropical storms. Three years ago a tiny band
of armed men, who turned out to be Marxists, took over the nation of Grenada;
other islands are equally vulnerable to small groups of many political stripes,
adventurers or even gangsters. In Central America, acute economic troubles are
unsettling rigid social compacts formed generations ago in Guatemala, widening
distrust in El Salvador and bringing Costa Ricans to worry about the sturdy
democratic compact that has served them well for more than 30 years.

Timing its move to exploit these vulnerabilities, Cuba has mounted a campaign to
establish Marxist-Leninist dictatorships in both Central America and the
Caribbean. Beginning in 1978, Fidel Castro redoubled his efforts to discredit
basin governments, ridicule democracy and glorify armed violence. The Cuban
Government has covertly trained, supplied and directed extremists engaged in
guerrilla warfare and economic sabotage.

Soviet Weaponry Listed

Arms delivered through Nicaragua to guerrillas in El Salvador with Cuban and
Soviet help have come from as far away as Vietnam. Cuba's Air Force now has 200
or more Soviet-supplied MIG fighter-bombers.  Should Cuba's Soviet MIG's be able
to utilize airports now under construction in Grenada and Nicaragua, their range
would be greatly extended.

If Soviet MIG's or submarines were to be based in the Caribbean area, we would
be forced to divert American defensive strength from Europe and Asia to develop
a costly military shield where today we have none.

Our message to Cuba is clear. We will not accept that the futureof the Caribbean
basin be mainipulated from Havana. It must be determined by the countries
themselves.

Self-determination is best assured and progress toward democracy is best
achieved when a country's economy is developing well. A country is most secure
when it can promise its people freedom and economic progress. It is the purpose
of the President's plan to help the countries of the Caribbean basin achieve
self-sustaining economic growth as a foundation to maintain freedom and
independence as sovereign nations.

Serious Economic Difficulties

The countries of the Caribbean basin face very serious economic difficulties and
need the support of the international community.  Declining prices for
traditional exports - such as sugar, bauxite and coffee - together with higher
costs for essential imports, especially energy, have created serious balance of
payments problems, contributed to widespread unemployment and fostered a climate
of general economic malaise and dispair.

The world recession pinches these economies hard. The results have been
disastrous. Costa Rica's G.N.P declined 5 percent in 1981.  Inflation rose to 60
percent. Foreign exchange reserves - in a country of two million - became
negative by $400 million. Its external debt for both public and private sectors
exceeds a staggering $3.6 billion.

The Dominican Republic, after a decade of strong growth, expects no better than
zero growth this year. Earnings from sugar sales, its main export, could decline
by 40 percent in 1982, and its current account deficit could approach $1
billion.

In El Salvador, violence and economic sabotage have brought the economy to the
point of collapse. Output in 1981 fell 10 percent after a decline of 10 percent
in 1980. With economic assistance planned by the U.S. and other donors this
decline may be reduced or even a zero growth achieved in 1982.

President's Program Outlined

How, specifically, does the President's program serve U.S.interests? In several
ways:

- By opening the opportunity for long-term self-sustaining growth, the people of
the Caribbean basin can take hope in a future with Western values.

- By enhancing the prospects for economic development, the plan gives firm
support to the preservation and development of democratic institutions as the
best way to achieve change in peace.

- By strengthening regional cooperation and the principle of burden-sharing,
through coordination with Mexico, Canada, Venezuela, Colombia and with the
multilateral institutions and with self help measures by recipient nations.

- By alleviating the root causes of human misery which have stimulated a major
and sustained flow of people from the Caribbean basin into the United States.

- By protecting our strategic and economic interests by promoting stable
neighbors friendly to the United States.  In fact, this is what the President is
asking the Congress to undertake - a long-term commitment to help the small,
fragile countries of the Caribbean basin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Walter Stoessel

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
OVERSEER OF U.S. LATIN POLICY

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1603 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 25


Thomas O. Enders, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs,
is praised these days by some liberals and conservatives on Capitol Hill who
only a few months ago viewed him as ideologically suspect.

But such limited success seems to have strengthened the animosity of a circle of
critics that has surrounded Mr. Enders for more than a decade.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. placed Mr. Enders last year in the
taxing position of supervising United States policy and diplomacy in Latin
America. In Central America and the Caribbean, he has faced revolution and
insurgency; in South America, he has had to deal with America's frayed ties to
authoritarian governments.

Mr. Enders, 51 years old, has also played a considerable role in defending an
American policy that threatens major domestic and international divisions.

A Major Shake-Up

In addition, he has had the difficult task of helping to oversee a major
shake-up in the State Department's Bureau of Inter-American Affairs that has
caused resentment among Foreign Service officers.

Mr. Enders is no stranger to controversy and criticism. An imposing figure, both
physically and intellectually, he has enjoyed the patronage of such powerful
mentors as Henry A. Kissinger and Mr.  Haig.

Thomas Ostrom Enders was born on Nov. 28, 1931, in Hartford, the son of an
affluent banking executive and the nephew of a Nobel Prize winner, the
virologist John F. Enders.

He graduated from Yale in 1953, first in his class with a B.A. in history and
economics. He won the Alpheus Henry Snow award as outstanding man of his year,
and became a member of one of the university's more prestigious secret
societies, Scroll and Key.

An 'Intimidating' Appearance

He received a master's degree at Harvard and was working on a doctorate when he
left the university to enter the Foreign Service.  Working on a paper about the
economy of medieval Morocco, he met and married the daughter of an Italian
diplomat, Gaetana Marchegiano.  They have three daughters and a son.

Mr. Enders - 6 feet 8 inches tall, with straight hair severely parted and cool
eyes behind horn-rimmed glasses - is often described as physically
''intimidating.'' Nearly everyone who discusses him says he is ''brilliant.''

After serving as an economic officer in Stockholm and in Washington, where he
worked under another powerful mentor, Eugene V.  Rostow, a Yale professor who
had become an Under Secretary of State, Mr. Enders was made Deputy Chief of
Mission -the No. 2 diplomat - at the United States Embassy in Belgrade in 1969
at the precocious age of 38.

In Yugoslavia, Mr. Enders quarreled so violently with Ambassador William
Leonhart that the young diplomat was prematurely recalled to Washington. Asked
if it were true that he had asked for Mr. Enders's replacement and that he had
locked his deputy out of his office, Mr.  Leonhart said in a telephone
interview, ''The second is quite untrue.''

Enthusiastic About the Military

Such an incident might have shunted Mr. Enders's career onto a bureaucratic
siding. But Emory C. Swank, appointed Ambassador to Cambodia in 1970, was
persuaded by an assistant secretary of state to take Mr. Enders as Deputy Chief
of Mission in Phnom Penh.

Mr. Enders told several people in Phnom Penh that he was enthusiastic about
military affairs. He said he had hoped at one time for a career in the armed
forces, but was prevented from it by his height and eyesight.

Ambassador Swank placed Mr. Enders in charge of a civil-military embassy
committee that had been ordered by Washington to carry out a ''simple, rapid
request-validation-e@xecute procedure'' to clear Cambodian requests for heavy
bomber attacks in the Western two-thirds of the country. The embassy also, for a
time, played a role in relaying communictions involved in tactical strikes by
fighterbombers.

Mr. Kissinger was then President Nixon's national security adviser and
diplomatic trouble-shooter, with Mr. Haig his deputy and a frequent visitor to
Cambodia. The bombing and the support of Lon Nol's shaky Government was meant,
in part, to help the ''Vietnamization'' of the war in neighboring South Vietnam.


Air Strikes in Cambodia

The visit by two staff members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to
Phnom Penh in April 1973 led to a dispute over whether Mr. Enders misled them
about the role of the embassy in approving air strikes and about the extent to
which legislative restrictions on United States involvement in Cambodian combat
might have been violated.

In 1974, Mr. Kissinger, who was then then Secretary of State, selected Mr.
Enders to be Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs.

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee confirmed the nomination.  But it said in
a report that Mr. Enders gave the panel's staff a ''grossly misleading''
description in 1973 of the embassy role in the bombing. The committee report
also registered ''strong objection'' to what it called a ''conscious effort'' by
the embassy to mislead Congress.

According to a some members of the committee, a number of prominent figures in
Washington lobbied heavily for Mr. Enders's confirmation.  His advocates
reportedly argued that his part in the effort to mislead the committee should
not be allowed to spoil a ''brilliant career.''

Mr. Enders also had a bitter feud with the large American and international
press corps covering the collapse of Cambodia, arranging the expulsion of one
reporter.

In an appendix to the second volume of Mr. Kissinger's memoirs, ''Years of
Upheaval,'' Mr. Enders writes that there ''is no evidence of massive civilian
casualties'' as a result of the Cambodian bombing.

Mr. Swank, now retired, joined Mr. Enders in signing the appendix, which is part
of Mr. Kissinger's defense against charges by the journalist-a@uthor William
Shawcross and others that his policies led to the ''destruction'' of Cambodia.

The appendix also asserts that the two known major accidents in which B-52
bombers undeniably killed substantial numbers of civilians ''both were reported
by the embassy.''

Ambassador to Canada

When Ambassador Swank left Cambodia in September 1973, Mr. Enders took over as
acting head of mission. Returning to the United States several months before the
fall of Phnom Penh, he became an Assistant Secretary of State.

Since then, Mr. Enders has served as Ambassador to Canada, United States
representative to the European Economic Community and Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs.

Canadian politicians, diplomats and journalists describe Mr.  Enders's
performance as Ambassador to Canada as impressive. His economic expertise was
said to be particularly valuable. He traveled widely in Canada and is said to
have got to know the sprawling country and its heterogenous society extremely
well.

In contrast, a wide range of United States official and nonofficial authorities
on Latin America said they believed that Mr.  Enders's lack of experience in the
region, lack of fluency in Spanish and what most of them called a ''lack of feel
for the region'' posed drawbacks.

Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, a longtime acquaintence,
said Mr. Enders lacked knowledge of the ''political topography'' of Central
American nations. Senator Dodd said Mr.  Enders tended to take a ''globalist
view'' of the political unrest and insurgencies in the area, giving more
importance to outside intervention by Communist forces than to internal
political problems.

A number of leading foreign policy specialists on Latin America spoke in similar
terms, although most preferred not to permit the use of their names.

Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, originally put a ''hold'' on
the confirmation of Mr. Enders. He also succeeded in forcing Mr. Enders to
cccept some noncareer conservatives in the Inter-American bureau, where they are
regarded as Mr. Helms's ''watchdogs.''

But the Senator's staff specialist on the region, John Carbaugh, now says, ''My
own personal view has changed dramatically, and I think Tom Enders has on
balance done a very good job and is in the forefront of what active policy we do
have.''

'A Pretty Reasonable Fellow'

Representative Michael D. Barnes, a liberal Democrat from Maryland, praises Mr.
Enders for his accessibility and believes that he may be a force for
flexibility, rather than a strong ''globalist'' like Secretary Haig. ''He seems
to be a pretty reasonable fellow, which, of course, is not his image,'' Mr.
Barnes said.

But on the question of ''credibility,'' Mr. Barnes said, ''with some members of
the House Foreign Affairs Committee it is just a total block when it comes to
Secretary Enders.''

A diplomatic peer expressed the opinion that Mr. Enders's great loyalty
concealed some dismay about Mr. Haig's statements on Central America and the
decision to stake United States prestige on being able to ''hold the line''
there.

''For one time in his career, he is being victimized by others,'' the diplomat
said. ''This is a situation in which brilliance doesn't help.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Thomas Ostrom Enders

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOW PETERBOROUGH, N.H., VOTED FOR NUCLEAR FREEZE

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words

DATELINE: PETERBOROUGH, N.H., March 19


On a Monday two weeks ago, in a speech in Tennessee, President Reagan denounced
a notion that had been spreading through New England and Congress like a vine:
that the United States and the Soviet Union should agree to a joint freeze on
nuclear arms. But the next night, the residents of this small, cultured,
overwhelmingly Republican town came out of their homes in the snowy woods to
declare against the President and for the freeze.

People who live here do not consider Peterborough typical of New Hampshire,
because of its affluence, its high proportion of transplanted citizens and the
long influence of the MacDowell Colony for creative artists. Yet in a balanced
cluster of nearby towns, the same thing happened: in Mason, Sharon, and the tiny
town of Antrim; in Hancock, Dublin, and the retiree-thrifty town of Rindge; and
in Jaffrey and Greenfield, where Representative Judd Gregg, a Republican and the
son of a former governor, came home to speak out at his town meeting for a
freeze by the United States and the Soviet Union on the testing, production and
deployment of nuclear arms.

Issue Nurtured by Church

In Vermont and New Hampshire, the question has been called to a vote through the
town meetings by which these communities govern themselves. But in Peterborough,
as elsewhere, the issue was nurtured by an institution equally as cherished and
central to New England: the church. With the Rev. David D. Van Strien as its
pastor, the Unitarian Church, with its wooden belfry and clock tower, is at the
geographic center of life and town here in the low mountains of southern New
Hampshire. It is still the seat of a Lyceum that has been bringing in speakers
to stir this snug community with ideas since 1828.

''When you live in a little town like this,'' Marilyn Kelly said this afternoon,
serving up thick buttered slices from a loaf of freshly baked bread, ''you can
really cut yourself off from the big bad world.'' Beneath her, in the basement,
a wood-burning furnace purred; and beyond the dining room windows a rank of
birch trees stood in exclamation point against the snow.

This is the life she and her husband chose seven years ago. Born in the Bronx,
Mark Kelly is a doctor of internal medicine. At 35, he has a beard. Together,
they have four children, one of them an adopted orphan of the Vietnam War.

Population Has Doubled

For a century before World War II, Peterborough contained roughly 2,500 people.
Since then it has doubled, and the new half is composed of people who are
variants of the Kellys. Either young or retired, they tend to be vigorous and
intellectually alert.

''They're thinking people here,'' Dr. Peter Twitchell says. Dr.  Twitchell, a
Harvard graduate and a Republican, moved here a quarter of a century ago from
Massachusetts to practice general surgery.  ''I've been pretty much a closet
liberal until now.''

But it was Dr. Twitchell who stood up in the town meeting that Tuesday, near
midnight, to introduce the resolution to freeze the competition in nuclear arms.
Dr. Kelly had asked him to, and Dr.  Twitchell agreed. ''I don't think there's
any doubt but that in the current Administration,'' he says, ''there's increased
danger of nuclear war.''

The chain of events that brought him to speak began late in 1979 or early 1980,
when the Lyceum committee decided to invite Dr. H. Jack Geiger to speak. Dr.
Geiger, a professor of medicine at the City College of New York, is a founding
member of Physicians for Social Responsibility, a national group of doctors and
laymen concerned about the threat of nuclear war.

'Thought He'd Be Interesting'

The Lyceum committee's chairman is Ralph E. Cole. ''Ralph and I knew Geiger and
thought he'd be interesting,'' Robert S. Morison, another committee member,
recalls. Mr. Morison, a native of Peterborough who has retired back here from
the Rockefeller Foundation, had introduced Dr. Geiger at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology three months before.

In July 1981, Dr. Geiger stood at the pulpit of the Unitarian Church here and
offered a graphic account of the effect of a single nuclear bomb on a city the
size of Chicago. Mrs. Kelly took her children to hear it. ''It was a real
death-and-scare lecture,'' she says. It moved the Kellys to take part that
August in a symbolic march in Vermont, where Quakers had been active in
organizing the idea of a freeze.

The Kellys walked 36 miles from the town of Washington through Montpelier to
Moscow, Vt. They met other families from throughout New England, and when they
returned, they helped organize local committees in southern New Hampshire to
promote the idea of a nuclear freeze.

Tom Nichols, a native of Peterborough, senior partner in an insurance firm here
and also a Republican, was not part of that effort. But as he notes, the
mutuality of the notion is in itself a factor. ''I haven't heard of anybody who
wouldn't be delighted if we didn't have a nuclear threat,'' he said.

'Conservative Could Support It'

''The resolution was structured so that a conservative could support it,''
Representative Gregg said. ''I don't see it as a dramatic statement in
opposition to the President.''

A clutch of physicians and clergymen followed Dr. Twitchell to the microphone to
speak for the resolution the night of the town meeting, and by the time the town
moderator, former Gov. Walter Peterson, called for the vote, there were 200
people still in the audience and only one person had spoken in opposition. The
measure passed by a voice vote estimated at 5 to 1.

The lone speaker opposed was John Farrell, an insurance agent who moved here
four years ago from Framingham, Mass. He says he is worried that in trying to
send a signal to Washington, Peterborough is instead sending a message of
cowardice to Moscow. ''We are sending them a message that we don't want to
fight,'' he said. ''We'll just lay down, and if you want to walk all over us,
that's all right.''

The force that has brought the nuclear freeze movement to life, he said. ''is
primarily the clergy, which has been very leftist-oriented for some time.''

But Mr. Farrell is in the curious position of railing mainly against fellow
Republicans. And Dr. Kelly, a Democrat, feels optimistic about the movement. ''I
think it will spread,'' he says.  ''And I think it will affect the November
elections.'' He is already looking forward to the next phase.

On June 12, he says, he hopes to get off emergency room duty to take part in a
demonstration in New York City near the United Nations, which is holding a
conference on disarmament that day.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map photo of Dr. Mark Kelly photo of Dr. Peter Twitchell
photo of Peterborough, N.H.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV'S PROBLEMS IN COVERING THE SALVADOR WAR;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By TONY SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1025 words


''So long as we're limited to reports from El Salvador that run no longer than
two or three minutes, we'll never convince a jury that we're doing our best,''
CBS's Bill D. Moyers said. ''Nuances get lost, subtleties get squeezed out, and
the rich texture of a complicated war is sacrificed.''

Indeed, with notable exceptions such as CBS's recent 90-minute special on
Central America, and longer ''status reports'' by ABC's Richard Threlkeld, the
major television networks' daily coverage of El Salvador most often amounts to
snapshots of a war, with little broader perspective about the country, its
history, economy and everyday life.

By contrast, the 24-hour Cable News Network - relying on two crews as opposed to
the four or five that each of the three major networks now have in El Salvador -
has been regularly featuring longer reports. Among them were a half-hour
interview with Jose Napoleon Duarte, President of El Salvador, a half-hour
background special on El Salvador last month and several six- and seven-minute
pieces by James Alan Mickelshevsky and Peter Arnett, a former Associated Press
correspondent who was awarded the Pulitzer Prize in 1966 for his reporting from
Vietnam.

The disparity in the time that the Cable News Network and the networks devote to
Central America was graphically reflected this week. On Wednesday, CNN devoted
the first 17 minutes of its 90-minute evening newscast solely to Central
America. The major networks' entire evening news programs run just 22 minutes,
after commercials.

CBS Makes Biggest Effort

Among the three networks, CBS has made the most broad-ranging effort to reflect
the scope of the struggle in Central America, not just with its special, but
with several longer reports on its morning and evening news, as well as
commentaries by Mr. Moyers. The network's 90-minute special, in particular,
provided a background primer on Central America by focusing on interviews with
key figures in El Salvador, and in the neighboring countries of Guatemala,
Nicaragua and Mexico.

In general, however, the three networks' strong emphasis on the visual means
that reports that don't lend themselves to dramatic pictures receive far less
attention. Introducing his portion of the CBS special, Mr. Moyers noted that
''the frustrating thing about reporting this story is how much of it we cannot
show you,'' and went on to note briefly some of the historical events that led
to the war in El Salvador.

Perhaps sensitive to recent criticism, the networks seem to be resisting a
single-minded focus on ''bang bang'' - vernacular for footage of the most
violent battles and acts of terror. Still, the great majority of network reports
continue to focus on the war itself, rather than the country's situation as a
whole.

There are times when television's visual power can be used to considerable
advantage. David Dick, CBS correspondent, offered one example in a recent report
on a refugee camp in El Salvador - capturing with few words the miserable plight
of ordinary citizens forced to abandon their homes to avoid being caught in the
crossfire of the war, and trying to make do in cramped and Spartan refugee
camps.

'Awesome Responsibility'

''It's an awesome responsibility to provide a real picture of the war as it
evolves,'' Howard Stringer, executive producer of ''The CBS Evening News,''
said. ''Obviously, if you concentrate on a shootout and don't pull back the
camera to reveal towns going about their everyday business, you're not doing the
job. You can't ignore the violence in a war, but you have to keep asking
yourself if you're telling the whole story.''

When ABC's Mr. Threlkeld provided a longer background report on Central America
last month, the anchor, Frank Reynolds, prefaced it by noting that, ''It's
extremely difficult in a necessarily brief report on the day-by-day events in El
Salvador to place the whole tragic business in perspective, and in particular to
show what it means to live there.''

Mr. Threlkeld then managed, more successfully than most network reporters, to
show how one ostensibly typical small town in San Salvador -San Francisco Gotera
- was continuing to go about its business in the midst of a war. Offering a
contrast to the more typical battle images, Mr. Threlkeld used words and
pictures to show how the town's residents ''have managed to detour around this
war as if it were a broken bridge on the highway.''

On ABC's ''Nightline,'' the only nightly network news broadcast that deals in
depth with a single subject for a half hour, a recent program was devoted to
straightforward but effective interviews with people representing five
viewpoints on El Salvador - a priest, a businessman, a Government soldier, a
rebel and a spokesman for the State Department in the United States.

No In-Depth Reports

NBC, which devoted more attention to Central America than its two rivals during
the last two years, and was the first network to report on renewed fighting
there last February, has not featured any indepth reports on El Salvador during
the last several months, save a single segment on ''NBC Magazine.'' Indeed, in
recent weeks, a number of NBC reports have focused somewhat narrowly on isolated
battles, featuring dramatic shooting footage and people weeping over the bodies
of dead relatives, but lacking much perspective about the country's broader
situation. NBC has scheduled its first special on El Salvador for Monday, the
day after the Salvadoran elections, from 11:30 P.M to midnight.

''You can't give this story the time it deserves in two minutes a night on a
half-hour newscast,'' Reese Schonfeld, president of the Cable News Network,
said. ''It's bound to be superficial. With five or six minutes, you get a chance
to give a little perspective. It may not be deep perspective, but at least it's
some perspective.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 27, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GROUND BROKEN IN CAPITAL FOR MEMORIAL ON VIETNAM

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 26


A group of 125 Vietnam veterans, some of them weeping, turned a shovelful of
earth each today to start construction of a black granite memorial to honor
those who died in the divisive war.

''Let this memorial begin the healing process and forever stand as a symbol'' of
national unity, said Jan Scruggs, an infantryman in the war and the founder of
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund.

Speaking before a crowd of about 2,000 at the muddy site between the Washington
Monument and Lincoln Memorial, Mr. Scruggs, his voice cracking, noted that there
had been ''no monuments, no testaments, no memorials,'' to the Americans who
died in Vietnam.

Robb Recalls 23 Deaths

Gov. Charles S. Robb of Virginia, a Marine Corps officer in the war, recalled
that 23 men in his company died, ''two of them literally in my arms.'' He said,
''The families of the men who died in my unit have asked me the whys and hows of
their deaths.''

''I'm not sure of the whys,'' Mr. Robb said slowly. ''But this monument does say
we care and we remember. And that's terribly important.''

The memorial, which has stirred some dispute, will be erected on a two-acre site
at the west end of the Mall. The memorial, two 200-foot walls that meet at an
angle, will include the names of the 57,692 Americans killed or missing in
Vietnam.

Designed by Student

The memorial was designed by Maya Ying Lin, an architectural student at Yale,
whose design came in first in a competition with 1,420 entries.

The memorial, which will be paid for with $7 million in private donations, has
been criticized by some veterans and members of Congress who contended that the
extraordinarily simple design was a ''tombstone'' that failed to take into
account the valor and patriotism of the dead. A compromise was announced
Wednesday by Mr.  Scruggs and Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, a
key legislative backer of the memorial.

After a meeting with veterans' groups and others, Mr. Warner said that a
flagpole would be placed atop the apex of the two walls with a plaque reading,
''A gift from the veterans of Vietnam to the people of the United States of
America.'' A statue will be placed in front of the walls, ''a strong, commanding
figure symbolizing all who served in Vietnam,'' according to Mr. Warner and Mr.
Scruggs.

In addition, the memorial will now have several inscriptions, including one
reading: ''We are honored to have had the opportunity to serve our country under
difficult circumstances. God bless America!'' Those words were spoken by
Jeremiah Denton, now a Republican Senator from Alabama, when he returned to the
United States after more than seven years as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam.

Another inscription, to be placed at the base of the statue, was taken from the
wall of a bunker in 1968 in the Communist siege of the American base at Khe
Sanh. It will read: ''For those who fought for it, freedom has a flavor.''

Miss Lin, who is visiting Taiwan with her family, was unavailable for comment on
the additions to the memorial.  ''I think we had an honest disagreement about
this,'' said Milton Copulos, a former member of the 25th Infantry Division who
now works for the Heritage Foundation, a conservative research organization.
''We felt there wasn't a positive statement about the veterans' service and now,
I think, there is.''

Emotional Scenes

As Mr. Scruggs read a portion of Philip Caputo's Vietnam book, ''A Rumor of
War,'' in which the author described the death of a comrade, tears rolled down
the cheeks of several veterans.

Cooper T. Holt, executive director of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, said: ''Let
this memorial begin the healing process and forever stand as a symbol of
national unity. For those who died in the war, and those who lived, the nation
finally pays tribute.''

Money for the memorial has been raised through donations from veterans' groups,
oil companies and, according to Mr. Scruggs, numerous individuals, including
schoolchildren. The land was donated last year by Congress.

Mr. Scruggs said the dedication Nov. 11, Veterans Day, will be attended by
thousands of Vietnam veterans who are planning to come to Washington ''for the
parade and hero's welcome they never received.''

Other speakers at the ceremonies included Senators Warner and Charles McC.
Mathias Jr., Republican of Maryland, and Charles T.  Hagel, a deputy
administrator at the Veterans Administration and a Vietnam veteran, who said:
''We all know there's no glory in war, only suffering.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Vietnam veterans breaking ground

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 27, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
SATURDAY, MARCH 27, 1982

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 960 words


International
A meeting ''at a high political level'' will be held next month between the
United States and Nicaragua, Mexico's delegate announced to the United Nations
Security Council. United States sources would not confirm the announcement by
Porfirio Munoz Ledo, nor would Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the United States delegate,
However, the Foreign Minister of Nicaragua, Miguel d'Escoto, said that the
Mexican account matched his understanding. (Page 1, Columns 2-4.)
A compromise with the U.S. was impossible on the issue of the American arms
sales to Taiwan, Deng Xiaoping, China's leader, told an American businessman,
Armand Hammer, at a meeting at the Great Hall of the People in Peking. A Chinese
magazine this week quoted Mr. Deng as saying that Peking was ''well prepared''
to downgrade diplomatic relations with Washington if it had to. (8:3-6.)
National
President Reagan withdrew his commitment to the budget for the fiscal year 1983
and was prepared to negotiate basic changes with Republicans and Democrats to
reduce the deficit, Edwin Meese 3d, the White House counselor, announced. It was
the most explicitly conciliatory statement on the budget from anyone in the
Reagan Administration. Changes were necessary because the $91.5 billion deficit
that was projected in early February had grown, Mr. Meese said. (1:6.)
Three communication links failed on the space shuttle Columbia, but the
project's officials said back-up systems were sufficient for the astronauts to
carry out their mission to its scheduled ending Monday. The failures raised the
possiblity that the mission would have to be ended prematurely, but a project
official said that the failures thus far had not degraded the flow of
operational and scientific data from the spaceship, nor did they threaten the
crew's safety. (1:3.)
The Democratic Party adopted rules for its 1984 convention that turned away from
its grass-roots emphasis and placed potentially decisive power to nominate its
next Presidential candidate back in the hands of office-holders and party
officials. Without a single spoken protest and over only a handful of ''nay''
votes, the Democratic National Committee adopted rules providing that 14 percent
of the delegates to the nominating convention be chosen on the basis of their
office or party status and without commitment to a candidate. (1:4-5.)
Some Vietnam veterans wept as preliminary work began in Washington on the
two-acre site of a memorial to Americans who died in the Vietnam War. The
groundbreaking ceremonies were attended by about 2,000 people, including Gov.
Charles S. Robb of Virginia, who was a Marine officer in the war. The memorial,
consisting of two 200-foot black granite slabs inscribed with the names of
57,692 Americans killed or missing in Vietnam, will be erected on the west end
of the Mall, between the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial. (1:1-2.)
Tax-exemption for veterans' groups may no longer be granted by the Internal
Revenue Service while it denies the privilege to charitable or educational
organizations that conduct lobbying activities, a Federal appellate court has
ruled. The court said in a 6-to-4 decision that it was unconstitutional to grant
tax exemptions to veterans' groups, which have lobbied on a wide range of
issues, while denying this status to other nonprofit organizations that lobby on
behalf of legislation. (1:1-2.)
A bad job of policing Medicaid fraud has been done by most states, according to
a Congressional committee. New York State was the exception and was said to have
done a superlative job. The report by the House Select Committee on Aging
concluded that ''state enforcement of the Medicaid program has been an
unmitigated disaster.'' (9:1-2.)
Metropolitan
Two Brink's robbery suspects were arrested at dawn in police raids at opposite
ends of Manhattan. They were identified as Edward L.  Joseph, 29 years old, and
Cecil Ferguson, 35. Each was held in $1 million bail. The city police and agents
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation also raided an organization known as the
Black Acupuncture Advisory Association of North America on West 139th Street.
According to Federal complaints, suspects in the robbery and others were seen
leaving the organization on the morning of the holdup of the Brink's truck last
October in Rockland County. (1:5-6.)
An April 16 deadline for New York State's adoption of a reapportionment plan for
its legislative and Congressional districts was set by a special Federal court.
The court decided in a suit brought by the Legislature's Black and Puerto Rican
Caucus, which sought to break an impasse between the Republican-led Senate and
the Democratic-led Assembly over how and when to reapportion district lines in
accordance with the 1980 census. In setting the deadline, the court sought to
have the lines redrawn in time for elections this year. (25:1.)
The Westway project is being blocked by legislative leaders in Albany until the
Federal Government agrees in advance to pay its share of the highway's cost even
if it is never completed. The delaying measure agreed to by the legislators
would bar at least $191 million in contracts for landfill and for bracing on the
Hudson Tubes and the Holland Tunnel this year and would put the Westway projects
at least six months behind schedule, state transportation officials said.
(27:1-2.)

Business Digest, Page Page 31

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 27, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 47 words


''The families of the men who died in my unit have asked me the whys and hows of
their deaths. I'm not sure of the whys, but this monument does say we care and
we remember. And that's terribly important.'' - Gov. Charles S. Robb, a Vietnam
veteran. (1:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              373 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 27, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PROFESSIONAL GROUPS FLOCKING TO ANTINUCLEAR DRIVE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 2; Page 40, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 993 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, March 23


In an auditorium of the Harvard School of Public Health, 100 doctors, nurses and
medical students watched themselves on videotape machines.

They were not there to improve their medical skills, but to learn how to give
persuasive public talks on the dangers of nuclear war.  Their presence at the
session last Saturday was only the latest indication of the growing momentum of
the antinuclear arms movement, a success based at least in part on the unusual
way the campaign is organized.

In contrast with the civil rights movement of the early 1960's and the anti-
Vietnam War demonstrations of the late 1960's that drew on mass organizations or
students, the antinuclear activists have put together organizations built around
the professions.

Three Groups Organized It

The training course at the Harvard School of Public Health, for example, for
which each participant paid $50, was organized by three groups: Physicians for
Social Responsibility, the Nurses Alliance for the Prevention of Nuclear War and
the Nuclear War Study Group, an organization of medical students.

A fourth group, Educators for Social Responsibility, provided teachers to help
train the volunteer speakers, who expect to receive an increasing number of
requests for lectures on the threat of nuclear war. Dr. James Muller, an
assistant professor at the Harvard Medical School and secretary of the
International Physicians for Prevention of Nuclear War, said he had so many
invitations to speak recently that in the last month he had been forced to turn
down 40.

All five of these groups, like most of the dozen or so professionbased
antinuclear organizations now in existence, have their headquarters in Boston.

Alan B. Sherr, the president and founder of Lawyers Alliance for Nuclear Arms
Control, believes the guild approach has contributed to the strength of the
movement.

'Not Just a Leftist Fringe'

''It has been very important to avoid the divisiveness of the Vietnam War
protests, to prevent the labeling and categorizing of the past,'' Mr. Sherr
said. ''It enables us to recruit older and more conservative lawyers. They can
see it is not just a leftist fringe movement.''

Lawyers Alliance was formally begun in January with an office in Boston across
the street from the State House. It now has 700 members, according to Mr. Sherr,
and is growing by 100 new lawyers a week.

In two months, he said, the group has set up other chapters in Maine, Vermont,
New Hampshire and San Francisco.  The organizer of the group in Washington, Mr.
Sherr added, is Erwin Griswold, a former dean of the Harvard Law School and
former Solicitor General of the United States.

''It surprises me, to tell the truth,'' Mr. Sherr said of the interest of older
and more conservative lawyers. ''For them nuclear war is a personal question, it
has little to do with politics.''

''Our job is to keep up with this enthusiasm.''

He Worked for State Government

Mr. Sherr himself is a lawyer and, until he resigned in January to devote full
time to Lawyers Alliance, was general counsel to the Office of Human Services in
the Massachusetts government.

''Financially and career-wise it was a very big step,'' Mr. Sherr said. ''But it
was clear to me that the tempo of the arms race was increasing and I had to make
a decision about my priorities.''

One of the fastest-growing groups is Physicians for Social Responsibility,
headed by an Australian-born pediatrician, Dr. Helen Caldicott. Dr. Caldicott
estimated that her organization now had 16,000 members in 101 chapters in 45
states.

As Mr. Sherr gave up his law practice, Dr. Caldicott has given up her medical
practice. One of her most effective tools is a 30-minute film, ''The Last
Epidemic,'' depicting what would happen to San Francisco if a thermonuclear bomb
was dropped on it.

Dr. Caldicott is scheduled to show it to the Senate in Washington on Wednesday,
a screening sponsored by Senators Edward M. Kennedy and Paul Tsongas, both
Massachusetts Democrats.

Special Curriculum on Issue

Educators for Social Responsibility was started by Roberta Snow, a former
teacher in Brookline, a suburb of Boston who now directs a special curriculum on
the dangers of nuclear war in the Brookline and Cambridge public schools.

''It's exciting,'' she said of her work. ''I get so many letters and calls
asking for help that I can't keep up with them.'' Many of the requests come from
teachers who have discovered that their students are worried by the threat of
nuclear disaster and are not sure how to respond.

''We find that for kids it's very close to the surface,'' Mrs. Snow related.
''Many of them do not believe there is a future with nuclear war.''

Another new organization with its headquarters in Boston is the Communicators
for Nuclear Disarmament, which has set up a pool of 60 writers, editors,
photographers, designers and public relations specialists to assist other
groups.

Two small groups have also been established recently in Boston, the Musicians
Aganst Nuclear Arms, who staged a benefit concert at Symphony Hall here last
month, and the High Technology Professionals for Peace. The High Technology
group has set up an employment agency for engineers and scientists who want to
transfer out of companies that manufacture for the Defense Department.

The largest and best established group is the Union of Concerned Scientists,
based in Harvard Square, with 100,000 associates. It is helping teach-ins on 200
college campuses to coincide with a major program by an organization called
Ground Zero in Washington late in April. Last November a series of teach-ins by
the group attracted 100,000 students and next month's program is expected to be
bigger.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              374 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. RADAR CALLED AID TO THE ENEMY IN A WAR

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 734 words


The usefulness of the present United States radar systems in war has been
challenged by a retired Navy radar expert.Thomas S. Amlie, who served as
technical director of the Naval Weapons Center at China Lake, Calif., says
American radar signals could be easily detected by an enemy and ''are excellent
aiming points for anyone who wants to shoot at U.S. missiles, planes, warships
and ground units.'

The Government is spending $50 billion annually on radar that in war might be of
more value to an enemy than to the United States, he said.

Dr. Amlie, writing in the April issue of Spectrum, the principal magazine of the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, says all an enemy need do is
deploy low-cost, antiradiation missiles that home in on radiating antennas of
American radar long before that radar can detect an enemy presence.

Dr. Amlie worked at the Naval Weapons Center from 1968 to 1970, then for 10
years he worked for the Federal Aviation Administration on research and
development problems for collision avoidance systems, radar and microwave
landing systems.

Rear Adm. Wayne E. Meyer, who directed the development of the Navy's Aegis-class
cruisers, which are armed with radar-guided missiles, sayd Dr. Amlie's proposals
are too simplistic.

Admiral Meyer, who is retired, also is not so optimistic about the efficacy of
antiradiation missiles as Dr. Amlie is. The differences between engaging a fixed
radar site on a slow-moving ship and on a supersonic missile are not trivial, he
points out. But antiradiation missiles in the hands of an enemy are of ''real
concern,'' he concedes in his reply, also printed in the magazine.

The Pentagon, according to Robert D. Tucker, an Assistant Deputy Under Secretary
of Defense, is aware of the vulnerability inherent in radar. But, he said,
''there are no simple solutions.''

Analysts said the Soviet Union has some air-to-surface missiles that can home in
on radar signals and there have been reports from NATO intelligence officials
that the Soviet Union was developing surface-to-air missiles with the same
capacity.

Mr. Turner did not reject Dr. Amlie's basic thesis that radardependent systems
''give an opponent a decisive advantage by broadcasting the position and makeup
of military forces to anyone who chooses to tune in.''

Naval sources reported that the service controls radar emission as a precaution
against enemy tracking. By turning off their radars, however, the vessels have
to rely on passive receivers. The radar is used sporadically and briefly, which
raises its failure rate.

One scientist attributed the situation to the tendency of naval designers in the
last 20 years to go ''overboard'' on ''radar gadgetry.'' As a result, he said,
the fleet would have to operate in war with muted radar instead of continuous
use of radar, as is now the practice.

Dr. Amlie believes that the solution is to design less vulnerable radar systems
that operate on low frequencies and are used in brief bursts.

Dr. Amlie says the vulnerability of American radar systems was demonstrated in
Vietnam when one Shrike missile hit Marine units that had not shut down their
radar and another Shrike accidentally attacked the destroyer Worden in the Gulf
of Tonkin. The missile homed on the Worden's radar and exploded 100 feet over
her superstructure.

Despite these lessons, he says, the Air Force is proceeding with the production
of B-1B deep penetration bombers. Their navigation will depend on
terrain-following radar and ''such continuously radiating radar signals can be
easily detected by an enemy.''

The author says the Navy's F-14 and the Air Force's F-15 fighters have expensive
and ''troublesome'' radar-controlled weapons that have made the aircraft ''not
only relatively unreliable but also easily attackable by radar-seeking enemy
missiles.''

Dr. Amlie also doubts the effectiveness in war of the Aegis-class cruisers that
are designed to protect carrier task forces. He gives the impression that the
Aegis cruisers would be as vulnerable, because of their radar, as ordinary
warships to antiradiation missiles.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              375 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOME ARE SWAYED ON CHEMICAL WAR

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 966 words


A number of scientists and military specialists say the circumstantial evidence
that chemical warfare is being waged in Laos, Cambodia and Afghanistan is
becoming increasingly persuasive.  They also say the Soviet Union appears to be
involved.

But there is disagreement over how lethal the chemicals are and over the degree
of Soviet complicity.  A 32-page report issued last Monday by the State
Department summarizes an array of evidence - refugee reports, medical testimony,
laboratory tests and intelligence information - suggesting that a wide variety
of chemical weapons are being used. These range from lethal nerve gases and
relatively new trichothecene toxins to nonlethal riot control and incapacitating
agents.

The report cites no new direct evidence of chemical weapons - no rocket casings
with chemical traces and no new samples of contaminated vegetation. But it
describes a mosaic of evidence that chemical agents, often called ''yellow
rain,'' are killing people.

Origin of Chemicals Not Clear

The report retreats from earlier assertions that only the Soviet Union could
have produced the trichothecene toxins. It acknowledges that Vietnam, Laos,
Cambodia and Afghanistan could all learn to make them, but says there is no
evidence they have done so.

The validity of the evidence depends heavily on the reliability of the
informants, which is difficult to assess.  John M. Deutch, professor of
chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who has kept abreast of
developments as a member of the Defense Science Board, a Pentagon advisory
committee, said in an interview:

''In my judgment, the Soviets are implicated in yellow rain activity in
Southeast Asia. I have no idea why, or what their intentions are.''

Charles C. Flowerree, who has just retired after serving as chief chemical
weapons negotiator for the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, said there is
''strong circumstantial evidence'' of Soviet involvement in chemical warfare and
''the evidence is becoming more and more concrete.''

Some Skeptics Are Persuaded

Even some scientists who raised questions about the evidence previously made
public have become persuaded that chemical weapons are killing people. One such
skeptic, Matthew Meselson, a Harvard biologist, said he is ''impressed by the
volume of human testimony'' that people are being exposed to chemicals, often
with lethal consequences.

''It is not rigorous proof,'' he said. ''But I am pretty convinced that some
kind of chemical warfare is going on.'' James F. Leonard, another former
chemical weapons negotiator, calls the reports ''disturbing,'' but says that
they do not prove that lethal chemicals are being dropped or that the Russians
are responsible.

And Arthur Kanegis, an analyst with the Center for Defense Information, a group
headed by former military officers, is puzzled that the United States has been
unable to supply such hard evidence as expended shells, photographs, unambiguous
blood samples or substantial traces of the chemicals.

''We need more solid information before making such serious allegations,'' he
said.

Only One Toxin Type Identified

The only chemicals that have been identified are the toxins known as
trichothecenes, which are produced by fungi. Virtually all scientists who have
examined the evidence agree that such toxins have been found in samples of
vegetation, water and rock scrapings from areas in Laos and Cambodia that were
reportedly attacked.

Dr. Meselson said that, while gaps remain in the evidence, he gives the State
Department the benefit of the doubt that the samples are authentic. He also
concludes that the toxins were probably put there by man rather than naturally
produced, as he and others had once suggested. But he remains puzzled by the
reported toxin concentrations, which seem too low to cause death.

Except for the trichothecenes, there is no hard evidence to document the use of
chemical agents. Their presence is inferred from symptoms reported by victims or
observed by doctors, and from reports by defectors that certain agents were
being stockpiled or used.

The chief new element in the State Department's report is an analysis of
intelligence information, some newly made public, concerning the degree of
Soviet complicity.

Chemical Accidents Are Reported

The report cites evidence that the Russians have been supplying chemical weapons
to Vietnam. For example, a Soviet ship carrying military supplies sank in 1975
and leaked chemicals that disabled salvage divers. A Soviet shipment of
cannisters broke open during unloading at Ho Chi Minh City in 1981. The soldiers
there were warned that they contained deadly chemicals. And two defectors said
Soviet chemical weapons were stored in caves in 1979.

In Laos, defectors and refugees have reported seeing Soviet soldiers firing
hand-held chemical weapons, and Soviet advisers supervising the storage and
loading of chemical weapons. The report says Soviet advisers are running the
Laotian Air Force, which has conducted chemical attacks against Hmong tribal
villages.

In Afghanistan, where the Soviet Union is directly involved in the fighting, the
report says, a Soviet war prisoner and an Afghan defector acknowledged entering
areas that had been sprayed with chemicals. Defectors and exiles also report
that Soviet personnel have stocked and used chemical agents.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              376 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THOUSANDS IN WASHINGTON MARCH TO PROTEST U.S. POLICY IN EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1110 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 27


Thousands of demonstrators marched and rallied here today to protest United
States policy toward El Salvador.

The police estimated that 23,000 people took part in the march here. The
sponsors put the number at 50,000.  Similar demonstrations were held today in
Seattle, Chicago, Dallas, Los Angeles, Denver and San Francisco.  In Oakland
tonight, the police arrested 120 protesters who conducted a sit-in at the main
gate of a Navy supply center. Four men were arrested at Fort Bragg, N.C., when
they blocked traffic outside the Army base to protest the training of Salvadoran
Government troops there.

'A Very Different World'

''We want an end to all U.S. aid in El Salvador,'' said Robert Costa, spokesman
for the backers of the Washington demonstration, who said it was sponsored by
more than 40 labor, civil rights and religious groups. ''We also believe the
election process is a sham.Once again, Pax Americana is back in vogue, but we're
in a very different world now.''

In Philadelphia, John Cardinal Krol led a protest tonight, an interfaith worship
service on Independence Mall, accompanied by leaders of Protestant and Jewish
faiths and leaders of a European antinuclear movement. The police estimated that
15,000 people gathered on the mall; organizers said up to 20,000 people took
part in the protest.

There were candlelight processions to the mall from 12 Philadelphia churches and
synagogues leading up to the service. Several thousand marchers gathered in the
Friends Meeting House at Fourth and Arch Streets and set out in high winds with
candles protected by plastic cups.

Francis G. Brown, general secretary of the Philadelphia yearly meeting of the
Religious Society of Friends, noted that the Quakers had organized their own
antinuclear march last year but invited other faiths to join them this year.
''We Quakers can no longer even claim leadership of the movement,'' he said.

Festive Mood in Washington

In Washington, it was a festive, peaceful demonstration with singing, dancing of
the hora, playing of bongo drums, couples meeting and some huddling against the
cold on a blustery day. Many carried backpacks, and some brought their children.

''Curb Your Dogma,'' said a large red banner. Others urged, ''U.S.  Hands Off El
Salvador'' and ''We Need Jobs, Not War.'' Chanting ''No Draft, No War, U.S. Out
of El Salvador!'' the marchers also held aloft a papier-mache marine helicopter
and an outsized figure depicting a suffering peasant.

A delegation of students from the University of Michigan sold buttons, T-shirts
and bandanas to help defray the cost of chartering three buses that made the
12-hour trip from Ann Arbor.

The demonstration began with a rally at Malcolm X Park, and the protesters then
marched downtown to end with another rally at Lafayette Park, across the street
from the White House. A White House press aide said President Reagan was at the
White House during the demonstration. Thus the President would have been within
earshot of the chanting and could have seen the protesters in their colorful
down jackets and ski caps on the park lawn.

Although serious of purpose, some protesters said they planned to combine the
demonstration with sightseeing in Washington, and others viewed it as an
opportunity to meet people.

''It's kind of a social thing,'' said John Goetz, who is majoring in literature
at the University of Minnesota. ''It's a gathering of the left. It's a good
chance for the left to unite on a common issue. Ronald Reagan is the best
organizer we have.''

Another college student was overheard telling a friend that ''this is the best
thing I've been to since the Republican convention in Detroit.''

Some See a New Awareness

Some of the protesters regarded the day as the beginning of political awareness
for their generation. Keith Feather, a political science major at the University
of North Carolina, said: ''I'm glad people are starting to care again. There was
so much apathy. Now people are starting to open up their minds.''

Maggie Perone, a nursing major at the University of Michigan, said that ''people
are coming and getting involved, finally.'' There were many feminist banners and
signs.Anna Keller, a librarian from the District of Columbia, held aloft a sign
that said, ''Solidarity - A Socialist Feminist Network, '' and said, ''We're
here to express our protest against the Reagan Administration's attempt to
convince the American people that we have an interest in maintaining the Duarte
regime and an interest in intervening in the affairs of the Nicaraguan people.''

A contingent of Palestinian students at Western Michigan University carried a
banner that read ''From Palestine to El Salvador - One Struggle, Many Fronts.''
Mhidi Djebbar, one of the students, said, ''It's very important for us to relate
El Salvador to Israel.''

Among the older demonstrators was Judith Yelvington, an artist from New York,
who said, ''I have four boys, and if they had a war like Vietnam, they'd get
in.''

Typical of the labor protesters were those who carried a banner proclaiming,
''We Need Jobs, Not War.'' Another banner urging ''Jobs, Justice, Peace,'' was
signed SANE, the Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy.''

Other organizations that supported the demonstration, according to the sponsors,
included locals of the American Federation of Government Employes, the American
Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, the American Postal Workers
Union, the American Friends Service Committee, the Fellowship of Reconciliation,
the United Steelworkers of America and the Women's Strike for Peace.

Messages were sent by Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachussetts;
Representatives Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Ronald V.
Dellums, Democrat of California, and Delegate Walter E. Fauntroy, Democrat of
the District of Columbia.

----

West Berlin Protest Dispersed

WEST BERLIN, March 27 (Reuters) - Riot police used tear gas today to disperse
some 10,000 anti-American protesters demonstrating at the Tempelhof air base.

The march was organized by 30 political groups, mainly from the extreme left
wing, including the Socialist Unity Party of West Berlin, a sister party to East
Germany's Communist Party.

----

West Germans Stone Consulate

BREMEN, West Germany, March 27 (AP) - Demonstrators threw stones and paint at
the United States Consulate and an American bank today, and 4,000 people staged
a march to protest United States policy toward El Salvador. The police said the
demonstration was otherwise peaceful. It was organized by the Bremen chapter of
the Nicaragua-El Salvador Committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of marchers gathered in Washington to protest

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              377 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Leigh Grant Sets August Wedding

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 71, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 215 words


Mr. and Mrs. John Barrett Grant of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the
engagement of their daughter, Leigh Grant, to John Antony Doumlele Jr., son of
Mr. and Mrs. Doumlele of Richmond.

An August wedding is planned in Greenwich. Miss Grant, an illustrator of
children's books and greeting cards in New York, was graduated from Greenwich
Academy, Hollins College and Pratt Institute. Her father is senior
quality-control auditor with Richardson-Vicks Inc. in Wilton, Conn.

Mr. Doumlele, corporate economist and director of corporate relations for Moore
McCormack Resources in Stamford, Conn., will become president of the Child Care
Center in Stamford in May, where he has served as treasurer for two years. The
future bridegroom, who served as a lieutenant in the Army in Vietnam, is
divorced. He was graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy, Yale University and the
University of Virginia Graduate School of Business Administration.  His father
is supply manager in the Defense Logistics Agency of the Department of Defense
in Richmond, where his mother, Ruth H.  Doumlele, is assistant vice president
and business manager of the Neighborhood Communications Corporation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              378 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The World in Summary;
The Evidence on 'Yellow Rain'

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim and Barbara Slavin

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 331 words


The Reagan Administration tried last week to chase away the cloud of doubt over
its repeated charges that Soviet troops in Afghanistan and Moscow's allies in
Southeast Asia have unleashed toxic ''yellow rain'' against their guerrilla
opponents.

A 32-page State Department report brought together extensive circumstantial
evidence that the Russians, Vietnamese and Laotians had used chemical agents.
The report charged that the substances had caused more than 10,000 deaths since
1975. But some scientists remained unsure whether the agents were intended to be
lethal or were akin to the herbicides the United States used in Vietnam. A
senior Administration official acknowledged, ''We still don't have the kind of
hard, direct evidence that would remove all doubts.''

The report's conclusions were based on accounts of symptoms provided by victims
of alleged attacks and on the observations of doctors, guerrillas and defectors
from the Vietnamese, Laotian and Afghan armies. To support accusations of direct
Soviet involvement in the use of chemical agents in Indochina, it cited an
incident it said took place in Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon) in July.
Vietnamese soldiers unloading a shipment of Soviet goods broke open a crate and
were told that cannisters inside contained ''deadly toxic substances from the
U.S.S.R.,'' the report said.

The only physical evidence presented had been disclosed by the Administration
before. Trichothecenes, a group of toxins produced by fungi, were found in
samples of vegetation, water and rock scrapings in Laos and Cambodia. Many other
''known chemical warfare agents are nonpersistent and disappear from the
environment within a few minutes to several hours after being dispersed,'' the
report said.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Milt Freudenheim and Barbara Slavin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              379 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. MILITARY INTERVENTION'S SORRY RECORD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 320 words


To the Editor:

Norman Podhoretz's otherwise carefully reasoned Op-Ed piece on U.S. military
intervention (March 23) seems to me to have one serious and rather disingenuous
flaw.

One can perhaps share his doubt that the people of Indochina would choose what
they have today over what they might have had if we had succeeded, but one must
ask also what might have come about if we had chosen not to intervene in the
first place (which was, if memory serves, what President Eisenhower urged).

We may have intervened fruitfully and well on the shores of Tripoli, but since
then things seem to have been mostly downhill, particularly in the Western
Hemisphere.

Over the past 136 years, we have ''intervened'' in Mexico (twice), the Dominican
Republic and Nicaragua (plus, inter alia and depending on how you keep score,
Guatemala and Chile).

In what sense and for whom would Mr. Podhoretz argue that these efforts were a
success? I concede that in some of these places evil and sin were rampant before
we went in. What bothers me is that they appear to have remained rampant (in
different uniforms) after we left.

There are, it seems to me, two problems which we had better solve before we go
back into the business of military intervention.  The first is that our
activities in this area seem always to rest on an assumption which is never
really true. This assumption is that there is the good-guy side and the bad-guy
side, and that if we get rid of the bad guys and go home everything will be fine
(the British used to solve this, more or less, by not going home, but that was
called colonialism, and nobody does it anymore).

The second problem is that those we favor with intervention are all too often
ungrateful, if not downright bitter, for several generations, as Mr. Podhoretz
may easily discover if he will visit Chapultepec Park next time he is in Mexico.

WILLIAM D. HALSEY, New York, March 23, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              380 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AID'S PURPOSE

BYLINE: By Lee H. Hamilton

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: WAS HINGTON


A major difficulty with our foreign assistance program is that it has largely
become a mechanism for helping two countries, Egypt and Israel.

With President Reagan's request for another sizeable increase - $700 million in
military assistance for Egypt and Israel - total aid for them would rise to $4.8
billion in fiscal 1983 - $2.3 billion for Egypt and $2.5 billion for Israel, the
equivalent of more than $45 for each Egyptian and $630 for every Israeli. If the
budget is approved, Egypt and Israel will corner some 75 percent of our foreign
military sales program worldwide and some 60 percent of the economic support
program. Egypt will also continue to get more than 25 percent of the food aid.

A staggering $25 billion in military, economic, and food aid will have been
provided to Egypt and Israel from fiscal years 1978 through 1983. This sum is
nearly one-third of our worldwide total for that period. A comparison with the
budget for Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War is revealing: From 1968 to
1973, Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia chewed up $17 billion in foreign aid - well
over one-third of the total.

That Egypt and Israel have staked out huge portions of the United States'
foreign aid budget is neither an argument against the aid nor the importance
that we assign to their well-being. There are persuasive reasons for very high
levels of military and economic assistance to both countries, but the imbalance
that such amounts creates carries clear consequences for the United States'
national interests.

First, our commitments to economic development in poor countries and to
alleviation of suffering around the world are called into question. Given those
rationales for foreign aid, as stated by every post-World War II administration,
we must be uneasy with a budget that tilts so strongly toward two countries,
however worthy, and shows a corresponding neglect of all others. A serious gap
exists between our growing political and economic interests in the developing
world and the low priority given the developing world in our foreign aid budget.
The United States already is slipping badly as a donor of economic aid. Today,
the United States ranks 15th among developed countries.

Second, serious problems arise in our relations with other countries. The poor
nations know our attitude toward developmental assistance; they also know that
Egypt and Israel receive more economic aid than do all of them combined. The
imbalance breeds envy and suspicion. Notwithstanding our claims to the contrary,
many countries believe that we can control those who receive so much of our aid.
Other states, including North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies, find it hard
to believe that they, as old friends, receive so much less than Egypt, a new
friend. The high levels of assistance to Egypt and Israel are used as leverage
by Spain, Greece, and Turkey when we negotiate military base agreements. There
is also the danger that other countries exaggerate their security concerns
because they see the United States placing such a high priority on aid to two
countries that have been at war and that maintain a military footing.

Third, there are risks for Egypt and Israel. They expect enormous amounts of
American aid. Each cites additional aid to the other as a reason for an increase
in its own aid. Because both are so dependent on our assistance, their economies
are distorted, their debts burgeon , and their need for more aid grows - if only
to service their debts. This is not healthy for Egypt and Israel, nor is it in
their longterm national interests. If the peace process eventually extends to
other countries, they too will demand of us a large ''peace dividend.''

Fourth, because of this concentration of assistance, we have not begun to
address adequately the world's social and economic problems. Security and
stability in most countries depend as much on solutions to such problems as on
military aid. If we cannot afford to fight hunger, poverty, pollution,
overpopulation, disease, and illiteracy in the poor countries, we may soon face
grave threats to security and stability caused, in part, by our neglect.

Congress has recognized the dilemma. In the 1970's, it directed that foreign aid
clearly support programs to assist the poorest of the poor in solving social
problems and stimulating self-sustaining economic growth. Budgetary constraints
- the most notable are the costly Egyptian and Israeli programs and the strong
emphasis on military aid - have combined to damage that mandate.

A review of our foreign aid programs is warranted. Without turning our back on
Egypt and Israel, we need to rethink the purposes of foreign aid, what it can
and must achieve, and whether the present distribution of aid is the best we can
do.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Lee H. Hamilton, Indiana Democrat, is chairman of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee's Subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              381 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 7; Page 4, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 240 words


March 28, 1982 NONFICTION120:
DUBUFFET. By Andreas Franzke.12 ERIC GILL: Man of Flesh and Spirit. By Malcolm
Yorke.  30 THE ESSENTIAL EARTHMAN: Henry Mitchell on Gardening. By Henry
Mitchell.  16 GENOCIDE: Its Political Use in the Twentieth Century.  By Leo
Kuper.  9 INDIAN SUMMER: Lutyens, Baker and Imperial Delhi.  By Robert Grant
Irving.  12 JUDY HOLLIDAY. By Will Holtzman.  18 LAST WALTZ IN VIENNA: The Rise
and Destruction of a Family, 1842-1942. By George Clare.  9 THE PURSUIT OF
VIRTUE AND OTHER TORY NOTIONS.  By George F. Will.  16 SELECTED ESSAYS ON THE
HISTORY OF LETTER-FORMS IN MANUSCRIPT AND PRINT. By Stanley Morison.  13 WHY WE
WERE IN VIETNAM. By Norman Podhoretz.  7
FICTION
THE BOHEMIANS: John Reed and His Friends Who Shook the World. By Alan Cheuse.

14 DUTCH SHEA, JR. By John Gregory Dunne.  1 A GREEN DESIRE. By Anton Myrer.  14
LOVE AND WORK. by Gwyneth Cravens.  11 LULLABY. By Oakley Hall.  15 MEXICO BAY.
By Paul Horgan.  15 UNTOLD MILLIONS. By Laura Z. Hobson.  14 UP NORTH. By Bettz
Burr.  14 WHITE HORSES. By Alice Hoffman.  11
FEATURES
THE BUSINESS OF VANITY AND VICE VERSA.  By N.R. Kleinfield.  3
DEPARTMENTS
ABOUT BOOKS AND AUTHORS. By Edwin McDowell.34 BEST SELLERS.  32 CHILDREN'S
BOOKS.  28 EDITORS' CHOICE.  32 LETTERS.  31 NONFICTION IN BRIEF. Neal Johnston.
16 PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS.  36 PAPERBACKS: NEW AND NOTEWORTHY.  35 PAPERBACK
TALK. By Ray Walters.  35 READING AND WRITING.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              382 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN DEFENSE OF AN OFFENSIVE WAR

BYLINE: By JAMES FELLOWS; James Fellows, Washington editor of The Atlantic, is
the author of ''National Defense.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1956 words


WHY WE WERE IN VIETNAM By Norman Podhoretz.  240 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster.
$13.50.

AT the end of a chapter describing the final withdrawal of American forces from
Vietnam, just before Saigon was overrun by Communist troops, Norman Podhoretz
says: ''In abandoning these people at the end, the United States demonstrated
that saving South Vietnam from Communism was not only beyond its reasonable
military, political, and intellectual capabilities but that it was ultimately
beyond its moral capabilities as well.''

In this sentence is much of the argument of Mr. Podhoretz's book.  In no
traditional military sense, he says repeatedly, could we have ''won'' in
Vietnam. Our bombing was ineffective, and our understanding of the culture
crude. It would have made no difference had we gone in ''fast and big instead of
'slow and small.' ... The only way the United States could have avoided defeat
in Vietnam was by staying out of the war altogether.''

Nonetheless, Mr. Podhoretz says, the United States was morally right to have
been involved in the war, and the effort to end that involvement will bear
history's moral censure - and his own, rendered in this book.

In part of his argument about morality, Mr. Podhoretz makes a reasonable case.
The decisions by Presidents Kennedy and Johnson that first took the nation into
Vietnam may now look unwise or tragic, but it is hard to call them ''immoral.''
Mr. Podhoretz argues that they proceeded from the desire to contain the
expansion of the ''Sino-Soviet bloc'' and to protect a pro-Western country from
armed totalitarian attack. Such values had been part of the broad consensus of
postwar foreign policy, Mr. Podhoretz says; the surprise would have been if
Presidents formed by the experiences of Munich and Korea had responded in any
different way.

As Mr. Podhoretz rightly points out, the contention that the United States went
to war to defend its economic empire suffers when exposed to fact. What markets
or raw materials were at stake that could possibly justify such a war's cost? It
is also true that one of the two great failings of the antiwar movement was a
willingness to overstate America's original sin in Vietnam. (The other was a
reluctance, which I shared, to recognize that protest from the privileged
sanctuary of college shifted the war's costs to the poor.) Mr. Podhoretz, who is
the editor of Commentary, a magazine that has long emphasized the evils of an
''adversary culture'' (and that has viewed my own writing with disfavor), claims
that rather than having been generated by the war, anti-American feelings were
in the air, and people were looking for an excuse to voice them. There he
exaggerates, in my opinion, but he is closer to being right about the intentions
behind the American involvement in the war than were those who spoke of raw
materials for the American empire.

But Mr. Podhoretz seems to think that this closes the question: If American
Presidents meant well at the beginning, the ensuing chain of consequences is
legitimized by their good intent. He seems to recognize no difference between
morality of intention and morality of effect. He will not grant that certain
courses of action, appropriate at one level of effort, may at other levels
demand sacrifices far out of proportion to what can possibly be gained, and can
become ''immoral'' in that sense. Nor does he seem to recognize that it was such
a calculation - less a re-examination of the motives than a revulsion at the
consequences - that turned mainstream American political opinion against the war
by the late 1960's.

Mr. Podhoretz is reluctant to admit this because he has recast recent history as
a black-and-white struggle between those with the courage to contain Communist
expansionism and those who lack the backbone for that effort. Thus he attributes
President Eisenhower's decision not to aid the French against the Communists to
the moral taint of French colonialism, rather than to the sense that certain
evils might lie beyond our reasonable power to control. (He does, however, quote
the entry from Eisenhower's diary in 1951: ''I'm convinced that no military
victory is possible in that kind of theater.'') And thus he has no tolerance for
the idea of inadvertence or ''quagmire'' in Vietnam - that the escalation which
took place between 1965 and 1967 might have been more than President Kennedy, in
sending American advisers, originally foresaw. He says that Kennedy should have
seen precisely where those first steps would lead; he implies that the
difference between dispatching advisers and committing American troops to combat
was not a fundamental one. Mr.  Podhoretz does not even mention Kennedy's
comments, reported by Mike Mansfield and Kenneth O'Donnell, that he intended to
remove the troops after the 1964 election. In disregard of the record of
Congressional debate, Mr. Podhoretz says that many of the Senators who voted for
the Tonkin Gulf resolution did so with full knowledge that it would ''empower
the President to involve the United States in a major land war in Asia.''

This simplified view of history is a consequence not only of Mr.  Podhoretz's
ideology but also of his evidence, which consists exclusively of quotations from
other books and magazine articles.Time and again the footnote for a crucial
argument directs the reader to Guenter Lewy's ''America in Vietnam,'' a book
whose historical objectivity, to put it mildly, is not accepted by all sides.
Mr.  Podhoretz's primary sources for the Nixon years are the published memoirs
of President Nixon and Henry Kissinger; Mr. Podhoretz finds completely
persuasive their denials of the charge that the Administration had been working
merely for a ''decent interval'' between American withdrawal and the fall of the
regime in Saigon. But a comparable assertion from, say, Arthur Schlesinger about
President Kennedy's intentions carries no such automatic plausibility.

After arguing that the United States as a whole is free from ''moral'' guilt in
Vietnam, Mr. Podhoretz proceeds to the second stage of his moral argument, which
is to reassign that guilt to certain groups of Americans.

''Everyone on all sides of the argument turned out to be wrong'' about the war,
Mr. Podhoretz says. The military men were wrong in thinking the war winnable;
three Presidents were wrong in trying to fight it on the cheap. But most wrong
of all, because they were wrong in the moral sense, were those who opposed the
war.

Mr. Podhoretz sprinkles his ideological criticism with personal digs. He speaks
of John Kenneth Galbraith and George Ball as ''Kennedy's 'doves' (including
those who when the going got rough in the late sixties would convert to
dovishness or claim a dovish past for themselves).'' He says that it is almost
impossible to ''forgive'' such writers as Anthony Lewis, Sydney Schanberg and
Stanley Hoffman for saying that the devastation of war might be worse for the
people of Indochina than any postwar regime. Virtually the only people who are
spared such digs are Sir Robert Thompson, the British expert on guerrilla
warfare who advised Richard Nixon, and Doan Van Toai, a former Vietcong
sympathizer who has since denounced the Communists. But Mr.  Podhoretz's real
complaint against ''doves'' of any complexion is that they are to blame for what
has happened in Cambodia and Vietnam since our forces left:

''The truth is that the antiwar movement bears a certain measure of
responsibility for the horrors that have overtaken the people of Vietnam; ... in
making a contribution to the conquest of South Vietnam by the Communists of the
North, they were siding with an evil system against something much better from
every political and moral point of view.''

Mr. Podhoretz is right in saying that such writers as Mary McCarthy and Susan
Sontag wildly romanticized life in North Vietnam. (Others, including myself,
have made the same point.) He is right that certain fringes of the antiwar
movement marched with Vietcong flags - though not as early as 1965, as he
contends. But, as infamous as conditions now are in Indochina, one wonders how
responsibility can be assigned to a nation that lacked, to use Mr. Podhoretz's
words, the ''reasonable military, political, and intellectual capabilities'' to
prevent the Communist victory. Moreover, there are grounds other than logic on
which to find Mr. Podhoretz's judgment devoid of grace.

ON every page of this book, the reader feels the heat of Mr.  Podhoretz's scorn
for those who failed the test of moral courage during the war years. Nowhere
does the author give a hint that he himself might ever have fallen short of the
high moral standard he now sets. To read passages like the one about those who
sided ''with an evil system'' is to assume that if there were any voice of
courage to be heard above the babble, it would have been that of Mr.  Podhoretz
in his magazine. But to have read Commentary at the time was to have quite a
different impression.

In May 1971, when - according to this book - President Nixon was receiving so
little support for his efforts to withdraw from Vietnam in a dignified,
''moral'' way, the principal article in Commentary was Nathan Glazer's ''
Vietnam: The Case for Immediate Withdrawal.'' In it he said that the Government
must be persuaded ''to desist from a disastrous policy which can only be carried
out, whatever the intentions of those at the top, by cruel and inhuman
methods.'' Mr.  Glazer mentioned the fear of official spokesmen that ''the rest
of Southeast Asia would fall to Communism or come under Chinese Communist
influence. One is hard put to understand the weight of this fear.''

Five months later, in ''America After Vietnam,'' Edmund Stillman said in
Commentary that ''the killing in Vietnam is a tragedy, and may very well be,
with respect to America's involvement, a crime.''

From the middle 60's until the early 70's, during the very era in which, by Mr.
Podhoretz's current standards, politicians and thinkers failed America by
refusing to make the moral case for the war, such a case simply was not made in
the pages of Commentary.

WHEN Commentary's editor spoke in his own name about the war, in the same issue
that carried Nathan Glazer's article, he said that he had delivered a speech in
1969, ''on the day of the great Moratorium,'' urging an immediate American
withdrawal from the war.  In 1982, Mr. Podhoretz sees yet another moral failing
in the War Powers Act and other efforts that kept President Nixon from using
American air power to enforce indefinitely the peace agreement in Vietnam. He
says that America's unwillingness to stand behind President Thieu is another
illustration that we lacked the ''moral capabilities'' to win the war. But in
1971, he had other thoughts:

''As one who has never believed that anything good would ever come for us or for
the world from an unambiguous American defeat, I now find myself -and here is
the main source of my own embarrassment in writing about Vietnam - unhappily
moving to the side of those who would prefer just such an American defeat to a
'Vietnamization' of the war which calls for the indefinite and unlimited
bombardment by American pilots in American planes of every country in that
already devastated region.''

Editors cannot always be held responsible for every word in their publications;
but it is far from generous of them to criticize, with no humility, articles
they chose to publish themselves. Mr. Podhoretz does this at one point with Mr.
Glazer's piece.

Editors are entitled to change their views, perhaps even to regret, as many of
us have cause to do, things said and thought in those troubled years. They are
not entitled to self-righteousness and venom.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map showing Saigon and Hanoi

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              383 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Communists Hear Of 'Acute Problems'

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 143 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 28


The Vietnamese Communist Party gathered in Hanoi this weekend for its annual
congress and heard the party secretary, Le Duan, ascribe Vietnam's economic
problems in part to the ''shortcomings and mistakes of the party and state
agencies, from national down to grass-roots level.''

''Our country is now being confronted with many acute problems,'' Mr. Le Duan
told 1,033 delegates on the opening day of the conference Saturday, according to
the Vietnam News Agency, which transmitted the speeches of the senior party
officials and foreign guests.

''The national product is not in a position to meet the needs of social
consumption,'' he said.  ''There are shortages of food, clothing, material and
other essential consumer goods.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              384 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG RETAINS HOPE OF REFORM REGIME

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 927 words


As voters in El Salvador chose a 60-member constituent assembly, Secretary of
State Alexander M. Haig Jr. restated the Reagan Administration's preference for
a Salvadoran government committed to continuing social and economic reforms.

He also reiterated the Administration's desire for a political solution to the
Salvadoran civil conflict, which has claimed up to 30,000 lives in the last two
years.

The outcome of yesterday's voting may determine whether negotiations with the
leftist insurgents will be feasible, according to Central American diplomats.
Strong support for the centrist Chrisstian Democrats would be a setback for both
the left, which is not taking part in the elections, and the extreme right,
which has shown increasing strength during the election campaign.

The left, which failed to provoke a popular uprising, as promised, in the weeks
before the voting, might be more amenable to talks with the Christian Democrats,
according to some Administration officials.

U.S. to 'Wait and See'

In San Salvador, Ambassador Deane R. Hinton, hailing the large voter turnout,
said that the United States should attempt to work with whatever party or
coalition took control of the next stage of the Salvadoran political process.
Mr. Hinton said that Washington would have to wait and see what the winning
party leaders would say and do before ruling out continued American assistance.

Mr. Haig, speaking on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press,'' allowed for the
possibility that Salvadorans might vote heavily for the Nationalist Republican
Alliance, Roberto d'Aubuisson's party of the extreme right, which opposes
economic reforms and is pledged to defeating the guerrilla insurgency by any
means possible.

''If we espouse a democratic process and the people of El Salvador, in critical,
credible elections, select a candidate, I think that's their business,'' the
Secretary of State said. But he added:

''Now as far as the United States is concerned, we have supported the current
regime based on the reforms that that regime has instituted - land reform,
improved pluralization, democratic reform, efforts to improve the human rights
situation, economic reform.''

Chance of Talks Hinted

Mr Haig said that ''it will be adherence to those principles that will determine
the level of American support.'' The Administration is under pressure from some
members of Congress and public pressure groups to end United States military aid
to El Salvador, or at least make continued aid contingent on negotiations with
the insurgent Salvadoran left.

The Administration, which has always said that it would not favor giving the
guerrillas in negotiations what they could not win on the battlefield and would
not attempt to gain through the ballot box, has nevertheless begun to talk in
the last few weeks of looking for ways to bring the left into the next stage of
the Salvadoran political process.

Yesterday Mr. Haig, asked about the prospect of talks with the left, said,
''President Duarte, who's currently in charge, has made it clear that he would
be willing to talk to the left providing they will lay down their arms and join
in a peaceful political process. We have never been adverse to that here in the
United States, and would favor such an outcome.''

Yearning for Peace Noted

Ambassador Hinton, interviewed yesterday on the ABC News program ''This Week,''
suggested yesterday that it was unlikely that any government in El Salvador
would be willing to seek a settlement with the guerrillas, whom he described as
''a couple of thousand terrorist thugs.''

Mr. Hinton added, ''I think most of all they realized that the people of El
Salvador want peace, and they are sick and tired of the guerrillas coming in and
disrupting it.''

In Washington, Senator Barry Goldwater, the chairman of the Senate Intelligence
Committee, said today that the United States should do all that it could in a
peaceful manner to help El Salvador and should not send troops there.

The Arizona conservative, appearing on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation,''
called on the Reagan Administration to seek accommodation with whoever are the
winners of yesterday's election.

''I think we should try to get along with them,'' he added. ''I think we should
do whatever we can in a noncombatant way to help the country. I wouldn't want to
see us go down there with armed forces if there's a chance of getting the whole
thing to work. And I think maybe we can do it.''

'We Have to Stop Cuba'

Asked whether he could foresee any situation in which the United States might
dispatch troops to El Salvador, Mr. Goldwater replied, ''I can't conceive of any
at this moment.'' He added, however, that if the moment ever came, another
Vietnam would not result because, he said, the current leadership in Washington
would accompany the troops with ''a decision to win whatever we set out to do.''

Mr. Goldwater asserted that the ''deeper part'' of the problem in El Salvador
was the flow of arms from Cuba. ''We have to stop Cuba in her intervention
throughout Central America and eventually South America,'' he continued.

''I've advocated - and I know it won't be popular - tell Castro that if he
doesn't stop it, we'll start shooting down his supply planes and we'll start
sinking his supply ships.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              385 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'THE GERMAN PROBLEM'

BYLINE: By George W. Ball

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 804 words


In some American circles, there is a growing tendency to speak of ''the German
problem'' as though the Federal Republic were drifting mindlessly toward the
East, ignoring our wise advice, and refusing to make the sacrifices Western
security requires. The Reagan Administration explains such aberrant behavior
largely on the ground that, because we have not kept up our military strength,
the West Germans are tempted toward neutralism out of fear that we can no longer
defend them.

Both the problem and the diagnosis are overstated. Not only the West German
Government but, as the polls reveal, the West German people remain resolutely
committed to the alliance. Neutralist sentiments, to the extent they exist - and
their prevalence is overstated - have emerged not because the West Germans are
worried about America's weakness but because they fear we may bring on a nuclear
war with their country as the battlefield.

To be sure, young West Germans face special problems of life in a divided
country, and it is fashionable to say that the coming generation knows all too
little of its country's history. But, of course, the same could be said of many
young Americans and even of some of our national leaders. Since psychological
analyses of a whole generation are hazardous, we might better examine our own
responsibility for current West German reactions.

Much of the strain in the alliance is caused by erratic American policies and by
the presumptuous conviction of some Government officials that Washington knows
all the answers. No doubt the atmosphere could be greatly improved were the
Administration prepared to pursue a more reassuring course. Our leaders should
stop shouting in bellicose and flamboyant terms about the West's peril in the
face of Soviet superiority. They should cease approaching even local and
regional problems as though they were inevitably part of the East-West conflict.
They should recognize the role of diplomacy and not behave as though
international quarrels could be resolved only by military means.

Nothing would do more to restore West German confidence in America than for the
Administration to repudiate the fatuous heresy that nuclear weapons could be
fired without triggering a full-scale nuclear exchange, and make clear that the
Administration does not - as some of its hangers-on imply - regard nuclear bombs
as weapons for fighting wars rather than solely for deterrence. Finally, it
should stop trying to press Europe - and particularly West Germany - to impose
costly economic sanctions while America refuses to reinstate its wheat embargo
out of consideration for the farm lobby.

Unpleasant as it may be, much of the so-called German problem results from the
fact that ever since Vietnam, the West German people, as well as other
Europeans, have progressively lost confidence in America's good sense and the
quality of its leadership.

Complicating that loss of faith is the unhappy fact that America and West
Germany hold two fundamentally different views of East-West relations.

West Germany's view is conditioned by history, geography, and politics. It needs
detente; we think we don't. West Germans found the frigid days of the cold war
far more frightening and agonizing than we did. Crises threatened the very life
of West Berlin, while the building of the wall cruelly divided families and
friends. Out of the imperatives of a divided country came the original movement
toward Ostpolitik, which eased the hardships of divided families and made
possible the repatriation of Germans left behind when parts of Silesia were
ceded to Poland by the Potsdam treaty.

To the West Germans, the Nixon-Kissinger invention of detente meant a
universalizing of Ostpolitik, and, though America has now turned its back on
detente, the West Germans have not changed their position. The Soviet Union, as
they see it, has not altered its behavior; it has continued to behave quite as
the West Germans expected - exploiting targets of opportunity whenever it could
do so at minimum cost and risk just as Russians have done thoughout history.

That difference of appraisal goes far to explain the ''German problem'' - and we
should ponder it thoughtfully. Whether West Germany is drifting away from us or
we from West Germany is far from clear.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
George W. Ball, former Under Secretary of State, is senior managing director of
Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb Inc., a New York investment bank.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              386 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

INDEX;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words


A NATO base has only lukewarm support in Iceland A2
Bonn starts land surveys for mis- sile emplacement A3
Jaruzelski visits East Berlin for the day A3
Explosive on French train kills 5 and injures 14 A3
Anglican-Roman Catholic report on unification issued A4
Around the World A5
Weinberger assures Seoul of U.S.  commitment to its security A7
In India, Sanjay Gandhi's widow defies the Prime Minister A8
Guatemalan police lieutenant slain in ambush A10
Transcript of Haig's statement on Salvadorn elections A10
Israeli Arabs warned on strikes backing West Bank protests A11
Israelis tighten control over Arab newspapers A12

Washington Talk
Briefing B12
The ambitions of Representative Jack Kemp B12
Springtime doings at the Agricul- ture Department B12

General
Around the Nation A16
A farmer's plight: Broke and in debt $35 million A16
Grandpa Jones wows city folks at the Smithsonian A16
Bankruptcy in Suburbia is shak- ing the American Dream B2
State appeals court rules jurors can take notes at some trials B4
Drama in cave spurs amateur rescue teams into action B8
Luchow's being considered for designation as a landmark B9
Case of Staten Island couple missing three weeks still open B10
U.S. Attorney keeps job despite remarks on C.I.A. source B14
Assault case involving Florida girl, 6, will be mediated B15

Science Times
Perfection eludes the space shut- tle, but confidence grows C1
The gypsy moth broadens its range again C1
About Education C1
The Doctor's World: an anniver- sary for tuberculosis C3
Three landing sites wait for the shuttle to choose C4
Science Watch C5
Researchers tie certain TV shows to a child's achievement C6
Science Q&A C6

Government/Politics
Liberal Party leader paves way for Koch to seek endorsement B2
Black leaders eye post on Surro- gate's Court B3
Senate Republicans blocking many of Carey's appointments B9
White House opposes amend- ments to spending bill B11
California Attorney General leads contenders for Governor B14
Court bars job rights case on reli- gious colleges B15

Arts/Entertainment
Waiting and watching on Holly- wood's big night C12
''Chariots of Fire,'' Henry Fonda and Hepburn win Oscars C13
New members honored by Thea- ter Hall of Fame C16
Norman Podhoretz's ''Why We Were in Vietnam'' reviewed C17
ABC News considering Phil Donahue for new program C17
Film about farmers' movement in North Dakota on PBS C19
Martin Segal receives New York museum's $24 award C19

Style
Notes on Fashion C7
Ready-to-wear hits its stride C7
Adopted boy hears of mother C7

Obituaries
Gen. Nathan Twining, chairman of Joint Chiefs in '50s D22
Fazlur R. Khan, innovative engi- neer of skyscrapers D22

Sports
Mets less hopeful of deal with Cubs for a pitcher C8
North Carolina beats Georgetown to win N.C.A.A. title C9
George Vecsey on Dean Smith and the Final One C9
Jockey dies after spill at Aque- duct C9
Islanders rout Rangers, 7-3 C9
A 2d coach says he reported rival school for recruiting violations C10
Vince Lombardi's son is emerg- ing C12
Second Raiders-N.F.L. antitrust trial opens C12

Features/Notes
Notes on People B16
Sports People C8
Going Out Guide C15

News Analysis
Raymond Bonner assesses effect on Salvador's leftists A1

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18

Central American democracy Twice ''yes'' in Westchester Topics: Nancy/fancy
Letters A18
Sydney H. Schanberg: centrists don't eat oatmeal A19
Theodore Macdonald: on Nicara- guan Indians A19
Michael Harrington: the left gropes for options A19
Judd Burstein: don't subvert habeas corpus A19

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              387 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 785 words


BOOKISH

The books are old and the New York Antiquarian Book Fair also keeps getting
older. This annual is making its 22d round in town starting today and running
through Thursday. It used to be a mid-Manhattan affair, but this year it is
downtown, near where the money is in the financial center, on the broad and high
mezzanine of No. 1 World Trade Center, the northernmost of the center's giant
towers.

The visitor will find 107 bookstalls at which rare and old books, or both,
documents, maps and art books will be on view and on sale. A quarter of the
participating sellers are from Europe, and the rest from around the United
States.

Among the items being brought to the show are such things as a first edition of
Darwin's ''Origin of Species,'' selling for $3,000; another, Kant's ''Critique
of Pure Reason,'' on the block for $5,000. Also, Frank Lloyd Wright's ''Drawings
for a Living Architecture,'' published in 1959 for $35 and now valued at $1,500.
Also such rarities as a program of a Jenny Lind concert of 1850, Benjamin
Franklin's tract on electricity, in French, and, also in French, a complete
collection of documents and decrees issued by the Revolutionary Government
between 1790 and 1793 dealing with economic affairs.

Open today and tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M., Thursday from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5. Information: 757-9395.
OPENING

The Valentine Room of Once Upon a Stove, 325 Third Avenue, near 20th Street
(683-0044), is upstairs at this rambling restaurant full of unexpected alcoves
and niches on two levels. It is the entertainment room, and for nine months
featured a long-running revue, ''From High Atop the Altoona Motor Hotel.'' The
show closed several weeks ago but the spirit of it lives on again, starting
tonight.

It is revived in a new revue, a sequel to the old one, called ''Live from
Altoona ...,'' created by Ira Guttman and Joel Raney, who wrote the original. As
did the first in this continuing series, the setting is a radio studio and the
music is of the 1920's through the 40's, but the tunes, costumes and the
five-member cast are different from those of the first. Very nostalgic, with the
Charleston, the Black Bottom, ''Baby Face,'' ''Way Down Yonder in New Orleans''
and others.

Monday through Thursday at 7:45 P.M. A $7.50 cover plus a $5 minimum. Drinks, $3
and up; main courses, $6.75 to $14.95.
ORGANIC

Lee Erwin is a well-known theater organist, and tonight at 8 o'clock he will be
playing the 1,000-pipe Wurlitzer at the Carnegie Hall Cinema, 887 Seventh
Avenue, at 57th Street (757-2132).

Both Mr. Erwin and the organ are old hands at playing along with silent film,
and two of the three pictures on the bill tonight will give them scope. The
films are early works by Rene Clair, the French director. The organ will boom
along in accompaniment to ''The Italian Straw Hat,'' a comedy made in 1928,
which is the main feature of the evening. The other silent is the 1924
''Entr'acte,'' originally created to be a film interlude to a Dadaist ballet and
made in keeping with the concepts of the Dada artists of the day. The third
film, ''Under the Roofs of Paris'' was made in 1929 as Clair's first venture
into talkies and is seldom seen these days.

Admission: $5.
RECALL

PEN American Center is an organization of American writers that from time to
time schedules gatherings to discuss various aspects of society and literature.
Tonight at 8 o'clock, with New York University's English department, it is
sponsoring ''Vietnam Voices: The War in American Literature.'' The session takes
place in Schimmel Auditorium, a 500-seater in the university's Tisch Hall, 40
West Fourth Street.

A half-dozen authors who wrote books about that period will sit in on the
meeting to reflect on what it was like to tackle the war theme and on the
response that the reading public had to what they wrote and on their own
perspectives of the war from today's distance.

The talkers are C.D.B. Bryan (''Friendly Fire''), Robert Olen Butler (''The
Alleys of Eden''), George Davis (''Coming Home''), Frances Fitzgerald (''Fire in
the Lake''), Tim O'Brien (''Going After Cacciato'') and Harry Maurer (''Not
Working''). Each will speak solo, then they will exchange views in discussion,
and finally they will field questions from the audience.

Admission is free. Information: 255-1977.

For Sports Today, see page C10.  Richard F. Shepard

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              388 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
WHY WE WERE IN VIETNAM. By Nor- man Podhoretz. 240 pages. Simon & Schuster.
$13.50.

THERE is much that is drearily familiar about Norman Podhoretz's ''Why We Were
in Vietnam,'' which should not come as a surprise considering that most of it is
a rehash of Vietnam literature across the spectrum of opinion from Noam
Chomsky's to Sir Robert Thompson's, with particular dependence on the
Presidential memoirs of Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard M. Nixon, and on ''The
White House Years,'' the first volume of former Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger's memoirs.

Once again, we have rehearsed for us the lessons of Munich; the looming of the
monolithic Communist conspiracy (and how plausible it still seemed as late as
1969); the evolution of the policy of containment, the Truman Doctrine, the
Marshall Plan and NATO. Once again, we review Dienbienphu and the anticolonial
reasons why we did not help the French there; the Geneva accords and why we were
not willing to sign them; and President John F. Kennedy's decision to send
advisers and the familiar debate over whether he would have raised the ante had
he lived to make such a decision.

In short, Mr. Podhoretz tries to remind us of the decent and honorable reasons
we were in Vietnam - ''because we were trying to save the southern half of the
country from the evils of Communism.''

And once again we are forced to confront the horrifying denouement, and to ask
the painful question that must trouble so many of us in the aftermath of South
Vietnam's collapse: How can those of us who were against the war reconcile our
opposition with the terrible suffering of the South Vietnamese after we got out
and the North proceeded to invade, especially if we grant Mr. Podhoretz's point
that what followed the takeover by the North far exceeded in evil what preceded
it?

In his historical review of events, Mr. Podhoretz, it seems to me, provides a
reasonable answer to this question, at least for the majority of Americans who
came to oppose the war. This answer is that while our cause may in the first
place have been decent and honorable, the conduct of the war was eventually
blundered.

Mr. Podhoretz concludes for the moment: If ''Kennedy tried to apply containment
in Vietnam on the military cheap, and Johnson tried to make it work on the
political cheap, Nixon tried to salvage it on the strategic cheap. All three
failed. That these were failures of leadership is certain.'' And a reader may
reasonably conclude that a large number of Americans did not want to sacrifice
their lives or the lives of their children to these failures. To state the case
blandly: what the war was doing to both us and the South Vietnamese no longer
seemed worth the cause.

But this is far from the conclusion that Mr. Podhoretz asks us to draw from his
evidence, or the ultimate gravamen of his case. The weight of his accusation
eventually falls on all of those who opposed the war - not only those ''elite''
advisers who got us into Vietnam in the first place, who escalated the war and
who later turned against it; not only those extremists who argued that the war
was in and of itself immoral, and who therefore declared America a force for
evil, but all those who concluded that our conduct in the anti-Communist crusade
was not worth what some patriots came to regard as anti-American conduct, not to
mention behavior that was antihumanitarian.

Somehow, Mr. Podhoretz's argument rankles. It does so for such a comparatively
petty reason as his habit of writing that so-and-so ''rightly'' or ''correctly''
argues such-and-such, when he has no ground to aver the truth of the argument,
other than agreement with the statement or that the authority in question is
Richard Nixon or Henry Kissinger.

It rankles becase Mr. Podhoretz tries to split some extremely fine hairs. For
instance, he argues that it is ''grotesque'' to maintain that American conduct
toward the Vietnamese was ''genocidal'' when statistics showed the population of
South Vietnam to be increasing during the relevant years. Whether or not one
believes that our conduct was genocidal, what strikes one here as ''grotesque''
is the equation of policy with results.

Most of all, Mr. Podhoretz's argument rankles because, as so often occurs with
respect to his reasoning, it traps us in his grandiose mind-schemes to relate
everything in the moral universe to everything else. Thus, his argument seems to
go, if Communism is the worst thing that can happen to a people, then anything
less bad than Communism is justified in the war against such an evil.

Granted, Mr. Podhoretz contends at considerable length that what we did in
Vietnam was by no means as evil as opponents of the war have claimed it was, and
arguably not evil at all. But nevertheless his criterion of good and evil
appears to be rooted in the degree to which it opposes Communism. Thus ''Why We
Were in Vietnam'' seems less a serious examination of the past, and more a
clarion call to future crusades.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Norman Podhoretz

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              389 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 31, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

58 SENATORS BACK ALTERNATIVE PLAN ON NUCLEAR ARMS

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1215 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 30


A majority of the Senate endorsed a resolution today that called upon the United
States and the Soviet Union to freeze their nuclear arsenals at ''equal and
sharply reduced levels,'' an approach that won general support from President
Reagan.

The bipartisan resolution, sponsored by Senator Henry M. Jackson, Democrat of
Washington, Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, and 56 of their
colleagues, was offered as a substitute for a measure sponsored two weeks ago by
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Senator Mark O.
Hatfield, Republican of Oregon.

Kennedy-Hatfield Plan

The Kennedy-Hatfield proposal, endorsed by 20 senators and 150 representatives,
calls upon the two countries first to negotiate a freeze on nuclear forces at
existing levels, then to follow with reductions in atomic arms.

At least two legislators have sponsored both proposals: Senator Robert C. Byrd
of West Virginia, the Democratic leader, and Senator Alan Cranston of
California, the assistant Democratic leader. Both resolutions have been referred
to committees, but no hearings have been scheduled yet by either the House or
Senate foreign relations committees.

Arguments by Administration

Administration officials have strongly objected to the Kennedy-Hatfield
proposal, arguing that it would prevent the United States from modernizing its
strategic forces and leave it in a permanent position of strategic inferiority.

The Administration and Republicans have come under increasing pressure to
endorse some move aimed at halting the nuclear arms race. For example, at a
private meeting of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee today, Republicans
urged State Department and arms control officials to take some action soon to
persuade the public that the Administration is serious about arms control.

And Senator Warner acknowledged in a news conference that his proposal reflected
an effort to respond to the rising public concern about the nuclear arms race in
a way that was ''consistent with the President's objectives.''

Acceptable to Reagan

The Warner-Jackson proposal is more in keeping with the Administration's
approach because it would not block President Reagan's plans to deploy new
strategic bombers, missiles and submarines pending a Soviet-American accord on
arms reduction.

The Warner-Jackson measure calls on the Administration to take the following
actions:

- Propose to the Soviet Union a long-term, mutual and verifiable freeze on
nuclear forces at equal and sharply reduced levels.

- Propose practical measures to the Soviet Union to reduce the danger of nuclear
war through accident or miscalculation and to prevent the use of nuclear weapons
by third parties, including terrorists.

- ''Challenge the Soviet Union to join in this historic effort to channel the
genius of our two peoples away from the amassing of nuclear armaments and to
focus the energy and resources of both nations on attacking the ancient enemies
of mankind - poverty, hunger and disease.''

- ''Continue to press month after month, year after year, to achieve balanced,
stabilizing arms reductions'' with the eventual aim of eliminating all nuclear
weapons.

Senators Jackson and Warner met with President Reagan this afternoon to discuss
their proposal. After the 15-minute meeting, Mr. Jackson said, ''The basic
thrust is acceptable to him.'' Senator Warner added that while some White House
aides ''had some reservations about a word or two,'' President Reagan had
''expressed a common interest in our goals.''

Mr. Warner added that his staff and Administration officials had worked together
in drafting the proposal.  Mr. Reagan is expected to endorse the Warner-Jackson
proposal at a news conference tomorrow night.

Warner-Jackson Plan Criticized

The measure was immediately and sharply criticized by Senatos Kennedy and
Hatfield. In a joint statement, they called the Warner-Jackson resolution ''a
blank check for the Reagan Administration to continue the nuclear arms race.''
The proposal is ''dangerously deceptive,'' they asserted, because it pays ''lip
service to the concept of a freeeze, while actually pushing the nation into yet
another spiral of the arms race.''

Representrative Edward J. Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat who is a co-sponsor
of the immediate-freeze resolution, said the Warner-Jackson proposal enabled
those not genuinely committed to arms control to ''jump on any resolution that
contains the word 'freeze.' ''

Meanwhile, the House of Representatives began a scheduled 18-hour debate on the
freeze proposal and alternative arms control proposals.  Representative Thomas
P. O'Neill Jr., the Speaker of the House, compared the debate to one in Oct. 14,
1969, when the House began a similar session to consider the war in Vietnam.

''That was the start of the day when the war began to wind down,'' Mr. O'Neill
said.

Arms Proposal by Gore

Predicting that the debate would mark a similar turning point in efforts to halt
the arms race, Mr. O'Neill endorsed not only the Hatfield-Kennedy measure, but
another sponsored by Representative Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. The
Gore proposal is designed to apply the freeze concept as a negotiating strategy
to reduce the levels of what are considered the most dangerous weapons systems.

However, Representative Robert H. Michel, Republican of Illinois, the Minority
Leader, urged members to reject the Hatfield-Kennedy approach. He characterized
the debate as between those who ''think that freedom can be protected without a
credible nuclear deterrent on our part and those who believe - as I do - that
such a deterrent is necessary unless and until the Soivet Union possesses no
nuclear threat.''

Representative Paul N. McCloskey Jr., Republican of California, argued that the
Hatfield-Kennedy proposal, as currently worded, would not prevent the
Administration from modernizing its forces.

In general, proponents of the different approaches disagree about the relative
military strength of the United States and the Soviet Union. Proponents of the
Kennedy-Hatfield plan argue that the two nations are roughly equivalent in
nuclear strength. Opponents of the Hatfield-Kennedy proposal, and supporters of
the Warner-Jackson plan maintain that the Soviet Union is ahead.

In a separate development affecting nuclear weapons, the Senate approved an
amendment today to prohibit the use of spent commercial nuclear reactor fuel in
making nuclear weapons. The provision, sponsored by Senator Gary Hart, Democrat
of Colorado, and Senator Alan Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, was an amendment
to the a bill authorizing $496 million in fiscal 1983 for the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, which was also approved today. The Administration has opposed the
Hart-Simpson measure. The House has not acted on a comparable measure.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              390 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 31, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PANEL REJECTS APACHE COPTERS

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 319 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 30


tank helicopter, Congressional sources said.

They said that the committee voted by a substantial margin in a secret session
to cut out the $700 million that Mr. Reagan had requested for 48 AH-64 Apache
helicopters.

It was the second arms defeat for the President in as many days.  The committee
voted Monday to cut about $2 billion from the controversial MX mobile missile
program, forcing it back to the drawing board again.

The Army argued in Congress that the missile-firing Apache helicopters would
play a vital role in countering any invasion of western Europe by Soviet tanks.

The program was cut, in large part, because of major cost overruns in the craft,
built by the Hughes Helicopter Corporation, the sources said. The cost per
helicopter soared from $10.5 million each last year to $16.2 million now,
according to an Administration official.

The Army already has a number of Apaches in service.  The helicopter has also
come under attack from critics who charge that it is highly vulnerable, even to
small-arms fire.  The laser-guided Hellfire missiles that the craft would fire
at tanks are also likely to fail, according to some Government officials. They
say the laser guides can be blinded by heavy rain, high humidity or smoke on the
battlefield.

Army officials say that the Apache is able to withstand direct hits in many
places without crashing and that pilots are training to hover behind hills and
trees, then ''pop up'' to fire quick shots. Critics reply that in the confusion
of battle, pilots would not know which hills and trees were safe to use as
cover.

Paul Hoven, a former helicopter pilot in Vietnam who now is a military analyst,
predicted the Apache would fail in battle. ''Every last one of them will be gone
within a week,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              391 of 391 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 31, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: OFFBEAT VOTES MADE OSCAR NIGHT A WINNER

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1219 words


THANKS largely to the fancifulness of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and
Sciences' voters, Monday night's Oscar presentation was the most exciting in
recent years. When the awards show itself is something less than swift or
glamorous, which was certainly the case this year, it can still come to life if
the voting takes a sufficiently strange turn.

It became clear midway through the show that the academy members had been as apt
to vote against certain choices as for others, and that gave the evening its
suspense. Certainly Katharine Hepburn was not named best actress because of any
groundswell among academy members who felt she needed a fourth Oscar; she won
because the voters lacked enthusiasm for Diane Keaton or Meryl Streep, the true
leading contenders in that category.

The best-picture award for ''Chariots of Fire'' grew out of rebelliousness
against ''Reds.'' That ''Mephisto'' was voted best foreign film is a measure of
how little the voters liked ''Man of Iron,'' which should have been a shoo-in.
The choice of ''Genocide'' as best documentary seemed a blow against the more
controversial ''El Salvador: Another Vietnam?'', although it may have been
another of the Academy's traditional wild-card choices. Ordinarily, these lapses
in judgment are reserved for the best-song category.

The show certainly would have been rocky without these surprises.Getting off to
its familiarly slow start - only three Oscars were awarded during the first
hour, compared with 10 in the second, 9 in the third and 4 in overtime - it
featured Johnny Carson as a master of ceremonies who easily outshone most of the
presenters.

Mr. Carson's quips were clever (of Warren Beatty's multiple nominations:
''Warren, I think that's great, something like this could get you girls'').
What's more, they were virtually the only quips of the evening. The year's
presenters were mostly a humorless bunch, and it wasn't an exceptionally
star-studded lineup, either.  Presenters included Paul Williams, Chris Atkins,
Paula Prentiss, Richard Benjamin, Robert Hays, Morgan Fairchild and Jack
Valenti.

A bland rendition of the theme from ''Ragtime'' was offered by John Schneider, a
star of television's ''The Dukes of Hazzard,'' who had neither the voice nor the
movie credits to explain his appearance on the Oscar show.

On the plus side, Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau were on hand to offer a droll,
well-timed introduction to the best-director nominees. And Bette Midler's
appearance, though brief, was just long enough to steal the show. It took Miss
Midler about a minute and a half to level most of the movies she was called upon
to mention, as she presented a music award.

Of ''For Your Eyes Only,'' she declared ''and they weren't kidding, I couldn't
watch a single frame,'' and ''Endless Love'' was pronounced an ''endless
movie.'' Miss Midler might have sounded too disparaging on a better-balanced
show but, as things were, she was the hit of an otherwise humorless evening.
''Don't you hate it when presenters come out here and use this moment for
personal aggrandizement?'' asked she. In her case, not at all.

The same could not be said for the screenwriter Ernest Thompson, who gave an
acceptance speech that exemplified everything that can be wrong with the Oscar
and its winners. With a white scarf draped around his neck, Mr. Thompson
congratulated himself on having had ''something to say, and a burning need to
say it,'' though all he personally had had to say was contained in the
screenplay for ''On Golden Pond.'' Mr. Thompson beat Harold Pinter for the best
adaptation award, which was only one of the evening's many ironies.  Another was
the orchestra's playing ''The Internationale'' at this most all-American of
events every time ''Reds'' won a prize.

It couldn't be said that this year's show lacked fireworks, especially as laser
beams flashed across the stage during a James Bond dance routine. Another dance
number, with Debbie Allen and Gregory Hines in a tribute to Harry Warren, was
even more full of fireworks.

The evening's tribute to Barbara Stanwyck, and its selection of clips from old
Oscar shows, attested to the fact that the movies' glamour isn't anything like
what it used to be. As Jane Fonda - who made such a moving acceptance speech for
her father, Henry Fonda - develops more and more of a radiant movie-queen air,
she makes it all too clear how rare that quality is today. It doesn't help that,
as Mr. Carson put it, this was ''the 54th year of this awards show, and
coincidentally the 54th awards show of this year.'' But Monday night was proof
that Oscar's place in the firmament remains secure.

HOLLYWOOD, March 30 (AP) - Following are the winners of the 54th annual Academy
Awards: BEST PICTURE: ''Chariots of Fire.'' ACTOR: Henry Fonda, ''On Golden
Pond.'' ACTRESS: Katharine Hepburn, ''On Golden Pond.'' SUPPORTING ACTOR - John
Gielgud, ''Arthur.'' SUPPORTING ACTRESS - Maureen Stapleton, ''Reds.'' DIRECTOR
- Warren Beatty, ''Reds.'' FOREIGN-LANGUAGE FILM - ''Mephisto,'' Hungary.
ORIGINAL SCREENPLAY - Colin Welland, ''Chariots of Fire.'' ADAPTED SCREENPLAY -
Ernest Thompson, ''On Golden Pond.'' ORIGINAL SONG - ''Arthur's Theme, (Best
That You Can Do),'' ''Arthur.'' ORIGINAL SCORE - ''Chariots of Fire,'' Vangelis.
CINEMATOGRAPHY - ''Reds,'' Vittorio Storaro.  EDITING - ''Raiders of the Lost
Ark,'' Michael Kahn.  VISUAL EFFECTS - ''Raiders of the Lost Ark,'' Richard
Edlund, Kit West, Bruce Nicholson, Joe Johnston.  SOUND - ''Raiders of the Lost
Ark,'' Bill Varney, Steve Maslow, Gregg Landaker, Roy Charman.ART DIRECTION -
''Raiders of the Lost Ark,'' Art Direction: Norman Reynolds, Leslie Dilley. Set
Decoration: Michael Ford.  COSTUME DESIGN - ''Chariots of Fire,'' Milena
Canonero.DOCUMENTARY FEATURE - ''Genocide.'' DOCUMENTARY SHORT - ''Close
Harmony.'' ANIMATED SHORT - ''CRAC.'' LIVE ACTION SHORT - ''Violet.'' MAKEUP -
''An American Werewolf in London,'' Rick Baker.

Announced in advance: IRVING THALBERG AWARD - Albert R. (Cubby) Broccoli.  JEAN
HERSHOLT AWARD - Danny Kaye.  GORDON E. SAWYER AWARD - Joseph B. Walker.
HONORARY AWARD - Barbara Stanwyck.  SPECIAL ACHIEVEMENT - SOUND EFFECTS:
''Raiders of the Lost Ark.'' SPECIAL AWARD - Fuji Photo Film Co.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Henry Fonda with Oscar

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
